PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 10
Keeping the Heart in Temptation and Doubt

---

Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 7. Keeping the Heart in Temptation and Doubt.

idolatrous Israelites. When Servetus condemned Zuinglius for his?
harshness, his answer was, In aliis mansuetus ero, in blasphemiis in
Christum, non ita; In other cases I will be mild, but in the cause of
Christ not so. That which the world calls moderation and mildness
here, is in God's account stupidity and cowardliness; neither of these
are that which I am now persuading you to keep your hearts against.
But, (3.) There is a sinful passion, that is the thing which endangers
you. Now anger becomes sinful when it is either causeless, Mat. 5:22.
or excessive; and that either in measure or time, exceeding the value
of the impulsive cause, be it more transient or abiding; yet it is a sin,
and it is matter of humiliation before God. Now the means to keep
the heart from it under provocations, are these:
Means
Means 1. Get low and humble thoughts of yourselves, and then you
will have meek spirits, and peaceable deportments towards others.
The humble is ever the patient man; pride is the root of passion; a
lofty will be a surly spirit; bladders blown up with wind, will not lie
close together; but prick them, and you may pack a thousand in a
little room: "Only by pride cometh contention," Prov. 13:10. When
we over-rate ourselves, then we think we are unworthily treated by
others, and that provokes; and here, by the way, take notice of one
great benefit of acquaintance with your own hearts, even the
meekening and calming of your spirits. Christian, methinks thou
wouldst know so much of thyself, that it is impossible any should lay
thee lower, or have baser thoughts of thee than thou hast of thyself.
Some render the original of that text, Hab. 2:5. thus: "The proud
man is as he that transgresseth by wine;" and drunkards, you know,
are quarrelsome. O get more humility, and that will bring you more
peace.
Means 2. Be often sweetening your spirits in communion with God,
and they will not easily be imbittered with wrath towards men.

A quiet conscience never produced an unquiet conversation: the
peace of God doth βραβευειν, rule in the heart, as an umpire
appeasing strifes; for so much that word, Col. 3:15. imports. Wrath
and strife are hugely opposite to the frame and temper of a spiritual
heart, because inconsistent with the delight and contentment of that
dove-like spirit which loves a sedate and quiet breast. O! saith the
soul that feeds upon the sweet communion of the Spirit, shall the
sparks of provocations now catch in my passions, and raise such a
smoke in my soul, as will offend and drive away the Comforter from
me? This is so effectual a remedy against passion, that I durst almost
venture, in a Christian of a hasty nature, to make long-suffering a
sign of communion with God. Seest thou such a Christian quiet and
calm under provocations, it is very like his soul feeds upon such
sweetness in God as he is loth to leave; and on the other side, seest
thou a Christian turbulent and clamorous, doubtless, all is not well
within; his spirit is like a bone out of joint, which cannot move
without pain and trouble.
Means 3. Get due apprehensions of the evil nature and effects of
sinful anger: Ira furor brevis; anger is a short madness, (saith one;)
Ira animæ febris (saith another;) anger is the fever of the soul; It is
the interregnum and eclipse of reason, (saith a third).
The effects of it are also very sad.
(1.) "It grieves the Spirit of God," Eph. 4:30. banishes him from that
breast in which it rages and tumultuates: God is the God of peace;
the presence and comforts of God are only enjoyed in a calm. It is a
golden note one gives upon the forecited text, God doth not usually
bless with peace of conscience, such as make no conscience of peace.
(2.) It gives advantage to the devil, Eph. 4:26, 27. Satan is an angry
and discontented spirit, and finds no rest but in restless hearts? he
lives like the salamander, in fires of contention; he bestirs himself
when the spirits are in a commotion; sometimes he fills the heart
with revengeful thoughts, sometimes he fills the lips, and inflames
the tongue with indecent language; even a meek Moses sometimes

speaks unadvisedly with his lips. (3.) It dis-tunes the spirit for duty;
upon this account the apostle dissuades husbands and wives from
jarring carriages and contentions, that their prayers be not hindered,
1 Pet. 3:7. All acts of worship must be suitable to the object of
worship; but God is the God of peace, the God of love. (4.) To
mention no more, it disparages the Christian religion. How would
Plato and Pythagoras shame us, if they were now living? Christ was a
lamb for meekness, and doth it become his followers to be like lions?
O keep your hearts, or you will at once lose not only your own peace,
but the credit of religion.
Means 4. Consider how sweet a thing it is to a Christian to conquer
his corruptions, and carry away the spoils of them.
"He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth
his spirit, than he that taketh a city," Prov. 16:32. Is there any
content in venting a passion? How much more in mortifying it?
When thou comest in a calm mood, or upon a death-bed to-review
thy life, how comfortable then will it be to reflect upon the conquests
thou hast got by the fear of God, over the evil propensions of thine
own heart! It was a memorable saying of Valentinian the emperor
when he came to die: 'Amongst all my conquests (said he) 'there is
but one that now comforts me; and being asked what that was, he
answered, I have overcome my worst enemy, mine own naughty
heart.'
Means 5. Shame yourselves by setting before you those eminent
patterns that have been most excellent for meekness.
Above all, compare your spirits with the Spirit of Christ: "Learn of
me (saith he,) for I am meek and lowly," Mat. 11:29. Christ was meek
and lowly, but I am proud and passionate; it was the high
commendation of Moses, Num. 12:3. "Now the man Moses was meek
above all the men of the earth: and this was the man that knew God
to face." It is said of Calvin and Ursin, that they both were of choleric
natures, but yet had so learned the meekness of Christ as not to utter

one word, under the greatest provocation, un-beseeming religion.
When I read the pretty stories of the very heathens that never had
the advantages that we have, how the Pythagoreans, whatever feuds
had been among them in the day, would hush all by sending to each
other this message, The sun is almost set; and that of Plato to his
scholar, I would beat thee if I were not angry.
When I read what lenity and tenderness Lycurgus shewed to an
insolent fellow that had struck out one of his eyes, I am ashamed to
see how much Christians are out-shot by heathens; who, by mere
moral arguments and precepts, had thus meekened their spirits, and
conquered their passions. The dim light of nature could teach Seneca
to say, That anger will hurt a man more than the offence; for there is
a certain bound in the offence, but I know not how far mine anger
will carry me. It is a shame that these men who came so far behind us
in means and advantages, should so far out-strip us in meekness and
patience.
Means 6. Lastly, Avoid all irritating occasions.
He that will not hear the clapper, must not pull the rope: "Grievous
words stir up anger," saith Solomon, Prov. 16:1. Do not only pray,
and resolve against it, but get as far as you can out of the way of it, it
is true spiritual valour, to run as fast, and as far as we can, out of
sin's way: If you can but avoid anger in its first rise, there is no great
fear of it afterwards; for it is not with this sin as it is with other sins;
other sins grow to their full strength by degrees, their first motions
are the weakest; but this sin is born in its full strength, it is strongest
at first; withstand it then, and it falls before you. Thus learn to keep
your hearts when provocations arise.

Keeping the Heart When the Hour of
Temptation Comes

Season 9. The ninth season of exerting our greatest diligence, 'Is the
critical hour of temptation, wherein Satan lays close siege to the fortroyal of a Christian's heart, and often surprizes it for want of
watchfulness: to keep the heart now, is no less a mercy than a duty;
few Christians are so well skilled in detecting the fallacies, and
retorting the arguments by which Satan uses to draw them to sin, as
to come off safe in those encounters. "Watch and pray (saith our
Lord) lest ye enter into temptation," Mark 14:38.' Even an eminent
David, and a wise Solomon, have smarted for their carelessness, at
such a time as this. The ninth case therefore shall be this,
Case 9. How a Christian, when strongly solicited by the devil to sin,
may keep his heart from yielding to the temptation.
Now there are six special arguments by which Satan subtilly
insinuates and winds in the temptation; in all which I shall offer thee
some help for the keeping of thy heart; and the first is this:
Arguments
Argument 1. The first argument is drawn from the pleasure of sin: O
(saith Satan) here is pleasure to be enjoyed: the temptation comes
with a smiling countenance, and charming voice: what, art thou so
phlegmatic and dull a soul, as not to feel the powerful charms of
pleasure? Who can with-hold himself from such delights?
Now thine heart may be kept from the danger of this temptation, by
retorting this argument of pleasure upon the tempter; which is done
two ways.
1. Thou tellest me, Satan, that sin is pleasant; be it so: But are the
gripes of conscience, and the flames of hell so too? Is it pleasant to
feel the wounds and throbs of conscience? If so, why did Peter weep
so bitterly? Mat. 26:75. Why did David cry out of broken bones? Psal.
51. I hear what thou sayest of the pleasure of sin, and I have read
what David hath said of the terrible effects of sin in his Psalm to
bring to remembrance, Psal. 38. ver. 2. "Thine arrows stick fast in

me, and thy hand presseth me sore:" ver. 3. "There is no soundness
in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin: ver. 4. "For mine iniquities are gone over
mine head as an heavy burden; they are too heavy for me:" ver. 5.
"My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness:" ver.
6. "I am troubled, I am "bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the
day long:" ver. 7. "My loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and
there is no soundness in my flesh," ver. 8. "I am feeble and sore
broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart."
Here I see the true face of sin; if I yield to thy temptation, I must
either feel these pangs of conscience, or the flames of hell.
2. What talkest thou of the pleasure of sin, when, by experience, I
know there is more true pleasure in the mortification, than can be in
the commission of sin? O how sweet is it to please God, to obey
conscience, to preserve inward peace! To be able to say, in this trial, I
have discovered the sincerity of my heart; now I know I fear the
Lord, now I see that I truly hate sin. Hath sin any such delight as
this? This will choak that temptation.
Arg. 2. The second argument is drawn from the secresy of sin. O
(saith Satan) this sin will never disgrace thee abroad, none shall
know it.
This argument may be retorted, and the heart secured thus: thou
sayest, none shall know it; but, Satan, canst thou find a place void of
the divine presence for me to sin in? Thus Job secured his heart from
this temptation, Job 13:4. "Doth he not see my ways, and count all
my steps?" Therefore he makes a covenant with his eyes, ver. 1. After
the same manner Solomon teacheth us to retort this temptation,
Prov. 5:20, 21. "And why my son wilt thou be ravished with a strange
woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the ways of man
are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings."
What if I hide it from the eyes of all the world for the present? I
cannot hide it from God; and the time is at hand, when all the world

shall know it too; for the word assures me, Luke 8:17. "That what
now is done in secret, shall be proclaimed as upon the house top."
Besides, is not my conscience as a thousand witnesses! Do I owe no
reverence to myself? Could the heathen man say, Turpe quid
ausurus, te fine, teste time; When thou art tempted to commit sin,
fear thyself without any other witness: And shall not I be afraid to sin
before mine own conscience, which always hath a reproof in its
mouth, or a pen in its hand, to record my most secret actions?
Arg. 3. The third argument by which Satan tempteth to sin is taken
from the gain and profit arising out of it; why so nice and
scrupulous? it is but to stretch the conscience a little, and thou
mayest make thyself: now is thy opportunity!
The heart may be kept from falling into this dangerous snare by
retorting the temptation thus: But what a profit will it be, if a man
should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? Or what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul? Shall I hazard thee for all the good
that is in this world? There is an immortal spirit dwelling in this
earthly tabernacle, of more value than all earthly things, which must
live to all eternity when this world shall lie in white ashes. A soul for
which Jesus Christ shed his precious and invaluable blood. I was sent
into this world to provide for this soul; indeed God hath also
committed to me the care of my body, but, (as* one happily
expresses it) with this difference: a master commits two things to a
servant—the child, and the child's clothes; will the master thank the
servant, if he plead, I have kept the clothes, but I have neglected the
life of the child?
Arg. 4. The fourth argument is drawn from the smallness of the sin;
it is but a little one, a small matter, a trifle; who would stand upon
such niceties?
This argument may be retorted three ways.

1. But is the majesty of heaven a little one too? If I commit this sin, I
must offend and wrong a great God, Isa. 40:15, 16, 17–22.
2. Is there any little hell to torment little sinners in? Are not the least
sinners there filled with the fulness of wrath? O there is great wrath
treasured up for such as the world counts little sinners.
3. The less the sin, the less the inducement to commit it: What, shall
I break with God for a trifle? Destroy my peace, wound my
conscience, grieve the spirit, and all this for nothing? O what
madness is this!
Arg. 5. A. fifth argument is drawn from the grace of God, and hopes
of pardon: Come, God will pass by this as an infirmity, he will not be
extreme to mark it;
But stay, my heart;
1. Where do I find a promise of mercy to presumptuous sinners?
Indeed for involuntary surprisal, unavoidable and lamented
infirmities, there is a pardon of course; but where is the promise to a
daring sinnner that sins upon presumption of pardon? Pause a while,
my soul, upon that scripture, Numb. 15:27–30. "And if a soul sin
through ignorance, then he shall bring a she-goat of the first year for
a sin-offering, &c. But the soul that doth ought presumptuously, the
same reproacheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from among
his people."
2. If God be a God of so much mercy, how can I abuse so good a God?
shall I take so glorious an attribute as the mercy of God is, and abuse
it unto sin? Shall I wrong him because he is good? Or should not
rather the goodness of God lead me to repentance? Rom. 2:4. "There
is mercy with thee that thou mayest be feared," Psal. 130:4.
Arg. 6. Lastly, Sometimes Satan encourages to sin from the examples
of good and holy men; thus and thus they have sinned and been
restored, therefore this may consist with grace, and thou be saved

nevertheless. The danger of this temptation is avoided, and the heart
secured, by retorting the argument these three ways:
1. Though good men may commit the same sin materially, which I
am tempted to, yet did ever any good man venture to sin upon such a
ground and encouragement as this?
2. Did God record these examples for my imitation, or for my
warning? Are they not set up as sea-marks, that I might avoid the
rocks upon which they split? 1 Cor. 10:6. "Now these were our
examples, to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as
they also lusted."
3. Am I willing to feel what they felt for sin? O, I dare not follow them
in the ways of sin! quia me vestiga terrent; Lest God should plunge
me into the deeps of horror, into which he cast them.
Thus learn to keep your hearts in the hour of temptation to sin.

Keeping the Heart in the Time of
Doubting and Spiritual Darkness
Season 10. "The tenth special season to keep the heart with all
diligence, is the time of spiritual darkness and doubting, when it is
with the soul as it was with Paul in his dangerous voyage, neither
sun, nor moon, nor star appears for many days: When by reason of
the hidings of God's face, the prevalency of corruption, and the
inevidence of grace, the soul is even ready to give up all its hopes and
comforts for lost; to draw sad and desperate conclusions upon itself;
to call its former comforts vain delusions; its grace hypocrisy. When
the serene and clear heavens are overcast with dark clouds, yea, filled
with thunders and horrible tempests, when the poor pensive soul sits
down and weeps forth this sad lamentation, "My hope is perished
from the Lord!" Now to keep the heart from sinking in such a day as

this, to enable it to maintain its own sincerity, is a matter of great
difficulty. The tenth case then will be this:'
Case 10. How the people of God, in dark and doubting seasons, may
keep their hearts from entertaining such sad conclusions about their
estates, as destroy their peace, and unfit them for their duty.
There are two general heads to which the grounds of doubting our
sincerity may be reduced. (1.) God's carriage towards the soul, either
in the time of some extraordinary affliction, or of some long and sad
desertion. Or, (2.) The soul's carriage towards God: And here it
usually argues against the truth of its own graces, either (1.) From its
relapses into the same sins from which it had formerly risen with
shame and sorrow. Or, (2.) From the sensible declining of its
affections from God. Or, (3.) From the excess of the affections
towards creature-comforts and enjoyments. Or, (4.) From its
enlargements in public, and often straitenings in private duties. Or,
(5.) From some horrid injections of Satan, with which the soul is
greatly perplexed. Or, lastly, From God's silence and seeming denial
of its long depending suits and prayers.
These are the common grounds of those sad conclusions: Now in
order to the establishment and support of the heart in this condition,
it will be necessary,
1. That you be acquainted with some general truths, which have a
tendency to the settlement of a trembling and doubting soul.
2. That you be rightly instructed about the forementioned
particulars, which are the grounds of your doubting.
The general truths requisite for poor doubting souls to be acquainted
with, are these:
1. That every working and appearance of hypocrisy doth not
presently prove the person in whom it is, to be an hypocrite. You
must carefully distinguish between the presence and predominancy

of hypocrisy: There are remains of deceitfulness in the best hearts;
David and Peter had sad experience of it; yet the standing frame and
general bent of the heart being upright, it did not denominate them
hypocrites.
2. That we ought as well to hear what can be said for us as against us:
It is the sin of upright hearts sometimes to use an over-rigid, and
merciless severity against themselves: They do not indifferently
consider the case of their own souls: It is in this case, as Solomon
speaks in another, Prov. 12:7. "There is that maketh himself rich, and
yet hath nothing; and there is that maketh himself poor, and yet hath
great riches." It is the damning sin of the self-flattering hypocrite, to
make his condition better than it is: And it is the sin and folly of
some upright ones, to make their condition worse than indeed it is.
Why should you be such enemies to your own peace? To read over
the evidences of God's love to your souls, as a man doth a book which
he intends to confute? Why do you study to find evasions, to turn off
those comforts which are due to you? It is said of Joseph, that he was
minded to put away his espoused Mary, not knowing that that holy
thing which was conceived in her, was by the Holy Ghost: And this
may be your case. And a third truth is this:
3. That many a saint hath charged and condemned himself for that,
which God will never charge him with, nor condemn him for. "Why
hast thou hardened our hearts from thy fear," (saith the church) Isa.
63:17 and yet the verse before manifests, that their hearts were not so
hardened: Godly Bradford wrote himself an hypocrite, a painted
sepulchre; yet doubtless God acquitted him of that charge.
4. Every thing which is a ground of grief to the people of God, is not a
sufficient ground of questioning their sincerity. There are many more
things to trouble you, than there are to stumble you: If upon every
slip and failing through infirmity, you should question all that ever
was wrought upon you, your life must be made up of doubtings and
fears: You can never attain a settled peace, nor live that life of praise
and thankfulness, the gospel calls for.

5. The soul is not at all times fit to pass judgment upon its own
condition: To be sure in the dark day of desertion, when the soul is
benighted; and in the stormy day of temptation, when the soul is in a
hurry, it is utterly unfit to judge its estate; "Examine your hearts
upon your beds, and be still," Psal. 4. This is rather a season for
watching and resisting, than for judging and determining.
6. That every breach of peace with God, is not a breach of covenant
with God. The wife hath many weaknesses and failings, often grieves
and displeases her husband; yet in the main is faithful, and truly
loves him: These failings may cause him to alter his carriage, but not
to withdraw his love, or deny his relation. "Return, O backsliding
Israel, for I am married unto you."
7. Lastly, Whatever our sin, or trouble be, it should rather drive us to
God, than from God. "Pardon my sin for it is great," Psal. 25:11.
Suppose it be true, that thou hast so and so sinned, that thou art thus
long and sadly deserted: Yet it is a false inference, that therefore thou
shouldest be discouraged, as if there were no help for thee in thy
God. When you have well digested these seven establishing truths, if
still the doubt remain, then consider what may be replied to the
particular grounds of these doubts. As,
1. You doubt, and are ready to conclude, the Lord hath no regard or
love for your souls, because of some extraordinary affliction which is
come upon you: But I would not have thy soul so to conclude, till
thou be able satisfactorily to answer these three questions.
Questions
Question 1. If great troubles and afflictions be marks of God's hatred,
why should not impunity and constant prosperity be tokens of his
love? For contrariorum contraria est ratio & consequentia? of
contrary things, there is a contrary reason and consequence: But is
this so indeed? or saith not the scripture quite otherwise? Prov. 1:32.
"The prosperity of fools destroys them." So Psal. 37:5.

Quest. 2. Dare I draw the same conclusion upon all others that have
been as much, yea, more afflicted than myself? If this argument
conclude against thee, then so it doth against every one in thy
condition; yea, the greater the affliction of any child of God hath
been, the more strongly the argument still concludes: And then woe
to David, Job, Heman, Paul, and all that have been afflicted as they
were.
Quest. 3. Had God exempted you only from those troubles, which all
other his people feel, would not that have been a greater ground of
doubting to you than this? Especially since the scripture saith, Heb.
12:8. "If ye be without chastening, whereof all are partakers, then are
ye bastards, and not sons."
Oh, how is our Father put to it by froward children! If he afflicts,
then one cries, he loves me not: If he exempt from afflictions, others
question his love upon that ground. Surely you have other work to
do, under the rod, than this.
2. Or do you rashly infer, the Lord hath no love for you, because he
hides his face from you; that your condition is miserable, because
dark and uncomfortable? Before you draw such rash conclusions, see
what answer you can give to these four following queries.
Queries
Query 1. If any action of God towards his people will bear a
favourable, as well as a harsh and severe construction, why should
not his people interpret it in the best sense? And is not this such?
May he not have a design of love, as well as of hatred, in this
dispensation? May he not depart for a season, and not for ever? Yea,
that he might not depart for ever. You are not the first that have
mistaken God's ends in desertion. Isa. 49:14. "Sion said, the Lord
hath forsaken me, my God hath forgotten me:" Was it so indeed?
Nothing less. Ver. 15. "Can a mother forget," &c.

Query 2. Do you find the marks of an absolute, total and final
desertion upon your own spirits, that you are so apt to conclude
yours to be such? Do you find your hearts inclined to forsake God?
Have you lost your conscientious tenderness in point of sin? If so,
sad characters appear upon you indeed; but if in this dark hour you
are as tender of sin as ever, as much resolved to cleave to God as
ever; I cannot, I will not forsake God, let him do what he will with
me: O no, I cannot. If your hearts work thus, it can be but a partial,
limited, and temporary desertion; by this he still keeps his interest in
your hearts, a sure sign he will return, and visit you again.
Query 3. Is sense and feeling a competent judge of God's actions and
designs? Or may a man safely rely upon its testimony, after so many
discoveries of the infallibility of it? Is this a sound argument? If God
had any love for my soul, if it were not quite gone, I should feel it
now, as well as in former times; but I cannot feel it, therefore it is
quite gone. Do you not know the sun still keeps on his course in the
heavens, even in dull and close weather, when you cannot see it? And
may it not be so with the love of God? Read Isa. 50:10. May not I as
well conclude in winter, when the flowers have hid their beautiful
heads under ground, they are quite dead and gone, because I cannot
find them in December where I saw them in May?
Query 4. Think you the Lord cares not to break his children's hearts,
and his own promise too? Hath he no more regard to either? If he
return no more, these must be the consequents, Isa. 57:16, 17. Heb.
13:5.
Well, then, from God's carriage towards you, either in affliction, or
desertion, no such discouraging, heart-sinking conclusions can be
inferred. Next, let us see whether they may not be inferred from our
carriage towards God; and here the principal grounds of doubting
are such as these;
1. I have fallen again into the same sin from which I have formerly
risen with repentance and resolution; therefore my sinning is