PURITAN GOLD -- Female Piety by John Angell James: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 13
The Beautiful Picture of the Excellent Wife in the Book of Proverbs

---

Female Piety: or, The Young Woman's Guide Through Life to Immortality. By John Angell James.

Chapter 13. The Beautiful Picture of the Excellent Wife in the Book of Proverbs.

THE BEAUTIFUL PICTURE OF THE
EXCELLENT WIFE IN THE BOOK OF
PROVERBS
"Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above
rubies." Proverbs 31:10
If anyone desires a book which shall combine grandeur of subject—
with beauty of expression; the most sublime theology—with the
soundest morality; the widest variety of topic—with an obvious unity
of design; the most ancient history with—poetry; the profoundest
philosophy—with the plainest maxims of human conduct; touching
narratives—with picturesque descriptions of character—in short, a
book which shall as truly gratify the taste by the elegance of its
composition, as it shall sanctify the heart by the purity of its

doctrines; and thus, while it opens the glories of heaven and prepares
the soul for possessing and enjoying them, shall furnish a source of
never failing pleasure upon earth; I say if such a book be sought, it
can be found in the Bible, and only in the Bible, and that precious
volume more than answers the description.
And where in all the range of inspired or uninspired literature can be
found a delineation of female excellence—I will not say equal to, but
worthy to be compared with—that which forms the subject of the
present chapter? We have in it a picture of which it is difficult to say
which is the most striking—the correctness of the drawing—or the
richness of the coloring. Both display a master's hand, and though
delineated three thousand years ago, it is still true to nature; and
when we have removed some of the effects of time, retouched some
lines that have been clouded and obscured by the lapse of years, and
given a few explanations, it is impossible to look at it without
admiration and delight. It adds to the interest to know that it is the
production of a female artist. It is the description of a good wife,
drawn by the hand of a mother, to guide her son in the selection of a
companion for life. They are "the words of king Lemuel, the prophecy
that his mother taught him." Who this king was is a matter of
uncertainty. He was not, as some have supposed, Solomon. The
original Hebrew has many Chaldaisms, which are found in no other
part of the book of Proverbs, and afford a cogent argument that it
was written by another hand, and perhaps after the captivity. The
whole passage is composed with art, being a kind of poem containing
twenty-two verses respectively beginning, like some of the Psalms,
with the letters of the Hebrew alphabet in their order of succession.
Whoever Lemuel might have been, he had the privilege of a most
eminent mother.

"The admonitory verses with which the chapter commences,
composed by this distinguished woman for her son when in the
flower of youth and high expectation, are an inimitable production,
as well in respect to their actual materials, as the delicacy with which
they are selected. Instead of attempting to lay down rules concerning
matters of state and political government, the illustrious writer
confines herself, with the finest and most becoming art, to a
recommendation of the gentler virtues of temperance, benevolence,
and mercy; and to a minute and unparalleled delineation of the
female character which might bid fairest to promote the happiness of
her son in wedded life."
What a pattern of maternal excellence was this mother of the king!
We may well imagine that in this inimitable portrait, she drew her
own likeness. What sons we would see, if all were blessed with such
mothers as she was!
1. In taking up this delineation, I shall first consider the INQUIRY
which introduces it. "Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price
is far above rubies." This interrogation implies the rarity and the
worth of the object sought. The question might have been more
forcible in those times than in ours, for such a blessing was no doubt
more scarce than it is now. True it is, the picture is so admirable, that
even now a perfect resemblance is not to be found everywhere. Yet, if
such extraordinary excellence is not often met with, happily that
which is far above mediocrity is by no means rare. And why should
there not be in every female bosom an intense desire to rise to a
perfect conformity to this beautiful pattern? How much more to be
valued by her happy possessor is this—than all the jewels with which
so many women are fond of being decked—or than the largest and
the purest diamond in the mines of the east!

I proceed now to consider this exquisite delineation of "the virtuous
woman." But really I feel as if to touch it were to spoil it, and as
though comments were almost like—painting the tulip—perfuming
the rose—or attempting to add brilliancy to the sun. Instead of
following the order of the verses, and adopting the regular expository
method—I shall arrange the verses and place them under separate
topical heads and titles.
2. The authoress reserves piety for the climax or culminating point of
her description, and winds up the whole thus, "Charm is deceptive,
and beauty is fleeting—but a woman who fears the Lord is to be
praised." Proverbs 31:30.
I shall make this our starting point. It is set forth in the verse just
quoted, and there the essence of true religion is comprised in that
phrase, "The fear of the Lord"—which means the cultivation and
exercise of all right and holy dispositions towards God. Yes, this is
religion, to have the heart right towards God. And we hold that this is
not merely the gilded ornament that towers upwards to heaven, and
crowns and beautifies the building at the apex, though it is this; but it
is more than this, for it is the base of the whole structure, and
supports the noble pyramid of varied excellences. It is this which
makes them strong and stable, and ensures at once their proportions
and their perpetuity.
True piety, instead of setting aside a single female excellence—
clothes all female virtues with a Divine sanction—harmonizes the
demands of God with the claims of man—converts the ordinary
duties of domestic life into a means of preparation for that glorious
world where the social ties no longer exist—and softens the cares,
anxieties, and sorrows, with which woman's lot in this world is but
too often sadly oppressed. Whatever else a woman may be—without

true piety, she is lamentably deficient. "Charm is deceptive, and
beauty is fleeting." The face of a beautiful woman ought to be an
index of the mind; and when all is beautiful on the outside—all
should be glorious within. Never does outer beauty and elegance
appear more revolting—than when seen united with an ill-furnished
mind and an ill-favored heart. And yet how often do elegance of
manners, and loveliness of person, conceal dispositions which are in
total opposition to them, and bitterly disappoint the man who has
been captivated by them—and who in his choice of a wife, has been
led by no other considerations than mere external beauty and
personal charms!
"Let beauty have its due praise, and suppose what you will of it;
suppose all that the poets say of it be true—still the text tells you it is
vain, it is in its nature transient, fleeting, perishing—it is the flower
of the spring which must fade in autumn; and when the blossom
falls, if no fruit is produced, of what value, I ask, is the tree? The
grave is already opening for the most elegant person that moves, and
the worms are waiting to feed on the most beautiful face!"
But true religion has an excellence and a beauty which time cannot
corrode, nor old-age wrinkle, nor disease spoil, nor death destroy;
but which after living and thriving amid the decay of all other things
in this world, will flourish in the next in the vigor of immortal youth.
3. We next note her marital excellence. "Her husband has full
confidence in her and lacks nothing of value. She brings him good,
not harm, all the days of her life. Proverbs 31:11-12.
Confidence between man and wife is the basis of domestic happiness.
There cannot possibly be happiness where this is lacking. Suspicion
and jealousy must drive felicity out of doors. In regard to the
"virtuous woman," her husband trusts her chastity. Her faithfulness

is as inviolable as the covenant of the Most High, and her purity
unsullied as the light of heaven. What a torment is jealousy in the
bosom of husband or wife! wormwood and gall are sweet compared
to it.
He trusts her fidelity in the management of his temporal affairs, and
knows that all his domestic interests are safe in her hands. With such
a manager at home, he can go without anxiety to his daily business,
travel to distant places, or remain, when necessary, away from home
for ever so long a time. He shall have "lacks nothing of value"—he
shall have no need of worrying about an extravagant wife—and her
wasting their property. "He need not," says Matthew Henry, "be
griping and scraping abroad, as those must be, whose wives are
extravagant and wasteful at home." She manages his affairs so that
he has plenty. He thinks himself so happy in her that he envies not
those who have most of the wealth of this world—he needs it not, he
has enough in having such a wife. Happy the couple that have such
satisfaction as this in each other! It is too well known to be denied,
that if many husbands make their wives wretched by their
unkindness—many wives make their husbands poor by
extravagance! Many a man has been tempted to cheat his creditors
through the bad management and extravagance of his wife.
The "virtuous Woman" will study to do her husband good, and to
avoid doing him harm, all the days of her life. She will be inventive,
ingenious, and laborious to promote his comfort, his health, and his
interest; will smooth by her sweet words his brow, when wrinkled
with care; hush the sigh that misfortune extorts from his bosom; will
answer with gentleness the sharp words that in moments of irritation
drop from his lips, and will do all this, not by fits and starts when in
congenial moods, but continually.

But this is not all; for on looking onward in the chapter we find
another reference to her conduct and influence as a wife. "Her
husband is known in the gates, when he sits among the elders of the
land." By the gates are meant the place of magisterial assembly and
business, which in ancient times was in rooms over the gates of the
city. In these public convocations a good wife will make her husband
known, and add to his public reputation in various ways. Her
prudent conduct in her domestic arrangements will enable him to
leave home with confidence to attend to public business. She does
not engross his company so as to prevent his becoming a public
benefactor and blessing. By the happiness which she imparts to him
at their own fireside she sends him abroad, not with a downcast look,
as if he had left a heavy trouble at home, or carried it everywhere
with him; but with a cheerful countenance, as though he had just
come from the scene and seat of his chief earthly bliss. By her proper
care of his personal appearance, in the elegance and neatness of his
apparel, (which in ancient times was the work of her hands)—and
especially by the force of her holy example sustaining and
encouraging his excellence, she raises the honor and increases the
respect of her husband. He is better known and more esteemed as
the husband of such a wife. Can a woman rise to higher honor than
to be so excellent and estimable as to augment the public
respectability of her husband?
Still, let husbands take care that they do not shine only in borrowed
splendor, and stand indebted for all their esteem to their wives. Let
them so act, and be such men, that the honor they receive on account
of their wives shall be only an addition to the greater honor that
belongs to themselves. It is to the comfort and glory of a man to be
better known and more respected on account of his wife; but it is to
his discredit to be known and respected only by and for his wife. It is
a poor base affair, for a man to go through society with no higher

qualification than his wife's excellence. Such a woman must feel
herself, though in one sense exalted, in another degraded, by being
the wife of a man who has no public honor, but such as he derives
from her. It must bring misery when the husband finds himself
always totally eclipsed by his wife—except indeed he be too dull to
feel it. Alas for the wife of such a man! Let this induce care and
caution in the formation of the marriage union. Unequal matches are
not often happy ones.
4. Observe now her industry as a woman. "She seeks wool and flax,
and works willingly with her hands. She lays her hands to the
spindle, and her hands hold the distaff." This is an allusion to the
customs of the times, and is a description of her personal habits of
manual labor and energetic employment. All textures of wool and
flax, cotton and silk, were, before the invention of machinery, woven
out of thread and yarn, spun by hand with a distaff and spindle. Nor
was this occupation confined exclusively to the laboring classes—for
queens, princesses, and peeresses disdained not to be thus employed,
amid the more courtly occupations of their rank. It is well worthy of
attention, that out of the twenty-two verses of this elegant poem,
eleven are taken up in setting forth the virtue and practice of the
matron's industry, in its various relations and duties. And her
industry is represented as eminently practical and utilitarian.
Indolence is sometimes thought and said to be one of the failings to
which women are exposed; especially when single, and more
frequently in wealthy circles. It is censurable even there; how much
more in the state of matrimony! And those who give themselves up
to indolence as young ladies are in imminent peril of carrying the
habit forward into the state of the wife, the mother, and the home
manager. An indolent woman at the head of the domestic circle must
throw all into confusion. The manager of an establishment,

especially if she be also a wife and a mother, can never plead lack of
work, as an excuse for personal laziness. What a sad example does
such a woman set to her children! No vice is more contagious than
this—nor is any example more likely to be imitated by those around.
5. We next notice her thriftiness as a wife and female head of a
family. "She considers a field and buys it; with the fruit of her hand
she plants a vineyard." "She makes fine linen, and sells it; and
delivers sashes unto the merchant." "She perceives that her
merchandise is good—her candle goes not out by night."* From these
verses it is apparent that in early times women were extensively
employed even in buying and selling such matters as suited their sex;
and without withdrawing their attention from other duties, aided
their husbands to increase the wealth and comforts of their families.
This manufacturing in the house, this traffic with the merchants, this
buying a piece of ground and planting a vineyard, sound hardly
feminine in our ears; but they give us an insight into those times, and
show how little the tyranny of man over woman, which afterwards,
as time rolled on, prevailed in eastern countries, had yet been
practiced.
It may be doubted whether in the state of society to which this
description belongs there were any household items, but such as
were thus produced in families, and the demand having no other
source of supply stimulated domestic production to an extent of
which we can hardly have any adequate conception. Many families
would produce much more than they could consume, and as there
was always a demand and a profitable remuneration for such
products, a thrifty housewife would be industrious herself, and keep
all her servants at work, especially at those articles, such as the fine
linen and sashes, which were most in demand. The traveling

merchants called at the homes of the people, bought up their articles,
and then re-sold them.
Woman is here seen as man's companion, counselor and helper, even
to the making provision for the support of the family. Modern
customs render this to a considerable extent unnecessary. Woman's
place ordinarily is the home and the nursery rather than the shop.
Buying and selling are the business of the husband, and taking care
of the family that of the wife; and the less, as a general rule, the wife
has to do with the shop, the better. It is an indelible reproach to any
man to live in idleness upon the labors of his wife, and leave her to
take care of their children also. A month's labor at the wearisome
mill, or a month's penance upon bread and water, would be a
suitable regimen for such drones.
Yet 'necessity' dispenses with ordinary laws; and where there are no
children to be provided for, or where their comfort and education
can be attended to also, it is by no means an unseemly spectacle to
witness a clever and devoted woman occasionally at the side of her
husband in the scenes of his trade. This applies, of course only to
'necessity'. No wife will feel herself degraded by such occupations.
The grateful and affectionate smile of her husband, and the
consciousness that she is lightening his cares and aiding him to
support his family, will be an ample reward for her labor.
It is, however, a great unhappiness for the laboring classes of this
and other manufacturing towns, that married women, who are not
only wives but mothers—are so extensively employed in our
factories. In some cases it may be necessary, and even beneficial; but
as a general practice it is fraught with much discomfort to the family.
And in order to render it unnecessary, let the husband be more
industrious, more sober, more temperate in all things—and forego

the earnings of his wife at the factory, that she may be looking after
her children, and providing him with a clean, comfortable, and wellordered home. This would take away from him one temptation to
frequent the ale-house.
6. We notice next her judgment and skill in her domestic
arrangements. "She rises also while it is yet night, and gives food to
her household, and a portion to her maidens." "She looks well to the
ways of her household, and eats not the bread of idleness." "Her
candle goes not out by night." "She is like the merchant's ship, she
brings her food from afar." "She is not afraid of the snow for her
household; for all her household are clothed with scarlet;" or, as it
should be rendered, "in double garments."
How many points there are here worthy of notice and imitation. She
knows the value of time and redeems it—and makes the day as long
as she can by early rising. Nothing wastes time more than
unnecessary slumber. Sleep is 'a temporary death', and no more of it
should be taken than prepares for a healthy resurrection in the
morning. Even the rising of our Lord from the grave took place very
early in the morning, as if among the minor lessons he would teach
us by the very circumstances of that wondrous and glorious event,
one is that our own morning figure of the resurrection in rising from
our bed should take place early. A slothful woman, who wastes the
precious prime hours of in bed—is a sad example to her family. How
can she teach the valuable habit of early rising to her children; or
how can she "look well to the ways of her household, and give food to
her maidens," by setting in order her household affairs—if she does
not leave her downy pillow until the day is far spent.
And then it is said of the good wife, "Her candle does not go out by
night." When the days are short and the nights long, she takes no

advantage of this for the indulgence of sloth. Though early up to
lengthen the day at that end, she is not in haste to retire to rest, and
so shorten it at the other end. Each hour has its work, and the work
of the hour is done in the hour. The ways of her household are the
constant matter of oversight and inspection, and such is the fruit of
her good management, that when winter comes, her children need
not fear frost or snow, for they are protected from the cold with both
inside and outside garments. How beautiful a scene is it on a bleak
cheerless day, when the north wind is piercing, and the sleet is
driving before it—to see a large family, through the activity of an
industrious and kind mother and manager, all warmly clad.
In a complete sense "looking well to the ways of her household,"
must include not only good housewifery, but a proper attention to
their moral habits, their religious instruction, their attendance on the
means of grace, giving them time for secret prayer, and reading
God's Word, the daily ordinance of family worship, anxious
watchfulness over their manners, habits, and connections. Who can
have the claim to the title of a virtuous woman who does not feel this
weight of family responsibility? And what a responsibility! Let every
wife read it, tremble and pray. I most urgently enjoin all the
acquirements of good and clever housewifery—of frugality without
stinginess—plenty without profusion—attention without slavery—
order without fastidiousness—efficiency without hurry—and
elegance without extravagance.
"This bear in mind," said an accomplished writer, in giving his advice
to his son, when he is directing him as to the choice of a wife, "that if
she is not frugal, if she is not what is called a good home manager, if
she does not pride herself on her knowledge of family affairs, and
laying out her money to the best advantage; let her be ever so sweetly
tempered, gracefully made, or elegantly accomplished—she is no wife

for a tradesman; and all these amiable talents will but open just so
many ways to ruin. In short, remember your mother, who was so
exquisitely versed in this art, that her dress, her table, and every
other particular, appeared rather splendid than otherwise; and yet
good housewifery was the foundation of all; and her bills, to my
certain knowledge, were a fourth less than most of her neighbors,
who had hardly cleanliness to boast, in return for their awkward
liberality." This is all true, and all good as far as it goes. But then it is
not enough, for to this must be added moral and religious oversight
and care.
7. I may now introduce her conduct as a MOTHER. "Her children
arise up and call her blessed." Happy the children of such a mother,
who receive the lessons of wisdom taught by her lips, as well as by
the example of piety, prudence, and sobriety—which she sets them in
her conduct. With their character formed under the resilient
influence of her own, and the consciousness how much they owe to
her influence, they rise up around her with feelings of gratitude and
veneration; when surrounded with families of their own, they teach
her grandchildren to reverence her; and when she has descended to
the tomb, they pour those blessings over her grave which they had
during her life been accustomed to offer round her chair, or in their
evening prayer for her welfare.
Let it be the holy and honorable ambition of every mother to be
crowned with the blessings of her children. Let every mother
seriously ponder what she would really wish her daughters to be;
what by general consent they would be praised for being—and that
let her be herself! The mother should be as perfect a model as
possible, for her daughters to imitate.

In the last chapter I gave directions to young mothers in reference to
the early training of their children; let me now give a few hints to
those whose children are rising up around them, or have become
young men and women. I say then, be much at home yourselves, and
that is the way, if your disposition, spirit, and conduct be loving and
agreeable—to keep them at home. Make them fond of your society—
by causing them to feel that you are fond of theirs. Throw an air of
cheerfulness over the circle. A mother's smile is the sunshine of the
domestic group, in which all delight to bask. Be happy yourselves,
and you will then make your children happy around you. And yet let
it not be a cheerfulness that degenerates into levity. Nothing can be
more unseemly than a frivolous mother, indulging in undignified
mirth—or frothy, gossiping, or slanderous discourse—in the midst of
grown-up sons and daughters. To be called a "rattle-brain" is no
commendation of a mother.
Of all subjects on which a discreet mother will never joke with her
children—love and courtship will be the last. A wise and good woman
will avoid all trifling with matters of such delicacy and importance.
To her sons she will exhibit in herself the model after which she
would wish them to choose a wife; and to her daughters, the pattern
she would wish them to copy, should they ever become wives and
mothers themselves. There should be a high and dignified bearing,
softened by the tenderest affection; and a kindness and affability
uncorrupted by a base familiarity. Her authority should insure the
prompt obedience of her children, whatever be their age; as her
wisdom should attract their confidence, and her love their gratitude
and affection. She must be thus their companion, counselor, and
comforter—and by the frankness of her own disposition, encourage
their openness with her. They must be so treated as to be made to
feel that they have no momentous secrets they could wish to conceal
from her. And especially should she exhibit to them all the holiness,

meekness, consistency, beauty and attractiveness of true religion—
the sanctifying, humbling, spiritualizing power of genuine godliness
in times of prosperity—and all its Divine support and heavenly
consolation in times of adversity—that they may be won by her
example to piety—and thus rise up not only on earth, and in time—
but in heaven, and through all eternity—to call her blessed!
8. She is not destitute of taste and elegance. "She makes herself
coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk and purple." Though not
addicted to 'pride in dress' and 'vanity in decorations', she maintains
her rank and station in society by their external and conventional
signs. Her wardrobe and her furniture are in keeping with her
circumstances, her virtues, and her industry. And it is right that they
should be so. Religion, my female friends, is not at war with elegance
and good taste. It is itself the "beauty of holiness," and the richest
and purest moral taste. Neither despise nor idolize these matters. Be
neither poorly dressed—nor a 'dressed doll'; neither the slave—nor
the despiser of fashion; neither excite disgust by your lack of
attention to little matters of order, suitableness and ornament—nor
court admiration by extravagance, splendor and expensiveness. Be
consistent with your station in all respects. Do not pretend the pride
of poverty—any more than that of magnificence.
As to the elegant occupations for leisure hours of modern times, I
refer to what in former chapters I have said on the subject of worldly
accomplishments.
9. Note her prudence in speech. "She opens her mouth in wisdom."
She thinks before she speaks; and therefore neither introduces a bad
subject, nor disgraces a good one by an improper manner of
discoursing upon it. She has too just a sense of the value of the gift of
speech, and too accurate an idea of the power of words for good or

for evil, to employ them in idle gossip, petty scandal, or slanderous
backbiting. She is neither too disinclined to talk—knowing that
speech is given to be employed; nor too talkative—equally knowing
that "When words are many, sin is not absent—but he who holds his
tongue is wise." The apostle James says—"If any man offends not in
word, the same is a perfect man." This, perhaps, is still more true of a
woman, inasmuch as she is thought to have a greater propensity to
loquacity.
The gift of speech is never more adorned than when employed in the
soft and gentle tones of woman's voice uttering the words of wisdom
and kindness. The gift of speech is never more dissonant and
repulsive than when her tongue is voluble in folly or falsehood,
malice or anger. Have we not all known husbands, a large portion of
whose time has been employed in explaining the mistakes, correcting
the follies, healing the feuds, and repairing the mischiefs, of wives
who opened their mouths without wisdom? While on the other hand,
has not many an Abigail, by her discreet and timely interposition and
wise speech, averted the storm that was gathering over the family
from the churlish language of Nabal, her husband?
Blessed is the woman who knows how to charm to repose the
troubled thoughts of an angry or a vexed husband—who can discern
when to be silent and when to speak—and how by the sweet tones of
her voice to lull his agitated mind, and drive the evil spirit out of his
bosom. Ah! it is at home that this wisdom of speech is most needed.
What stormy scenes sometimes arise from the absence of it, driving
peace from the family and filling it with harsh discord and fearful
strife!
10. Is kindness and benevolence no part of the spirit and conduct of
the virtuous woman? Let the text reply. "In her tongue is the law of

kindness. She stretches out her hand to the poor; yes, she reaches
forth her hands to the needy." Her kindness begins with thoughts,
goes on to words, and ends in works. In her heart, it is as a principle
of charity; upon her tongue, as a law to dictate gentle, and soothing,
and pleasing words. She speaks, and her expressions are as the
droppings of the honeycomb, or the falling of the dew.
But her mercy is in her hand as well as in her heart and upon her
lips. She does not merely say to the hungry and shivering, "Be
warmed and be filled," but she gives them with which to satisfy their
hunger and clothe their limbs. And her kindliness of disposition is
the golden thread which runs through all her life, and binds up all
her actions, not only into a womanly, but saintly, benevolence. Her
spindle and distaff so industriously employed, are worked not for
herself alone, but for the poor and needy. She is not so taken up with
those within the circle of her family as to forget those that are
outside. Her benevolence is like a spring, which not only refreshes
and fertilizes the spot where it gushes up and makes all verdant
round its margin—but flows onward to carry its benefits to those at a
distance.
She adorns herself with "silk and purple," and makes "coverings of
tapestry" for her own habitation, and clothes her household; but then
also, like Dorcas, she makes garments for the poor. How beautifully
does this feature of kindness come into the portrait; how does this
diamond of mercy sparkle amid the other jewels of this charming
character! What a blank would the absence of it have made! How
would we have turned away, not with admiration, but with sadness,
from this industry, frugality, marital affection, good housewifery,
maternal excellency, prudence, and elegance—if all these virtues had
been exhibited in the iron setting of selfishness—instead of the gold
of mercy! If this woman, the pattern of all household virtues, had

been presented to us as so swallowed up in her cares for her own
well-provided household as to do nothing for the starving and naked
families around her—a dark shadow would have fallen on her
otherwise bright character, and its luminousness would have passed
at once if not into total, yet into partial eclipse. But it is not so.
Mercy, like a midday sun, rises upon the scene, and sheds its luster
upon all. Christian women, you must be the brightest patterns of
kindness and mercy which our selfish world contains—and add to
temperance, patience, and godliness—Christian kindness and
charity.
11. Such a character cannot be unnoticed or unacknowledged; nor
can such excellence pass through the world without admiration and
commendation; and I now therefore note the honor and esteem with
which she is treated. "Strength and honor are her clothing; and she
shall rejoice in time to come." "Her husband also, and he praises
her." "Many daughters have done virtuously, but you excel them all."
"Favor is deceitful and beauty is vain; but a woman who fears the
Lord—she shall be praised." "Give her of the fruits of her hands, and
let her own works praise her in the gates."
She seeks not human applause, and therefore acts no theatrical part;
nor, for the sake of praise, attempts ostentatious display. Content
with the love and esteem of her husband, the veneration and
affection of her children, and the respect of her friends—she is not
anxious to obtrude herself upon public attention, to shine in brilliant
circles, or to have even her excellence made the subject of general
commendation. Still, unsought praise will be given her. Spontaneous
tributes and free-will offerings of honor and respect will be paid her.
Her husband will be the first to perceive, and the foremost to
acknowledge, her excellence. If a grateful man, he will make her

sensible of his just appreciation of her excellences, not by mere
caresses, but by respect for her judgment and character; by
commending her to her children, and bidding them follow her
example. (Cases do sometimes occur of men so inferior to their
wives, and so conscious of that inferiority, as to be jealous of their
wives superior godliness, and envious of the talents and virtues they
cannot imitate.)
A husband blessed with such a woman as is described in this chapter,
should not be backward on suitable occasions to let others know the
estimate he forms of her character. True it is that a wise man will not
be always talking of his wife's excellences; but he will, at proper
seasons, feel a pride and a pleasure in exalting her in public
estimation, and the public will not fail to give her the fruit of her
doings. "Let every one extol her virtue. Let her not lack the just
commendation of her pious labors. But while some are magnified for
the nobleness of the stock from whence they sprang; others for their
fortune; others for their beauty; others for other possessions—let the
good deeds which she herself has done, be publicly praised in the
greatest assemblies, where, if all men shall be silent, her own works
will declare her excellent works."
And to use the poetic language of Horne, "The crown which her own
hands have thus formed shall be placed upon her head as it were by
general consent, even in this life; and her good deeds celebrated in
public assemblies, shall diffuse an odor as pleasant as the smell of
Eden, or as the cloud of frankincense ascending from the holy altar.
When her task is ended, the answer of a good conscience, and the
blessings of all around, sweeter than the sweetest music, shall chant
her to her repose—until awakened on the great morning of the world,
descending angels shall introduce this daughter of Jerusalem into
the joy of her Lord."

Such then is the character of the virtuous woman, as delineated by
the mother of King Lemuel. By expanding the miniature as it was
drawn by the pen of inspiration into a large and full-length picture, I
have perhaps done injustice to the subject. If so, let those who are of
this opinion, perpetually and closely study the original as it is found
in the book of Proverbs. "There," says Matthew Henry, in his quaint
style, "is shut up this looking glass for ladies, which they are desired
to open and dress themselves by; and if they do so, their adorning
will be found to praise, and honor, and glory, at the appearing of
Jesus Christ."
If, however, a wife devoid of all that constitutes her real excellence,
will run counter to this beautiful picture—if instead of being the glory
of her husband, she will seek to rival him, and will either attempt to
be in the domestic skies the greater light to rule the day, or to throw
into eclipse him before whom she should be content to be partially
obscured—if instead of being content to be praised by him, and
deeming his approving smile her worthiest object of ambition and
her richest reward, she will seek the gaze of admiration and the
language of flattery from strangers—if she is a wife who wantonly
opposes his tastes, or neglects his comfort; who despises his opinion,
and contradicts him with rigor, and resents with improper heat his
real or unintentional slights—who exhibits indolence and not
industry in the management of his household—and either by
slovenliness allows all things to sink into uncleanness and confusion
—or by extravagance hastens on the approach of poverty and ruin—
who neglects even her children, and causes them to rise up in grief
and shame for their mother—who gives her maidens constant
occasion for reproach and complaint, on account of her ill-temper
and worse conduct—who is restless and uneasy at home, but gracious
and engaging everywhere else—who by her own conduct makes her
husband happier everywhere else than at his own fireside—"or if she

be a wife, using her empire over her husband to turn him away from
the Lord, as the wife of Jehoram, whose fatal influence the Holy
Spirit paints in the single expression, 'But Jehoram followed the
example of the kings of Israel and was as wicked as King Ahab, for he
had married one of Ahab's daughters.' A wife, in short, who
constrains her husband to sigh in secret over the hour when he was
blind enough to ask for her hand in marriage—and to look forward to
the day when he shall lay before the tribunal of God the eternal
wrongs she has done him—what plea can she offer for her conduct?"
(Monod)
There are some few things of a GENERAL CHARACTER which may
be worthy of notice in surveying this portraiture.
It is a very true and judicious remark of Mr. Bridges, that the
standard of godliness here exhibited is not that of the religious
recluse, shut up from active obligations under pretense of greater
sanctity and consecration to God. Here are none of those habits of
monastic asceticism that are extolled by some as the highest point of
Christian perfection. Nor does any other part of Scripture, either of
the Old Testament or the New, set up a finger-post pointing to the
convent. I repeat what I affirmed in a former chapter, that no single
practice pleading the sanction of religion, was ever the source of so
much pollution and vice, or inflicted so deep a wound on morals—as
monasticism. Woman's natural state is the marital one, into which
she ought to be, and is usually, willing to enter at the call of
Providence, and with all due discretion—and for which she should
assiduously prepare herself.
Still, should there be some women of singular unselfishness, or
exalted piety, who, either for the benefit of near relations, or from
motives of zeal and mercy, and not from a superstitious notion of 'the

superior sanctity of celibacy', shall be willing to forego the duties and
felicities of the wife and the mother; who, I ask, shall forbid them?
Such was the mind of the apostle Paul, whose words on this subject
have been so eagerly twisted in favor of erroneous opinions. "If I
search," says Monod, "throughout the whole world for the type of the
most useful, the most pure, the most Christian charity, I nowhere
find all these conditions better fulfilled than in the good aunt, who by
a marvelous sacrifice, accepts the fatigues and the cares of maternity,
without knowing its ineffable consolation. Sad she may be, but her
sadness is heavenly, and transforms itself completely into love and
sacrifice. But if no family engagements bind you, extend your view
further; find out a family who has need of you; comfort the afflicted;
form or support charitable institutions; assist a pious minister in his
labors—in short in every good work for which God appears to have
expressly reserved your liberty. Or embrace, for you may, a yet wider
sphere. Embrace the world if you will, provided it be in the spirit of
charity. In fine, accomplish your mission so faithfully, that when the
hour of your death shall arrive, all may rejoice in the happy isolation
which permitted you thus to devote yourself—and that amid the
tender regrets which shall follow your mortal remains to the tomb, it
may no longer be discerned in the sacrifice which you have made,
whether you were wife or sister, aunt or mother, relative or
stranger."
It cannot fail to impress every reader of this beautiful description of
the "virtuous woman," that the delineation chiefly regards the
ACTIVE virtues of the female character. It portrays the clever,
energetic, and prosperous female, surrounded by circumstances that
call forth her industrious assiduities, invest her with power, and
array her with public honor; rather than the quiet, gentle, and retired
sufferer, struggling with adversity, or crushed by oppression, whose
virtues consist of submission to the will of God, and patient

uncomplaining endurance of the wrongs of man, perhaps of her
husband—and the brightness of whose character is admired by God
and angels in heaven, rather than seen and extolled by men on earth.
To the latter I would say, look up with believing prayer to God for the
grace that is necessary to fill your dark sphere with the illumination
of that holy virtue, which with lunar radiance shines brightest in the
night.
Little of the glory of the character which I have been describing may
fall upon you in the secluded shades amid which you are called to
dwell. In solitude, with no eye to pity, no voice to soothe, no hand to
help—you may be called to drink the cup of sorrow. Well, drink it, as
did the greatest and holiest sufferer who ever passed through our
valley of tears, saying, "The cup which my Father gives me to drink,
shall I not drink it?" The time will come when he who loves you
better than you love yourself, shall wipe away all tears from your
eyes.
To those who by divine grace are copying the pattern set before them
in this chapter, and are in circumstances to do so, I would say, cast
the veil of gentleness, modesty, and humility, over all these fine traits
of active, energetic character. Let the passive virtues of your
femininity blend with and soften the active ones. Be sure to single
out that lovely feature, "the law of kindness is on her tongue." With
all this courageous energy in womanly conduct, unite feminine
tenderness and softness. Whatever else in character you may be, still
be a woman, with all a woman's grace and loveliness. and while as a
wife, a mother, and domestic manager, you wield the authority and
exert the influence which belongs to you, remember still there is one
in the family, I mean your husband, whose authority is still higher
than your own, and that it is at once your duty, and will be for your

happiness, meekly and gracefully, though not abjectly and
crouchingly—to bow to him.
Young women, I beseech you to make yourselves familiar with this
exquisite passage of Holy Writ. It must be a study for you. There is
much, very much, to be learned from it. You will here see that piety is
the broadest and most solid basis of all female excellence, and so far
from interfering with temporal duties, will, wherever it is genuine,
quicken attention to them. Godliness is profitable for all things—and
assists every lawful pursuit. There is not a single good quality in the
character which it will not improve—and no one earthly interest,
provided it is legitimate—which godliness will not effectually
promote.
Do not allow yourselves to be imposed upon by the
misrepresentations of its enemies, who will persuade you, if they can,
that piety is unfriendly to general character, and inimical to personal
happiness; that it enjoins harsh duties—and forbids pleasures
essential to youthful enjoyment. Upon candid examination it will be
found that this objection to it, like all others, is utterly unfounded. Is
there a virtue or a practice which can adorn or bless humanity which
piety does not enjoin? And as to its most solemn, and what some
would consider its most sorrowful duty—I mean repentance—I would
remind you that this is not the only exercise of true religion; for there
is the joy unspeakable of faith, as well as the grief of contrition; and
the latter leads on to the former, just as the shower in the sultry heat
of summer portends and produces a cooler atmosphere. True
religion forbids no pleasure—but only such things as are injurious to
the soul. True religion substitutes the substance of happiness for its
shadows. It resembles a fine country in spring, where the hedges
bloom and every thorn produces a flower.

Perhaps it will be thought by some a pity that a delineation of the
virtuous man, equally minute, comprehensive, and impressive, was
not drawn by the hand which gave us this picture of female
excellence. In diminishing of our regret however, it is observable how
much of what is here said may be copied into the character and
conduct of the masculine sex. There is scarcely a rule of conduct here
presented which may not, with a little change, be observed by the
husband, the father, and the master. This virtuous woman's fidelity
to her husband, personal industry, good management and diligence
in her family, consideration for the comfort and necessities of others,
kindness of speech and pity for the poor, courtesy to all, and
especially her sincere and practical piety—belong to her husband also
—and are required of him as well as of herself! These virtues are
appropriate to both sexes. They are the general principles of
excellence and virtue—though adapted here to the female sex. And
therefore we recommend husbands to study this portraiture, not only
to see what their wives should be, but what is required of themselves
also.
But who of either sex is sufficient for these things? None but those
whose sufficiency is of God; and He will ever bestow upon docile and
humble petitioners at the footstool of his grace—that gracious aid
which is equal to the exigency of every case. While enforcing your
various duties, and calling upon you to form for yourself a godly
character, which, after exhibiting to the admiration of every beholder
on earth its graceful proportions—shall endure with unfading beauty
and undiminished grandeur through eternity—I would also remind
you of your own indecision, feebleness of purpose, exposure to
temptation—and consequent necessity of divine assistance. To obtain
this help you must have faith in Christ, the source of all spiritual
efficacy, and earnest prayer to God; and none shall seek this grace in
vain.

I close a series of discourses on which, in consequence of the rarity of
the effort and the delicacy of the subject, I entered, not indeed
without some hope—but with much fear and trembling. So far as the
pleasure of my own mind in preparing and preaching them, and the
monthly attendance upon their delivery from the pulpit, were
concerned, my expectations were more than realized. In laying down
rules, pointing out defects, and occasionally in comparing the
excellences and the faults of the sexes, I have had a somewhat
difficult task to perform, and I can scarcely presume to hope that in
the performance of it, I have given satisfaction to all parties. I must
be contented (and it is no small matter to be so,) with the conviction
that I have endeavored to hold the balance with a steady and
impartial hand—and in this I have satisfied my own conscience. I
have praised, where praise was called for, and that was very often—
but my commendation has not degenerated into flattery. And I have
blamed, when blame was just—but it has been without bitterness. My
object has been to promote the happiness of both sexes, by
improving the character of the one on which so much of the
happiness of both depends; and to advance the welfare of society by
purifying its earthly source. How far I have succeeded it is impossible
that I should ever know, and in the absence of certainty I must be
comforted with hope.
I have looked upon woman as related to both worlds, as being bound
to this world—by the ties of a wife, a mother, and a domestic
manager; and to that world which is to come—by the grander and
more enduring bond of immortality; and therefore as having to
attain not only to social excellence—but to that which is individual in
special relation to God, heaven, and eternity. I have contemplated
you, my young friends, as the future wives and mothers of the next
generation—and have endeavored to prepare you for discharging the
duties of these momentous relationships. It has been my aim in these

sermons, to open and prepare for you a smooth passage through this
earthly state, gathering out of your way as many stones, and planting
as many flowers as I could. And imperfect as may have been my
counsels, and defective as may have been my views, I am confident
that if my advice be taken and my rules observed, though there may
be much sorrow in reserve for you—there will not be lacking a large
share of consolation and happiness. It will be your fault, not mine, if
your life becomes a dreary blank—a desert without an oasis—a
wilderness without a spring.
But I have looked beyond this world, to that state where you will find
yourselves with all those tender ties fallen from around you, and
yourselves standing alone in your individuality and immortality. I
am duly aware, and I wish you to be so, that you sustain a personal
relation to God, which requires an appropriate and prescribed line of
conduct towards him, and for the neglect of which no other duties,
excellences, or merits whatever, can be a substitute. It is not merely
what you have been as a woman in society, or as a wife, a mother, or
a manager in your family—but what you have been towards God, that
will decide your lot in the day of judgment. You may have been the
most exalted, noble, and learned of women; the most faithful of
wives; the most devoted and kindest of mothers; but if, with all this,
you have not had repentance towards God, faith in our Lord Jesus,
and true holiness—your domestic virtues, as they had in themselves
no relation to God, and in their performance no reference to God,
will, in the end, meet with no recompense from him—and instead of
"Well done, good and faithful servant," you will hear nothing more
than, "On earth, she had all the reward she will ever get."
Young women, contemplate your situation as I do, and as I now
present it to you. There, further than the eye can reach, stretches out
the vast plain of earthly existence, with all its varied landscape, its

numerous roads, its busy population, its duties, its pleasures, and its
dangers; you are traveling across it, and needing guidance,
assistance, protection, and comfort along the way. Step by step you
are going on, never stopping, but ever advancing, to what? To that
'boundless ocean of eternity' which lies beyond—on which you must
soon embark—and on which so many of your fellow-travelers are
every hour adventuring. Yes, yes, you are emigrants passing through
time to embark for eternity! And ought you not, like other emigrants,
to prepare for the voyage, and for the country to which you are
going? Shall your attention be so taken up with the plain across
which you are traveling, as to forget your embarkment upon the
ocean that lies beyond it? Does one of all the thousands who are now
crowding onto ships to immigrate, forget that he is soon to leave his
country for one beyond the sea? Oh, no! And will you forget that you
must soon, and how soon you know not, perhaps next year, or next
month, immigrate to eternity? By what motive shall I induce you to
prepare for eternity! By what? Only by itself. For if Eternity be not
enough to induce you to prepare for Eternity, by what other motive
can I hope to succeed?
I now, in conclusion, refer you to that day and that scene, when the
result of all ministerial efforts for the spiritual welfare of mankind,
and of this among the rest, shall be ascertained and made public.
Before that dread tribunal, you and I must appear. Not one single
person of all who heard, or who shall read these discourses, will then
be absent; and among the things to be brought into judgment will be
this feeble, yet sincere and earnest, endeavor for your spiritual
benefit. In reference to some of you it will, I fear, be found that I have
been "the savor of death unto death;" but it is my prayer and my
expectation, that to very many I may be "the savor of life unto life."
"For what is our hope, our joy, or the crown in which we will glory in

the presence of our Lord Jesus when he comes? Is it not you? Indeed,
you are our glory and joy!" 1 Thes. 2:19-20