PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 7 of 10
Chapters 31 through 36


We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach. In these chapters, Ben Sira addresses the snares of riches, the conduct of the table, true worship and sacrifice, and a great prayer for the deliverance of Israel.

CHAPTER 31

Verse 1. Watching for riches consumeth the flesh, and the care thereof driveth away sleep.

Verse 2. Waking care will not let a man slumber, as a sore disease breaketh sleep.

Verse 3. The rich hath great labor in gathering riches together, and when he resteth, he is filled with his delicacies.

Verse 4. The poor laboreth in his poor estate, and when he leaveth off, he is still needy.

Verse 5. He that loveth gold shall not be justified, and he that followeth corruption shall have enough thereof.

Verse 6. Gold hath been the ruin of many, and their destruction was present.

Verse 7. It is a stumbling block unto them that sacrifice unto it, and every fool shall be taken therewith.

Verse 8. Blessed is the rich that is found without blemish, and hath not gone after gold.

Verse 9. Who is he? And we will call him blessed; for wonderful things hath he done among his people.

Verse 10. Who hath been tried thereby, and found perfect? Then let him glory. Who might offend, and hath not offended? Or done evil, and hath not done it?

Verse 11. His goods shall be established, and the congregation shall declare his alms.

Verse 12. If thou sit at a bountiful table, be not greedy upon it, and say not, There is much meat on it.

Verse 13. Remember that a wicked eye is an evil thing; and what is created more wicked than an eye? Therefore it weepeth upon every occasion.

Verse 14. Stretch not thine hand whithersoever it looketh, and thrust it not with him into the dish.

Verse 15. Judge of thy neighbor by thyself, and be discreet in every point.

Verse 16. Eat, as it becometh a man, those things which are set before thee; and devour not, lest thou be hated.

Verse 17. Leave off first for manners' sake, and be not insatiable, lest thou offend.

Verse 18. When thou sittest among many, reach not thine hand out first of all.

Verse 19. A very little is sufficient for a man well nurtured, and he fetcheth not his wind short upon his bed.

Verse 20. Sound sleep cometh of moderate eating; he riseth early, and his wits are with him. But the pain of watching and choler and pangs of the belly are with an insatiable man.

Verse 21. And if thou hast been forced to eat, arise, go forth, vomit, and thou shalt have rest.

Verse 22. My son, hear me, and despise me not, and at the last thou shalt find as I told thee. In all thy works be quick, and no infirmity shall come unto thee.

Verse 23. Whoso is liberal of his meat, men shall speak well of him; and the report of his good housekeeping will be believed.

Verse 24. But against him that is a niggard of his meat the whole city shall murmur, and the testimonies of his niggardness shall not be doubted of.

Verse 25. Show not thy valiantness in wine, for wine hath destroyed many.

Verse 26. The furnace proveth the edge by dipping, so doth wine the hearts of the proud by drunkenness.

Verse 27. Wine is as good as life to a man if it be drunk moderately. What life is then to a man that is without wine? For it was made to make men glad.

Verse 28. Wine measurably drunk and in season bringeth gladness of the heart and cheerfulness of the mind.

Verse 29. But wine drunk with excess maketh bitterness of the mind, with brawling and quarreling.

Verse 30. Drunkenness increaseth the rage of a fool till he offend; it diminisheth strength and maketh wounds.

Verse 31. Rebuke not thy neighbor at the wine, and despise him not in his mirth. Give him no despiteful words, and press not upon him with urging him to drink.

CHAPTER 32

Verse 1. If thou be made the master of a feast, lift not thyself up, but be among them as one of the rest. Take diligent care for them, and so sit down.

Verse 2. And when thou hast done all thy office, take thy place, that thou mayest be merry with them, and receive a crown for thy well ordering of the feast.

Verse 3. Speak, thou that art the elder, for it becometh thee, but with sound judgment; and hinder not music.

Verse 4. Pour not out words where there is a musician, and show not forth wisdom out of time.

Verse 5. A concert of music in a banquet of wine is as a signet of carbuncle set in gold.

Verse 6. As a signet of an emerald set in a work of gold, so is the melody of music with pleasant wine.

Verse 7. Speak, young man, if there be need of thee; and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked.

Verse 8. Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in few words; be as one that knoweth and yet holdeth his tongue.

Verse 9. If thou be among great men, make not thyself equal with them; and when elders speak, be not much in talking.

Verse 10. Before the thunder goeth lightning, and before a shamefaced man shall grace go forth.

Verse 11. Rise up betimes, and be not the last; but get thee home without delay.

Verse 12. There take thy pastime, and do what thou wilt; but sin not by proud speech.

Verse 13. And for all these things bless Him that made thee, and hath replenished thee with His good things.

Verse 14. Whoso feareth the Lord will receive His discipline, and they that seek Him early shall find favor.

Verse 15. He that seeketh the law shall be filled therewith; but the hypocrite will be offended thereat.

Verse 16. They that fear the Lord shall find judgment, and shall kindle justice as a light.

Verse 17. A sinful man will not be reproved, but findeth an excuse according to his will.

Verse 18. A man of counsel will be considerate; but a strange and proud man is not daunted with fear, even when of himself he hath done without counsel.

Verse 19. Do nothing without advice, and when thou hast once done, repent not.

Verse 20. Go not in a way wherein thou mayest fall, and stumble not among the stones.

Verse 21. Be not overconfident in a plain way.

Verse 22. And beware of thine own children.

Verse 23. In every good work trust thy own soul, for this is the keeping of the commandments.

Verse 24. He that believeth in the Lord taketh heed to the commandment, and he that trusteth in Him shall fare never the worse.

CHAPTER 33

Verse 1. There shall no evil happen unto him that feareth the Lord; but in temptation even again He will deliver him.

Verse 2. A wise man hateth not the law; but he that is a hypocrite therein is as a ship in a storm.

Verse 3. A man of understanding trusteth in the law, and the law is faithful unto him, as when one asketh at the oracle.

Verse 4. Prepare thy speech, and so shalt thou be heard; bind up instruction and then make answer.

Verse 5. The heart of the foolish is like a cart wheel, and his thoughts are like a rolling axle-tree.

Verse 6. A stallion horse is as a mocking friend; he neigheth under every one that sitteth upon him.

Verse 7. Why doth one day excel another, when as all the light of every day in the year is of the sun?

Verse 8. By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, and He altered seasons and feasts.

Verse 9. Some of them hath He made high days, and hallowed them; and some of them hath He made ordinary days.

Verse 10. And all men are from the ground, and Adam was created of earth.

Verse 11. In much knowledge the Lord hath divided them, and made their ways diverse.

Verse 12. Some of them hath He blessed and exalted, and some of them He hath sanctified and set near Himself; but some of them hath He cursed and brought low, and turned out of their places.

Verse 13. As the clay is in the potter's hand, to fashion it at his pleasure, so man is in the hand of Him that made him, to render to them as He seeth fit.

Verse 14. Good is set against evil, and life against death; so is the godly against the sinner, and the sinner against the godly.

Verse 15. So look upon all the works of the Most High, and there are two and two, one against another.

Verse 16. I awaked up last of all, as one that gathereth after the grape-gatherers; by the blessing of the Lord I profited, and trod my wine-press like a gatherer of grapes.

Verse 17. Consider that I labored not for myself only, but for all them that seek learning.

Verse 18. Hear me, O ye great men of the people, and hearken with your ears, ye rulers of the congregation.

Verse 19. Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over thee while thou livest, and give not thy goods to another, lest it repent thee and thou entreat for the same again.

Verse 20. As long as thou livest and hast breath in thee, give not thyself over to any.

Verse 21. For better it is that thy children should seek to thee than that thou shouldest stand to their courtesy.

Verse 22. In all thy works keep to thyself the pre-eminence; leave not a stain upon thine honor.

Verse 23. At the time when thou shalt end thy days, and finish thy life, distribute thine inheritance.

Verse 24. Fodder, a wand, and burdens are for the ass; and bread, correction, and work for a servant.

Verse 25. If thou set thy servant to labor, thou shalt find rest; but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty.

Verse 26. A yoke and a collar do bow the neck, so are tortures and torments for an evil servant.

Verse 27. Send him to labor, that he be not idle; for idleness teacheth much evil.

Verse 28. Set him to work, as is fit for him; if he be not obedient, put on more heavy fetters.

Verse 29. But be not excessive toward any, and without discretion do nothing.

Verse 30. If thou have a servant, let him be unto thee as thyself, because thou hast bought him with a price.

Verse 31. If thou have a servant, treat him as a brother, for thou hast need of him as of thine own soul. If thou entreat him evil, and he run from thee, which way shalt thou go to seek him?

CHAPTER 34

Verse 1. The hopes of a man void of understanding are vain and false, and dreams lift up fools.

Verse 2. Whoso regardeth dreams is like him that catcheth at a shadow, and followeth after the wind.

Verse 3. The vision of dreams is the resemblance of one thing to another, even as the likeness of a face to a face.

Verse 4. Of an unclean thing what can be cleansed? And from that thing which is false what truth can come?

Verse 5. Divinations and soothsayings and dreams are vain, and the heart fancieth as a woman's heart in travail.

Verse 6. If they be not sent from the Most High in thy visitation, set not thy heart upon them.

Verse 7. For dreams have deceived many, and they have failed that put their trust in them.

Verse 8. The law shall be found perfect without lies, and wisdom is perfection to a faithful mouth.

Verse 9. A man that hath traveled knoweth many things, and he that hath much experience will declare wisdom.

Verse 10. He that hath no experience knoweth little, but he that hath traveled is full of prudence.

Verse 11. When I traveled, I saw many things, and I understood more than I can express.

Verse 12. I was ofttimes in danger of death, yet I was delivered because of these things.

Verse 13. The spirit of those that fear the Lord shall live, for their hope is in Him that saveth them.

Verse 14. Whoso feareth the Lord shall not fear nor be afraid, for He is his hope.

Verse 15. Blessed is the soul of him that feareth the Lord; to whom doth he look, and who is his strength?

Verse 16. For the eyes of the Lord are upon them that love Him; He is their mighty protection and strong stay, a defense from heat, and a cover from the sun at noon.

Verse 17. A preservation from stumbling, and a help from falling; He raiseth up the soul and lighteneth the eyes; He giveth health, life, and blessing.

Verse 18. He that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully gotten, his offering is ridiculous; and the gifts of unjust men are not accepted.

Verse 19. The Most High is not pleased with the offerings of the wicked, neither is He pacified for sin by the multitude of sacrifices.

Verse 20. Whoso bringeth an offering of the goods of the poor doeth as one that killeth the son before his father's eyes.

Verse 21. The bread of the needy is their life; he that defraudeth him thereof is a man of blood.

Verse 22. He that taketh away his neighbor's living slayeth him, and he that defraudeth the laborer of his hire is a bloodshedder.

Verse 23. When one buildeth and another pulleth down, what profit have they then but labor?

Verse 24. When one prayeth and another curseth, whose voice will the Lord hear?

Verse 25. He that washeth himself after the touching of a dead body, if he touch it again, what availeth his washing?

Verse 26. So is it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and goeth again and doeth the same: who will hear his prayer, or what doth his humbling profit him?

CHAPTER 35

Verse 1. He that keepeth the law bringeth offerings enough; he that taketh heed to the commandment offereth a peace offering.

Verse 2. He that requiteth a good turn offereth fine flour, and he that giveth alms sacrificeth praise.

Verse 3. To depart from wickedness is a thing pleasing to the Lord, and to forsake unrighteousness is a propitiation.

Verse 4. Thou shalt not appear empty before the Lord.

Verse 5. For all these things are to be done because of the commandment.

Verse 6. The offering of the righteous maketh the altar fat, and the sweet savor thereof is before the Most High.

Verse 7. The sacrifice of a just man is acceptable, and the memorial thereof shall never be forgotten.

Verse 8. Give the Lord His honor with a good eye, and diminish not the firstfruits of thine hands.

Verse 9. In all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance, and dedicate thy tithes with gladness.

Verse 10. Give unto the Most High according as He hath enriched thee, and as thou hast gotten give with a cheerful eye.

Verse 11. For the Lord recompenseth, and will give thee seven times as much.

Verse 12. Do not think to corrupt with gifts, for such He will not receive; and trust not to unrighteous sacrifices, for the Lord is judge, and with Him is no respect of persons.

Verse 13. He will not accept any person against a poor man, but will hear the prayer of the oppressed.

Verse 14. He will not despise the supplication of the fatherless, nor the widow, when she poureth out her complaint.

Verse 15. Do not the tears run down the widow's cheeks? And is not her cry against him that causeth them to fall?

Verse 16. He that serveth the Lord shall be accepted with favor, and his prayer shall reach unto the clouds.

Verse 17. The prayer of the humble pierceth the clouds, and till it come nigh he will not be comforted; and he will not depart until the Most High shall behold to judge righteously and execute judgment.

Verse 18. For the Lord will not be slack, neither will the Mighty be patient toward them, till He have smitten asunder the loins of the unmerciful, and repaid vengeance to the heathen;

Verse 19. Till He have taken away the multitude of the proud, and broken the sceptre of the unrighteous;

Verse 20. Till He have rendered to every man according to his deeds, and to the works of men according to their devices; till He have judged the cause of His people, and made them to rejoice in His mercy.

Verse 21. Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of rain in the time of drought.

CHAPTER 36

Verse 1. Have mercy upon us, O Lord God of all, and behold us.

Verse 2. And send Thy fear upon all the nations that seek not after Thee.

Verse 3. Lift up Thy hand against the strange nations, and let them see Thy power.

Verse 4. As Thou wast sanctified in us before them, so be Thou magnified among them before us.

Verse 5. And let them know Thee, as we have known Thee, that there is no God but only Thou, O God.

Verse 6. Show new signs, and make other strange wonders; glorify Thy hand and Thy right arm.

Verse 7. Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath; take away the adversary and destroy the enemy.

Verse 8. Make the time short; remember the covenant, and let them declare Thy wonderful works.

Verse 9. Let him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of the fire, and let them perish that oppress the people.

Verse 10. Smite asunder the heads of the rulers of the heathen, that say, There is none other but we.

Verse 11. Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, and inherit Thou them as from the beginning.

Verse 12. O Lord, have mercy upon the people that is called by Thy name, and upon Israel, whom Thou hast named Thy firstborn.

Verse 13. O be merciful unto Jerusalem, Thy holy city, the place of Thy dwelling.

Verse 14. Fill Zion with Thine unspeakable oracles, and Thy people with Thy glory.

Verse 15. Give testimony unto those that Thou hast possessed from the beginning, and raise up prophets that have been in Thy name.

Verse 16. Reward them that wait for Thee, and let Thy prophets be found faithful.

Verse 17. O Lord, hear the prayer of Thy servants, according to the blessing of Aaron over Thy people, that all they which dwell upon the earth may know that Thou art the Lord, the eternal God.

Verse 18. The belly devoureth all meats, yet is one meat better than another.

Verse 19. As the palate tasteth diverse kinds of venison, so doth an heart of understanding false speeches.

Verse 20. A froward heart causeth heaviness, but a man of experience will recompense him.

Verse 21. A woman will receive every man, yet is one daughter better than another.

Verse 22. The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance, and a man loveth nothing better.

Verse 23. If there be kindness, meekness, and comfort in her tongue, then is not her husband like other men.

Verse 24. He that getteth a wife beginneth a possession, a help like unto himself, and a pillar of rest.

Verse 25. Where no hedge is, there the possession is spoiled; and he that hath no wife will wander up and down mourning.

Verse 26. Who will trust a thief well appointed, that skippeth from city to city? So who will believe a man that hath no house, and lodgeth wheresoever the night taketh him?

This concludes Part 7 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 31 through 36. In our next reading, we shall hear Ben Sira's counsel on choosing advisors, on sickness and physicians, and on the craftsman and the scholar.
