PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 2 of 10
Chapters 6 through 10

In these chapters, Ben Sira teaches on the testing and value of true friendship, the diligent pursuit of wisdom, the duties owed by children, the grave dangers of pride and arrogance, and the responsibilities of those who hold authority and govern others.

CHAPTER 6

Verse 1. Instead of a friend become not an enemy, for thereby thou shalt inherit an ill name, shame, and reproach; even so shall a sinner that hath a double tongue.

Verse 2. Extol not thyself in the counsel of thine own heart, that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a bull.

Verse 3. Thou shalt eat up thy leaves, and lose thy fruit, and leave thyself as a dry tree.

Verse 4. A wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies.

Verse 5. Sweet language will multiply friends, and a fair-speaking tongue will increase kind greetings.

Verse 6. Be in peace with many, nevertheless have but one counselor of a thousand.

Verse 7. If thou wouldest get a friend, prove him first, and be not hasty to credit him.

Verse 8. For some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

Verse 9. And there is a friend who, being turned to enmity and strife, will discover thy reproach.

Verse 10. Again, some friend is a companion at the table, and will not continue in the day of thy affliction.

Verse 11. But in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be bold over thy servants.

Verse 12. If thou be brought low, he will be against thee, and will hide himself from thy face.

Verse 13. Separate thyself from thine enemies, and take heed of thy friends.

Verse 14. A faithful friend is a strong defense, and he that hath found such an one hath found a treasure.

Verse 15. Nothing doth countervail a faithful friend, and his excellency is invaluable.

Verse 16. A faithful friend is the medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall find him.

Verse 17. Whoso feareth the Lord shall direct his friendship aright, for as he is, so shall his neighbor be also.

Verse 18. My son, gather instruction from thy youth up; so shalt thou find wisdom till thine old age.

Verse 19. Come unto her as one that ploweth and soweth, and wait for her good fruits; for thou shalt not toil much in laboring about her, but thou shalt eat of her fruits right soon.

Verse 20. She is very unpleasant to the unlearned; he that is without understanding will not remain with her.

Verse 21. She will lie upon him as a mighty stone of trial, and he will cast her from him ere it be long.

Verse 22. For wisdom is according to her name, and she is not manifest unto many.

Verse 23. Give ear, my son, receive my counsel, and refuse not my advice.

Verse 24. Put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her chain.

Verse 25. Bow down thy shoulder unto her, and bear her, and be not grieved with her bonds.

Verse 26. Come unto her with thy whole heart, and keep her ways with all thy power.

Verse 27. Search, and seek, and she shall be made known unto thee; and when thou hast got hold of her, let her not go.

Verse 28. For at the last thou shalt find her rest, and that shall be turned to thy joy.

Verse 29. Then shall her fetters be a strong defense for thee, and her chains a robe of glory.

Verse 30. For there is a golden ornament upon her, and her bands are purple lace.

Verse 31. Thou shalt put her on as a robe of honor, and shalt put her about thee as a crown of joy.

Verse 32. My son, if thou wilt, thou shalt be taught; and if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be prudent.

Verse 33. If thou love to hear, thou shalt receive understanding; and if thou bow thine ear, thou shalt be wise.

Verse 34. Stand in the multitude of the elders, and cleave unto him that is wise.

Verse 35. Be willing to hear every godly discourse, and let not the parables of understanding escape thee.

Verse 36. And if thou seest a man of understanding, get thee betimes unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his door.

Verse 37. Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord, and meditate continually in His commandments; He shall establish thine heart, and give thee wisdom at thine own desire.

CHAPTER 7

Verse 1. Do no evil, so shall no harm come unto thee.

Verse 2. Depart from the unjust, and iniquity shall turn away from thee.

Verse 3. My son, sow not upon the furrows of unrighteousness, and thou shalt not reap them sevenfold.

Verse 4. Seek not of the Lord pre-eminence, neither of the king the seat of honor.

Verse 5. Justify not thyself before the Lord, and boast not of thy wisdom before the king.

Verse 6. Seek not to be judge, being not able to take away iniquity, lest at any time thou fear the person of the mighty, and lay a stumblingblock in the way of thy uprightness.

Verse 7. Offend not against the multitude of a city, and then thou shalt not cast thyself down among the people.

Verse 8. Bind not one sin upon another, for in one thou shalt not be unpunished.

Verse 9. Say not, God will look upon the multitude of my oblations, and when I offer to the Most High God, He will accept it.

Verse 10. Be not fainthearted when thou makest thy prayer, and neglect not to give alms.

Verse 11. Laugh no man to scorn in the bitterness of his soul, for there is One which humbleth and exalteth.

Verse 12. Devise not a lie against thy brother, neither do the like to thy friend.

Verse 13. Use not to make any manner of lie, for the custom thereof is not good.

Verse 14. Use not many words in a multitude of elders, and make not much babbling when thou prayest.

Verse 15. Hate not laborious work, neither husbandry, which the Most High hath ordained.

Verse 16. Number not thyself among the multitude of sinners, but remember that wrath will not tarry long.

Verse 17. Humble thyself greatly, for the vengeance of the ungodly is fire and worms.

Verse 18. Change not a friend for any thing, neither a faithful brother for the gold of Ophir.

Verse 19. Forego not a wise and good woman, for her grace is above gold.

Verse 20. Whereas thy servant worketh truly, entreat him not evil, nor the hireling that bestoweth himself wholly for thee.

Verse 21. Let thy soul love a good servant, and defraud him not of liberty.

Verse 22. Hast thou cattle? Have an eye to them, and if they be for thy profit, keep them with thee.

Verse 23. Hast thou children? Instruct them, and bow down their neck from their youth.

Verse 24. Hast thou daughters? Have a care of their body, and show not thyself cheerful toward them.

Verse 25. Marry thy daughter, and so shalt thou have performed a weighty matter; but give her to a man of understanding.

Verse 26. Hast thou a wife after thy mind? Forsake her not; but give not thyself over to a light woman.

Verse 27. Honor thy father with thy whole heart, and forget not the sorrows of thy mother.

Verse 28. Remember that thou wast begotten of them, and how canst thou recompense them the things that they have done for thee?

Verse 29. Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and reverence His priests.

Verse 30. Love Him that made thee with all thy strength, and forsake not His ministers.

Verse 31. Fear the Lord, and honor the priest, and give him his portion, as it is commanded thee: the firstfruits, and the trespass offering, and the gift of the shoulders, and the sacrifice of sanctification, and the firstfruits of the holy things.

Verse 32. And stretch thine hand unto the poor, that thy blessing may be perfected.

Verse 33. A gift hath grace in the sight of every man living, and for the dead detain it not.

Verse 34. Fail not to be with them that weep, and mourn with them that mourn.

Verse 35. Be not slow to visit the sick, for that shall make thee to be beloved.

Verse 36. Whatsoever thou takest in hand, remember the end, and thou shalt never do amiss.

CHAPTER 8

Verse 1. Strive not with a mighty man, lest thou fall into his hands.

Verse 2. Be not at variance with a rich man, lest he overweigh thee; for gold hath destroyed many, and perverted the hearts of kings.

Verse 3. Strive not with a man that is full of tongue, and heap not wood upon his fire.

Verse 4. Jest not with a rude man, lest thy ancestors be disgraced.

Verse 5. Reproach not a man that turneth from sin, but remember that we are all worthy of punishment.

Verse 6. Dishonor not a man in his old age, for even some of us wax old.

Verse 7. Rejoice not over thy greatest enemy being dead, but remember that we die all.

Verse 8. Despise not the discourse of the wise, but acquaint thyself with their proverbs; for of them thou shalt learn instruction, and how to serve great men with ease.

Verse 9. Miss not the discourse of the elders, for they also learned of their fathers, and of them thou shalt learn understanding, and to give answer as need requireth.

Verse 10. Kindle not the coals of a sinner, lest thou be burnt with the flame of his fire.

Verse 11. Rise not up in anger at the presence of an injurious person, lest he lie in wait to entrap thee in thy words.

Verse 12. Lend not unto him that is mightier than thyself; for if thou lendest him, count it but lost.

Verse 13. Be not surety above thy power; for if thou be surety, take care to pay it.

Verse 14. Go not to law with a judge, for they will judge for him according to his honor.

Verse 15. Travel not by the way with a bold fellow, lest he become grievous unto thee; for he will do according to his own will, and thou shalt perish with him through his folly.

Verse 16. Strive not with an angry man, and go not with him into a solitary place; for blood is as nothing in his sight, and where there is no help, he will overthrow thee.

Verse 17. Consult not with a fool, for he cannot keep counsel.

Verse 18. Do no secret thing before a stranger, for thou knowest not what he will bring forth.

Verse 19. Open not thine heart to every man, lest he requite thee with a shrewd turn.

CHAPTER 9

Verse 1. Be not jealous over the wife of thy bosom, and teach her not an evil lesson against thyself.

Verse 2. Give not thy soul unto a woman to set her foot upon thy substance.

Verse 3. Meet not with a woman of ill repute, lest thou fall into her snares.

Verse 4. Use not much the company of a woman that is a singer, lest thou be taken with her attempts.

Verse 5. Gaze not on a maiden, that thou fall not by those things that are precious in her.

Verse 6. Give not thy soul unto harlots, that thou lose not thine inheritance.

Verse 7. Look not round about thee in the streets of the city, neither wander thou in the solitary places thereof.

Verse 8. Turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, and look not upon another's beauty; for many have been deceived by the beauty of a woman, for herewith love is kindled as a fire.

Verse 9. Sit not at all with another man's wife, nor sit down with her in thine arms, and spend not thy money with her at the wine, lest thine heart incline unto her, and so through thy desire thou fall into destruction.

Verse 10. Forsake not an old friend, for the new is not comparable to him. A new friend is as new wine; when it is old, thou shalt drink it with pleasure.

Verse 11. Envy not the glory of a sinner, for thou knowest not what shall be his end.

Verse 12. Delight not in the thing that the ungodly have pleasure in, but remember they shall not go unpunished unto their grave.

Verse 13. Keep thee far from the man that hath power to kill, so shalt thou not doubt the fear of death; and if thou come unto him, make no fault, lest he take away thy life presently. Remember that thou goest in the midst of snares, and that thou walkest upon the battlements of the city.

Verse 14. As near as thou canst, guess at thy neighbor, and consult with the wise.

Verse 15. Let thy talk be with the wise, and all thy communication in the law of the Most High.

Verse 16. And let just men eat and drink with thee, and let thy glorying be in the fear of the Lord.

Verse 17. For the hand of the artificer the work shall be commended, and the wise ruler of the people for his speech.

Verse 18. A man of an ill tongue is dangerous in his city, and he that is rash in his talk shall be hated.

CHAPTER 10

Verse 1. A wise judge will instruct his people, and the government of a prudent man is well ordered.

Verse 2. As the judge of the people is himself, so are his officers; and what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are all they that dwell therein.

Verse 3. An unwise king destroyeth his people, but through the prudence of them which are in authority the city shall be inhabited.

Verse 4. The power of the earth is in the hand of the Lord, and in due time He will set over it one that is profitable.

Verse 5. In the hand of God is the prosperity of man, and upon the person of the scribe shall He lay His honor.

Verse 6. Bear not hatred to thy neighbor for every wrong, and do nothing at all by injurious practices.

Verse 7. Pride is hateful before God and man, and by both doth one commit iniquity.

Verse 8. Because of unrighteous dealings, injuries, and riches got by deceit, the kingdom is translated from one people to another.

Verse 9. Why is earth and ashes proud? There is not a more wicked thing than a covetous man; for such an one setteth his own soul to sale, because while he liveth he casteth away his bowels.

Verse 10. The physician cutteth off a long disease, and he that is today a king tomorrow shall die.

Verse 11. For when a man is dead, he shall inherit creeping things, beasts, and worms.

Verse 12. The beginning of pride is when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker.

Verse 13. For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that hath it shall pour out abomination; and therefore the Lord brought upon them strange calamities, and overthrew them utterly.

Verse 14. The Lord hath cast down the thrones of proud princes, and set up the meek in their stead.

Verse 15. The Lord hath plucked up the roots of the proud nations, and planted the lowly in their place.

Verse 16. The Lord overthrew countries of the heathen, and destroyed them to the foundations of the earth.

Verse 17. He took some of them away, and destroyed them, and hath made their memorial to cease from the earth.

Verse 18. Pride was not made for men, nor furious anger for them that are born of a woman.

Verse 19. They that fear the Lord are a sure seed, and they that love Him an honorable plant. They that regard not the law are a dishonorable seed; they that transgress the commandments are a deceivable seed.

Verse 20. Among brethren he that is chief is honorable, so are they that fear the Lord in His eyes.

Verse 21. The fear of the Lord goeth before the obtaining of authority, but roughness and pride is the losing thereof.

Verse 22. Whether he be rich, noble, or poor, their glory is the fear of the Lord.

Verse 23. It is not meet to despise the poor man that hath understanding, neither is it convenient to magnify a sinful man.

Verse 24. Great men, and judges, and potentates shall be honored, yet is there none of them greater than he that feareth the Lord.

Verse 25. Unto the servant that is wise shall they that are free do service, and he that hath knowledge will not grudge when he is reformed.

Verse 26. Be not overwise in doing thy business, and boast not thyself in the time of thy distress.

Verse 27. Better is he that laboreth and aboundeth in all things, than he that boasteth himself and wanteth bread.

Verse 28. My son, glorify thy soul in meekness, and give it honor according to the dignity thereof.

Verse 29. Who will justify him that sinneth against his own soul? And who will honor him that dishonoreth his own life?

Verse 30. The poor man is honored for his skill, and the rich man is honored for his riches.

Verse 31. He that is honored in poverty, how much more shall he be in riches? And he that is dishonorable in riches, how much more shall he be in poverty?

This concludes Part 2 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 11 through Chapter 15, covering humility and appearances, caution with associates, true generosity, the fear of God, and the gift of free will.
