PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 14
Quench Not the Spirit

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 10. Quench Not the Spirit.

10. Quench Not the Spirit
We are now to take notice of various sorts of men that offend deeply
against this merciful disposition of Christ.

FALSE DESPAIR OF CHRIST'S MERCY
There are those who go on in all ill courses of life on this pretence, that it
would be useless to go to Christ, because their lives have been so bad;
whereas, as soon as we look to heaven, all encouragements are ready to
meet us and draw us forward. Among others, this is one allurement, that
Christ is ready to welcome us and lead us further. None are damned in
the church but those that are determined to be, including those who
persist in having hard thoughts of Christ, that they may have some show
of reason to fetch contentment from other things, as that unprofitable
servant (Matt. 25:30) who would needs take up the opinion that his
master was a hard man, thereby to flatter himself in his unfruitful ways,
in not improving the talent which he had.
FALSE HOPE OF CHRIST'S MERCY
There are those who take up a hope of their own, that Christ will suffer
them to walk in the ways to hell, and yet bring them to heaven; whereas
all comfort should draw us nearer to Christ. Otherwise it is a lying
comfort, either in itself or in our application of it.
RESISTING CHRIST’S MERCY
There are those who take it on themselves to cast water on those sparks
which Christ labors to kindle in them, because they will not be troubled
with the light of them. Such must know that the Lamb can be angry, and
that they who will not come under his scepter of mercy shall be crushed
in pieces by his scepter of power (Psa. 2:9). Though he will graciously
tend and maintain the least spark of true grace, yet where he finds not the
spark of grace but opposition to his Spirit striving with them, his wrath,
once kindled, shall burn to hell. There is no more just provocation than
when kindness is churlishly refused.
When God would have cured Babylon, and she would not be cured, then
she was given up to destruction (Jer. 51:9). When Jerusalem would not be
gathered under the wing of Christ, then their habitation is left desolate
(Matt. 23:37,38). When wisdom stretches out her hand and men refuse,
then wisdom will laugh at men's destruction (Prow. 1:26). Salvation itself

will not save those that spill the medicine and cast away the plaster. It is a
pitiful case, when this merciful Saviour shall delight in destruction; when
he that made men shall have no mercy on them (Isa. 27:11).
Oh, say the rebels of the time, God has not made us to damn us. Yes, if
you will not meet Christ in the ways of his mercy, it is fitting that you
should `eat of the fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own
devices' (Prow. 1:31). This will be the hell of hell, when men shall think
that they have loved their sins more than their souls; when they shall
think what love and mercy has been enforced upon them, and yet they
would perish. The more accessory we are in pulling a judgment upon
ourselves, the more the conscience will be confounded in itself. Then they
shall acknowledge Christ to be without any blame, themselves without
any excuse.
If men appeal to their own consciences, they will tell them that the Holy
Spirit has often knocked at their hearts, as willing to have kindled some
holy desires in them. How else can they be said to resist the Holy Ghost,
but that the Spirit was readier to draw them to a further degree of
goodness than was consistent with their own wills? Therefore those in the
church that are damned are self condemned before. So that here we need
not rise to higher causes, when men carry sufficient cause in their own
bosoms.
PRESUMING ON CHRIST'S MERCY
And the best of us all may offend against this merciful disposition if we
are not watchful against that liberty which our carnal disposition will be
ready to take from it. Thus we reason, if Christ will not quench the
smoking flax, what need we fear that any neglect on our part can bring us
into a comfortless condition? If Christ will not do it, what can?
You know the apostle's prohibition, notwithstanding, `Quench not the
Spirit' (1 Thess. 5:19). Such cautions of not quenching are sanctified by
the Spirit as a means of not quenching. Christ performs his office in not
quenching by stirring up suitable endeavors in us; and there are none
more solicitous in the use of the means than those that are most certain

of their good success. The reason is this: the means that God has set apart
for the effecting of any thing are included in the purpose that he has to
bring that thing to pass. And this is a principle taken for granted, even in
civil matters; for who, if he knew before that it would be a fruitful year,
would therefore hang up his plough and neglect tillage?
Hence the apostle stirs us up from the certain expectation of a blessing (1
Cor. 15:57,58), and this encouragement from the good issue of victory is
intended to stir us up, and not to put us off. If we are negligent in the
exercise of grace received and the use of the means prescribed, suffering
our spirits to be oppressed with many and various cares of this life, and
take not heed of the discouragements of the times, for this kind of neglect
God in his wise care suffers us often to fall into a worse condition in our
feelings than those that were never so much enlightened. Yet in mercy he
will not suffer us to be so far enemies to ourselves as wholly to neglect
these sparks once kindled. Were it possible that we should be given up to
abandon all endeavor wholly, then we could look for no other issue but
quenching; but Christ will tend this spark and cherish this small seed, so
that he will always preserve in the soul some degree of care.
If we would make a comfortable use of this, we must consider all those
means whereby Christ preserves grace begun; such as, first, holy
communion, by which one Christian warms another. `Two are better
than one' (Eccles. 4:9). `Did not our heart burn within us?', said the
disciples (Luke 24:32). Secondly, much more communion with God in
holy duties, such as meditation and prayer, which not only kindles but
adds a luster to the soul. Thirdly, we feel by experience the breath of the
Spirit to go along with the breath of his ministers. For this reason the
apostle knits these two together: `Quench not the Spirit. Despise not
prophesyings' (1 Thess. 5:19,20). Nathan, by a few words, blew up the
decaying sparks in David. Rather than that God will suffer his fire in us to
die, he will send some Nathan or other, and something always is left in us
to join with the Word, as of the same nature with it; as a coal that has fire
in it will quickly gather more fire to it. Smoking flax will easily take fire.
Fourthly, grace is strengthened by the exercise of it: `Arise therefore, and
be doing, and the LORD be with thee' (1 Chron. 22:16), said David to his
son Solomon. Stir up the grace that is in you, for in this way holy motions

turn to resolutions, resolutions to practice, and practice to a prepared
readiness to every good work.
However, let us remember that grace is increased, in the exercise of it, not
by virtue of the exercise itself, but as Christ by his Spirit flows into the
soul and brings us nearer to himself, the fountain, so instilling such
comfort that the heart is further enlarged. The heart of a Christian is
Christ's garden, and his graces are as so many sweet spices and flowers
which, when his Spirit blows upon them, send forth a sweet savor.
Therefore keep the soul open to entertain the Holy Ghost, for he will
bring in continually fresh forces to subdue corruption, and this most of all
on the Lord's day. John was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, even in
Patmos, the place of his banishment (Rev. 1:10). Then the gales of the
Spirit blow more strongly and sweetly.
As we look, therefore, for the comfort of this doctrine, let us not favor our
natural sloth but exercise ourselves rather to godliness (1 Tim. 4:7), and
labour to keep this fire always burning upon the altar of our hearts. Let us
dress our lamps daily, and put in fresh oil, and wind up our souls higher
and higher still. Resting in a good condition is contrary to grace, which
cannot but promote itself to a further measure. Let none turn this grace
`into lasciviousness' (Jude 4). Infirmities are a ground of humility, not a
plea for negligence, nor an encouragement to presumption. We should be
so far from being evil because Christ is good that those coals of love
should melt us. Therefore those may well suspect themselves in whom
the consideration of this mildness of Christ does not work that way.
Surely where grace is, corruption is `as vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke
to the eyes' (Prov. 10:26). And therefore they will labour, with respect to
their own comfort, as likewise for the credit of religion and the glory of
God, that their light may break forth. If a spark of faith and love is so
precious, what an honor will it be to be rich in faith! Who would not
rather walk in the light, and in the comforts of the Holy Ghost, than live
in a dark, perplexed state? And not rather be carried with full sail to
heaven than be tossed always with fears and doubts? The present trouble
in conflict against a sin is not so much as that disquiet which any
corruption favored will bring upon us afterward. True peace is in
conquering, not in yielding. The comfort intended in this text is for those

that would fain do better, but find their corruptions clog them; that are in
such a mist, that often they cannot tell what to think of themselves; that
fain would believe, and yet often fear that they do not believe; and that
think that it cannot be that God should be so good to such sinful wretches
as they are, and yet they do not permit these fears and doubts in
themselves.
SEEKING ANOTHER SOURCE OF MERCY
And among others, how do they wrong themselves and him that will have
other mediators to God for them than he! Are any more pitiful than he
who became man to that end, that he might be pitiful to his own flesh?
Let all, at all times, repair to this meek Saviour, and put up all our
petitions in his prevailing name. What need do we have to knock at any
other door? Can any be more tender over us than Christ? What
encouragement we have to commend the state of the church in general,
or of any broken hearted Christian, to him by our prayers, of whom we
may speak to Christ, as they did of Lazarus, `Lord, the church which thou
lovest, and gavest thyself for, is in distress'; `Lord, this poor Christian, for
whom thou wast bruised (Isa. 53:5) is bruised and brought very low.' It
cannot but touch his heart when the misery of those so dear to him is
spread before him.
MISTREATING THE HEIRS OF MERCY
Again, considering this gracious nature in Christ, let us think with
ourselves thus: when he is so kind to us, shall we be cruel against him in
his name, in his truth, in his children? How shall those that delight to be
so terrible to `the meek of the earth' (Zeph. 2:3) hope to look so gracious
a Saviour in the face? They that are so boisterous towards his spouse shall
know one day that they had to deal with himself in his church. So it
cannot but cut the heart of those that have felt this love of Christ to hear
him wounded who is the life of their lives and the soul of their souls. This
makes those that have felt mercy weep over Christ whom they have
pierced with their sins. There cannot but be a mutual and quick sympathy
between the head and the members. When we are tempted to any sin, if
we will not pity ourselves, yet we should spare Christ, in not putting him
to new torments. The apostle could not find out a more heart breaking

argument to enforce a sacrifice of ourselves to God than to appeal to us
`by the mercies of God' in Christ (Rom. 12:1).
STRIFE AMONG THE HEIRS OF MERCY
This mercy of Christ should also move us to commiserate the state of the
poor church, torn by enemies without, and rending itself by divisions at
home. It cannot but affect any soul that ever felt comfort from Christ to
consider what an affectionate entreaty the apostle makes to mutual
agreement in judgment and affection. `If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded' (Phil.
2:1), as if he should say, `Unless you will disclaim all consolation in
Christ, labour to maintain the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.'
What a joyful spectacle is this to Satan and his faction, to see those that
are separated from the world fall in pieces among themselves! Our
discord is our enemy's melody.
The more to blame are those that for private aims affect differences from
others, and will not suffer the wounds of the church to close and meet
together. This must not be understood as if men should dissemble their
judgment in any truth where there is just cause of expressing themselves;
for the least truth is Christ's and not ours, and therefore we are not to
take liberty to affirm or deny at our pleasure. There is something due on a
penny as well as on a pound, therefore we must be faithful in the least
truth, when the season calls for it. Then our words are `like apples of gold
in pictures of silver' (Prov. 25:11). One word spoken in season will do
more good than a thousand out of season. But in some cases peace,
through having our faith to ourselves before God (Rom. 14:22), is of more
consequence than the open discovery of some things we take to be true,
considering that the weakness of man's nature is such that there can
hardly be a discovery of any difference in opinion without some
estrangement of affection. So far as men are not of one mind, they will
hardly be of one heart, except where grace and the peace of God bear
great rule in the heart (Col. 3:15). Therefore open show of difference is
only good when it is necessary, although some, from a desire to be
somebody, turn into by ways and yield to a spirit of contradiction in
themselves. Yet, if Paul may be judge, they `are yet carnal' (1 Cor. 3:3). If

it be wisdom, it is wisdom from beneath: for the wisdom from above, as it
is pure, so it is peaceable (James 3:17). Our blessed Saviour, when he was
to leave the world, what did he press upon his disciples more than peace
and love? And in his last prayer, with what earnestness did he beg of his
Father that `they all may be one', as he and the Father were one (John
17:21). But what he prayed for on earth, we shall only enjoy perfectly in
heaven. Let this make the meditation of that time the more sweet unto us.
TAKING ADVANTAGE OF THE BRUISED
And further, to expose offenders of this kind, what spirit shall we think
them to be of that take advantage of the bruisedness and infirmities of
men's spirits to relieve them with false peace for their own worldly ends?
A wounded spirit will part with anything. Most of the gainful points of
popery, such as confession, satisfaction, merit and purgatory, spring from
hence, but they are physicians of no value, or tormentors and not
physicians at all. It is a greater blessing to be delivered from the sting of
these scorpions (Rev. 9:5) than we are thankful for. Spiritual tyranny is
the greatest tyranny, and then especially when it is where most mercy
should be shown; yet even there some, like cruel surgeons, delight in
making long cures, to serve themselves through the misery of others. It
brings men under a terrible curse that they `remembered not to show
mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man', that they might `even
slay the broken in heart' (Psa. 109:16).
In the same way, to such as raise temporal advantage to themselves out of
the spiritual misery of others we must add such as raise estates by
betraying the church, and are unfaithful in the trust committed unto
them, when the children cry for the bread of life, and there is none to give
them, bringing thus upon the people of God that heavy judgment of a
spiritual famine, starving Christ in his members. Shall we so requite so
good a Saviour who counts the love and mercy shown in feeding his
lambs (John 21:15) as shown to himself?
DESPISING THE SIMPLE MEANS OF MERCY
Lastly, they carry themselves very unkindly towards Christ who stumble
at his low stooping to us in his government and ordinances, that are

ashamed of the simplicity of the gospel, that count preaching foolishness.
They, out of the pride of their heart, think that they may do well enough
without the help of the Word and sacraments, and think Christ did not
take enough dignity upon him; and therefore they will mend the matter
with their own devices so that they may give better satisfaction to flesh
and blood, as in popery. What greater unthankfulness can there be than
to despise any help that Christ in mercy has provided for us? In the days
of his flesh the proud Pharisees took offence at his familiar conversing
with sinful men, though he only did so as a physician to heal their souls.
What defenses was Paul driven to make for himself, for his plainness in
unfolding the gospel? The more Christ, in himself and in his servants,
shall descend to exalt us, the more we should, with all humility and
readiness, entertain that love and magnify the goodness of God, that has
put the great work of our salvation, and laid the government, upon so
gentle a Saviour as will carry himself so mildly in all things wherein he is
to deal between God and us, and us and God. The lower Christ comes
down to us, the higher let us lift him up in our hearts. So will all those do
that have ever found the experience of Christ's work in their hearts.