PURITAN GOLD -- The Attributes of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 19
The Supremacy of God

---

The Attributes of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 5. The Supremacy of God.

The Supremacy of God
Most do not know Him
IN ONE OF HIS LETTERS TO ERASMUS, LUTHER SAID, “YOUR thoughts of God are too human.” Probably that
renowned scholar resented such a rebuke, the more so, since it proceeded from a miner’s son; nevertheless, it was
thoroughly deserved. We too, though having no standing among the religious leaders of this degenerate age, prefer the
same charge against the majority of the preachers of our day, and against those who, instead of searching the Scriptures
for themselves, lazily accept the teaching of others. The most dishonoring and degrading conceptions of the rule and reign
of the Almighty are now held almost everywhere. To countless thousands, even among those professing to be Christians,
the God of the Scriptures is quite unknown.
Of old, God complained to an apostate Israel, “Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thyself” (Psa
50:21). Such must now be His indictment against an apostate Christendom. Men imagine that the Most High is moved by
sentiment, rather that actuated by principle. They suppose that His omnipotence is such an idle fiction that Satan is
thwarting His designs on every side. They think that if He has formed any plan or purpose at all, then it must be like
theirs, constantly subject to change. They openly declare that whatever power He possesses must be restricted, lest He
invade the citadel of man’s “free will” and reduce him to a “machine.” They lower the all-efficacious atonement, which
has actually redeemed everyone for whom it was made, to a mere “remedy,” which sin-sick souls may use if they feel
disposed to; and they enervate the invincible work of the Holy Spirit to an “offer” of the Gospel which sinners may accept
or reject as they please.
The “god” of this twentieth century no more resembles the Supreme Sovereign of Holy Writ than does the dim
flickering of a candle the glory of the midday sun. The “god” who is now talked about in the average pulpit, spoken of in
the ordinary Sunday School, mentioned in much of the religious literature of the day, and preached in most of the so10

called Bible Conferences is the figment of human imagination, an invention of maudlin sentimentality. The heathen
outside of the pale of Christendom form “gods” out of wood and stone, while the millions of heathen inside Christendom
manufacture a “god” out of their own carnal mind. In reality, they are but atheists, for there is no other possible alternative
between an absolutely supreme God, and no God at all. A “god” whose will is resisted, whose designs are frustrated,
whose purpose is checkmated, possesses no title to Deity, and so far from being a fit object of worship, merits naught but
contempt.

King of kings and Lord of lords
The supremacy of the true and living God might well be argued from the infinite distance which separates the
mightiest creatures from the almighty Creator. He is the Potter, they are but the clay in His hands, to be molded into
vessels of honour, or to be dashed into pieces (Psa 2:9) as He pleases. Were all the denizens of heaven and all the
inhabitants of the earth to combine in revolt against Him, it would occasion Him no uneasiness, and would have less
effect upon His eternal and unassailable Throne than has the spray of Mediterranean’s waves upon the towering rocks of
Gibraltar. So puerile and powerless is the creature to affect the Most High. Scripture itself tells us that when the Gentile
heads unite with apostate Israel to defy Jehovah and His Christ, “He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh” (Psa 2:4).
The absolute and universal supremacy of God is plainly and positively affirmed in many Scriptures. “Thine, O LORD,
is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven and in the earth
is Thine; Thine is the Kingdom, O LORD, and Thou art exalted as Head above all...And Thou reignest over all” (I Chron
29:11,12)—note, “reignest” now, not “will do so in the millennium.” “O LORD God of our fathers, art not Thou God in
heaven? and rulest not Thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in Thine hand is there not power and might, so that
none [not even the Devil himself] is able to withstand Thee?” (II Chron 20:6). Before Him presidents and popes, kings
and emperors, are less than grasshoppers.
“But He is in one mind, and who can turn Him? and what His soul desireth, even that He doeth” (Job 23:13). Ah, my
reader, the God of Scripture is no make-believe monarch, no mere imaginary sovereign, but King of kings, and Lord of
lords. “I know that Thou canst do every thing, and that no thought can be withholden from Thee” (Job 42:2)—that is, “no
thought of Thine can be hindered” (margin); or, as another has translated it, “no purpose of Thine can be frustrated.” All
that He has designed He does. All that He has decreed He performs. “But our God is in the heavens: He hath done
whatsoever He hath pleased” (Psa. 115:3); and why has He? Because “there is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel
against the LORD” (Pro 21:30).

Whatsoever the Lord pleased
God’s supremacy over the works of His hands is vividly depicted in Scripture. Inanimate matter, irrational creatures,
all perform their Maker’s bidding. At His pleasure the Red Sea divided and its waters stood up as walls (Exo 14); the earth
opened her mouth, and guilty rebels went down alive into the pit (Num 16). When He so ordered, the sun stood still (Josh
10); and on another occasion went backward ten degrees on the dial of Ahaz (Isa 38:8). To exemplify His supremacy, He
made ravens carry food to Elijah (I Kings 17), iron to swim on top of the waters (II Kings 6:5), lions to be tame when
Daniel was cast into their den, fire to burn not when the three Hebrews were flung into its flames. Thus “Whatsoever the
LORD pleased, that did He in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places” (Psa 135:6).
God’s supremacy is also demonstrated in His perfect rule over the wills of men. Let the reader ponder carefully Exodus
34:24. Three times in the year all the males of Israel were required to leave their homes and go up to Jerusalem. They
lived in the midst of hostile people, who hated them for having appropriated their lands. What then, was to hinder the
Canaanites from seizing their opportunity, and during the absence of the men, slaying the women and children and taking
possession of their farms? If the hand of the Almighty was not upon the wills even of wicked men, how could He make
this promise beforehand, that none should so much as “desire” their lands? Ah, “The king’s heart is in the hand of the
LORD, as the rivers of water: He turneth it whithersoever He will” (Pro 21:1).
But, it may be objected, do we not read again and again in Scripture how that men defied God, resisted His will, broke
His commandments, disregarded His warnings, and turned a deaf ear to all His exhortations? Certainly we do. And does
this nullify all that we have said above? If it does, then the Bible plainly contradicts itself. But that cannot be. What the
objector refers to is simply the wickedness of man against the external Word of God, whereas what we have mentioned
above is what God has purposed in Himself. The rule of conduct He has given us to walk by, is perfectly fulfilled by none
of us; His own eternal “counsels” are accomplished to their minutest details.
The absolute and universal supremacy of God is affirmed with equal plainness and positiveness in the New Testament.
There we are told that God “worketh all things after the counsel of His own will” (Eph 1:11)—the Greek for “worketh”
means “to work effectually.” For this reason we read, “For of Him, and through Him, and to Him, are all things: to whom
be glory for ever. Amen” (Rom 11:36). Men may boast that they are free agents, with a will of their own, and are at

liberty to do as they please, but Scripture says to those who boast “we will go into such a city, and continue there a year,
and buy and sell...Ye ought to say, If the Lord will” (James 4:13,15)!
Here then is a sure resting-place for the heart. Our lives are neither the product of blind fate nor the result of capricious
chance, but every detail of them was ordained from all eternity, and is now ordered by the living and reigning God. Not a
hair of our heads can be touched without His permission. “A man’s heart deviseth his way: but the LORD directeth his
steps” (Pro 16:9). What assurance, what strength, what comfort this should give the real Christian! “My times are in Thy
hand” (Psa 31:15). Then let me “Rest in the LORD, and wait patiently for Him” (Psa 37:7).