PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 11
God's Sovereignty and Prayer


The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 9. God's Sovereignty and Prayer.

he prayed that the Lord would open the way to speak to someone about Christ, reflecting that things would be changed because he prayed. Then his mind turned to other
things and the prayer was forgotten. The opportunity came to speak to the business man
upon whom he was calling, but he did not grasp it, and was on his way out when he remembered his prayer of a half hour before, and God’s answer. He promptly returned and
had a talk with the business man, who, though a church-member, had never in his life
been asked whether he was saved. Let us give ourselves to prayer and open the way for
God to change things. Let us beware lest we become virtual fatalists by failing to exercise our God-given wills in praying.

9. God’s Sovereignty and Prayer

115

The above illustrates what is being taught on the subject of prayer, and the deplorable thing
is that scarcely a voice is lifted in protest. To say that “human destinies may be changed and
molded by the will of man” is rank infidelity—that is the only proper term for it. Should anyone challenge this classification, we would ask them whether they can find an infidel anywhere
who would dissent from such a statement, and we are confident that such an one could not be
found. To say that “God has ordained that human destinies may be changed and molded by the
will of man” is absolutely untrue. “Human destiny” is settled not by the will of man, but by the
will of God. That which determines human destiny is whether or not a man has been born
again, for it is written, “Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” And
as to whose will, whether God’s or man’s, is responsible for the new birth is settled, unequivocally, by John 1:13: “Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God.” To say that “human destiny” may be changed by the will of man is to
make the creature’s will supreme—and that is, virtually, to dethrone God. But what saith the
Scriptures? Let the Book answer: “The LORD killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to
the grave, and bringeth up. The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and
lifteth up. He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill,
to set them among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory” (1Sa 2:6-8).
Turning back to the editorial here under review, we are next told, “This is at the heart of the
truth that prayer changes things, meaning that God changes things when men pray.” Almost
everywhere we go today one comes across a motto-card bearing the inscription “Prayer
Changes Things.” As to what these words are designed to signify is evident from the current
literature on prayer: we are to persuade God to change His purpose. Concerning this we shall
have more to say below.
Again, the editor tells us, “Some one has strikingly expressed it this way: ‘There are certain
things that will happen in a man’s life whether he prays or not. There are other things that
will happen if he prays, and will not happen if he does not pray.’ ” That things happen whether
a man prays or not is exemplified daily in the lives of the unregenerate, most of whom never
pray at all. That “other things will happen if he prays” is in need of qualification. If a believer
prays in faith and asks for those things that are according to God’s will, he will most certainly
obtain that for which he has asked. Again, that other things will happen if he prays is also true
in respect to the subjective benefits derived from prayer: God will become more real to him
and His promises more precious. That other things “will not happen if he does not pray” is
true so far as his own life is concerned—a prayerless life means a life lived out of communion
with God and all that is involved by this. But to affirm that God will not and cannot bring to
pass His eternal purpose unless we pray is utterly erroneous, for the same God Who has decreed the end has also decreed that His end shall be reached through His appointed means,
and one of these is prayer. The God Who has determined to grant a blessing, also gives a spirit
of supplication that first seeks the blessing.
The example cited in the above editorial of the Christian worker and the business man is a
very unhappy one to say the least, for according to the terms of the illustration, the Christian
worker’s prayer was not answered by God at all, inasmuch as, apparently, the way was not
opened to speak to the business man about his soul. But on leaving the office and recalling his
prayer the Christian worker (perhaps in the energy of the flesh) determined to answer the

116

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

prayer for himself, and instead of leaving the Lord to “open the way” for him, took matters into his own hand.
2. A book on prayer
We quote next from one of the latest books issued on prayer. In it the author says, “The possibilities and necessity of prayer, its power and results, are manifested in arresting and changing the purposes of God and in relieving the stroke of His power.” Such an assertion as this is
a horrible reflection upon the character of the Most High God, Who “doeth according to his
will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his
hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?” (Dan 4:35). There is no need whatever for God to
change His designs or alter His purpose, for the all-sufficient reason that these were framed
under the influence of perfect goodness and unerring wisdom. Men may have occasion to alter
their purposes, for in their short-sightedness they are frequently unable to anticipate what
may arise after their plans are formed. But not so with God, for He knows the end from the
beginning. To affirm God changes His purpose is either to impugn His goodness or to deny
His eternal wisdom!
In the same book we are told, “The prayers of God’s saints are the capital stock in heaven by
which Christ carries on His great work upon earth. The great throes and mighty convulsions
on earth are the results of these prayers. Earth is changed, revolutionized, angels move on
more powerful, more rapid wing, and God’s policy is shaped as the prayers are more numerous, more efficient.” If possible, this is even worse, and we have no hesitation in denominating
it as blasphemy. In the first place, it flatly denies Ephesians 3:11, which speaks of God’s having
an “eternal purpose.” If God’s purpose is an eternal one, then His “policy” is not being
“shaped” today. In the second place, it contradicts Ephesians 1:11, which expressly declares
that God “worketh all things after the counsel of his own will,” therefore it follows that, “God’s
policy” is not being “shaped” by man’s prayers. In the third place, such a statement as the
above makes the will of the creature supreme; for if our prayers shape God’s policy, then is the
Most High subordinate to worms of the earth. Well might the Holy Spirit ask through the
apostle, “For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor?” (Rom
11:34).
Such thoughts on prayer as we have been citing are due to low and inadequate conceptions
of God Himself. It ought to be apparent that there could be little or no comfort in praying to a
1
god that was like the chameleon, which changes its color every day. What encouragement is
there to lift up our hearts to one who is in one mind yesterday and another today? What would
be the use of petitioning an earthly monarch if we knew he was so mutable as to grant a petition one day and deny it another? Is it not the very unchangeableness of God that is our greatest encouragement to pray? It is because He is “without variableness or shadow of turning”
(Jam 1:17), we are assured that if we ask anything according to His will we are most certain of
being heard (1Jo 5:14). Well did Luther remark, “Prayer is not overcoming God’s reluctance,
but laying hold of His willingness.”

1

chameleon – small lizard that can change the color of its skin to blend with its surroundings in order to
avoid predators.

9. God’s Sovereignty and Prayer

117

B. Why God Bids Us to Pray
And this leads us to offer a few remarks concerning the design of prayer. Why has God appointed that we should pray? The vast majority of people would reply, In order that we may
obtain from God the things which we need. While this is one of the purposes of prayer, it is by
no means the chief one. Moreover, it considers prayer only from the human side, and prayer
sadly needs 2 to be viewed from the divine side. Let us look, then, at some of the reasons why
God has bidden us to pray.
1. God’s honor
First and foremost, prayer has been appointed that the Lord God Himself should be honored. God requires we should recognize that He is, indeed, “the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity” (Isa 57:15). God requires that we shall own His universal dominion: in
petitioning God for rain, Elijah did but confess His control over the elements (1Ki 18:36); in
praying to God to deliver a poor sinner from the wrath to come, we acknowledge that “salvation is of the LORD” (Jon 2:9); in supplicating His blessing on the gospel unto the uttermost
parts of the earth, we declare His rulership over the whole world.
Again, God requires that we shall worship Him, and prayer, real prayer, is an act of worship.
Prayer is an act of worship inasmuch as it is the prostrating of the soul before Him; inasmuch
as it is a calling upon His great and holy name; inasmuch as it is the owning of His goodness,
His power, His immutability, His grace; and inasmuch as it is the recognition of His sovereignty, owned by a submission to His will. It is highly significant to notice in this connection that
the Temple wasn’t termed by Christ the house of sacrifice, but instead, “the house of prayer”
(Mat 31:13).
Again, prayer redounds to God’s glory, for in prayer we do but acknowledge dependency upon Him. When we humbly supplicate the divine Being, we cast ourselves upon His power and
mercy. In seeking blessings from God, we own that He is the author and fountain of every
good and perfect gift. That prayer brings glory to God is further seen from the fact that prayer
calls faith into exercise, and nothing from us is so honoring and pleasing to Him as the confidence of our hearts.
2. Spiritual blessing
In the second place, prayer is appointed by God for our spiritual blessing, as a means for our
growth in grace. When seeking to learn the design of prayer, this should ever occupy us before
we regard prayer as a means for obtaining the supply of our need. Prayer is designed by God
for our humbling. Prayer, real prayer, is a coming into the presence of God, and a sense of His
awful majesty produces a realization of our nothingness and unworthiness.
Again, prayer is designed by God for the exercise of our faith. Faith is begotten in the Word
(Rom 10:8), but it is exercised in prayer; hence we read of “the prayer of faith” (Jam 5:15).
Again, prayer calls love into action. Concerning the hypocrite, the question is asked, “Will
he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God?” (Job 27:10). But they that
love the Lord cannot be long away from Him, for they delight in unburdening themselves to
Him. Not only does prayer call love into action, but through the direct answers vouchsafed to

2

sadly needs – i.e., it is sad that viewing from the divine side is not already taking place.

118

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

our prayers our love to God is increased—“I love the LORD, because he hath heard my voice
and my supplications” (Psa 116:1).
Again, prayer is designed by God to teach us the value of the blessings we have sought from
Him, and it causes us to rejoice the more when He has bestowed upon us that for which we
supplicate Him.
3. Our needs
Third, prayer is appointed by God for our seeking from Him the things that we are in need
of. But here a difficulty may present itself to those who have read carefully the previous chapters of this book. If God has foreordained, before the foundation of the world, everything that
happens in time, what is the use of prayer? If it is true that “of him and through him and to
him are all things” (Rom 11:36), then why pray? Ere replying directly to these queries, it
should be pointed out how that there is just as much reason to ask, “What is the use of me
coming to God and telling Him what He already knows? Wherein is the use of me spreading
before Him my need, seeing He is already acquainted with it?” as there is to object, “What is
the use of praying for anything when everything has been ordained beforehand by God?” Prayer is not for the purpose of informing God, as if He were ignorant (the Saviour expressly declared, “for your father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him,” Mat 6:8), but
it is to acknowledge He does know what we are in need of. Prayer is not appointed for the furnishing of God with the knowledge of what we need, but is designed as a confession to Him of
our sense of need. In this, as in everything, God’s thoughts are not as ours. God requires that
His gifts should be sought for. He designs to be honored by our asking, just as He is to be
thanked by us after He has bestowed His blessing.

C. Predestination and Prayer
However, the question still returns on us, If God be the predestinator of everything that
comes to pass and the regulator of all events, then is not prayer a profitless exercise? A sufficient answer to these questions is that God bids us to pray, “Pray without ceasing” (1Th 5:17).
And again, “men ought always to pray” (Luk 18:1). And further: Scripture declares that “the
prayer of faith shall save the sick,” and “the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth
much” (Jam 5:15-16); while the Lord Jesus Christ, our perfect example in all things, was
preeminently a man of prayer. Thus, it is evident, that prayer is neither meaningless nor valueless.
But still this does not remove the difficulty nor answer the question with which we started
out. What then is the relationship between God’s sovereignty and Christian prayer?
First of all, we would say with emphasis, that prayer is not intended to change God’s purpose, nor is it to move Him to form fresh purposes. God has decreed that certain events shall
come to pass through the means He has appointed for their accomplishment. God has elected
certain ones to be saved, but He has also decreed that these shall be saved through the preaching the gospel. The gospel, then, is one of the appointed means for the working out of the
eternal counsel of the Lord —and prayer is another. God has decreed the means as well as the
end, and among the means is prayer. Even the prayers of His people are included in His eternal decrees. Therefore, instead of prayers being in vain, they are among the means through
which God exercises His decrees. “If indeed all things happen by a blind chance or a fatal ne-

9. God’s Sovereignty and Prayer

119

cessity, prayers in that case could be of no moral efficacy and of no use; but since they are regulated by the direction of divine wisdom, prayers have a place in the order of events” (R. Haldane, 1764-1842).
That prayers for the execution of the very things decreed by God are not meaningless is
clearly taught in the Scriptures. Elijah knew that God was about to give rain, but that did not
prevent him from at once betaking himself to prayer (Jam 5:17-18). Daniel “understood” by
the writings of the prophets that the captivity was to last but seventy years, yet when these
seventy years were almost ended, we are told that he set his face “unto the Lord God, to seek
by prayer and supplications, with fasting, and sackcloth, and ashes” (Dan 9:2-3). God told the
prophet Jeremiah, “For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD,
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end”; but instead of adding, “there
is, therefore, no need for you to supplicate Me for these things,” He said, “Then shall ye call
upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you” (Jer 29:11-12).
Here then is the design of prayer: not that God’s will may be altered, but that it may be accomplished in His own good time and way. It is because God has promised certain things that
we can ask for them with the full assurance of faith. It is God’s purpose that His will shall be
brought about by His own appointed means, and that He may do His people good upon His
own terms, and that is by the “means” and “terms” of entreaty and supplication. Did not the
Son of God know for certain that after His death and resurrection He would be exalted by the
Father? Assuredly, He did. Yet we find Him asking for this very thing: “O Father, glorify thou
me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was” (Joh 17:5)!
Did not He know that none of His people could perish? yet He besought the Father to “keep”
them (Joh 17:11)!
Finally, it should be said that God’s will is immutable, and cannot be altered by our cryings.
When the mind of God is not toward a people to do them good, it cannot be turned to them by
3
the most fervent and importunate prayer of those who have the greatest interest in Him:
“Then said the LORD unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind
could not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth” (Jer 15:1).
The prayers of Moses to enter the promised land is a parallel case.
Our views respecting prayer need to be revised and brought into harmony with the teaching
of Scripture on the subject. The prevailing idea seems to be that I come to God and ask Him
for something that I want, and that I expect Him to give me that which I have asked. But this
is a most dishonoring and degrading conception. The popular belief reduces God to a servant,
our servant: doing our bidding, performing our pleasure, granting our desires. No; prayer is a
coming to God, telling Him my need, committing my way unto the Lord, and leaving Him to
deal with it as seemeth Him best. This makes my will subject to His, instead of, as in the former case, seeking to bring His will into subjection to mine. No prayer is pleasing to God unless the spirit actuating it is “not my will, but thine be done” (Luk 22:42).
When God bestows blessings on a praying people, it is not for the sake of their prayers,
as if He was inclined and turned by them; but it is for His own sake, and of His own sovereign will and pleasure. Should it be said, to what purpose then is prayer? it is answered, This is the way and means God has appointed for the communication of the
3

importunate – persistent.

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

120

blessing of His goodness to His people. For though He has purposed, provided, and
promised them, yet He will be sought unto, to give them—and it is a duty and privilege
to ask. When they are blessed with a spirit of prayer, it forebodes well, and looks as if
God intended to bestow the good things asked, which should be asked always with submission to the will of God, saying, “Not my will, but thine be done” (John Gill) 4.
The distinction just noted above is of great practical importance for our peace of heart. Perhaps the one thing that exercises Christians as much as anything else is that of unanswered
prayers. They have asked God for something: so far as they are able to judge, they have asked
in faith, believing they would receive that for which they had supplicated the Lord; and they
have asked earnestly and repeatedly—but the answer has not come. The result is that, in many
cases, faith in the efficacy of prayer becomes weakened, until hope gives way to despair and the
closet is altogether neglected. Is it not so?

D. Answered Prayer
Now, will it surprise our readers when we say that every real prayer of faith that has ever
been offered to God has been answered ? Yet we unhesitatingly affirm it. But in saying this we
must refer back to our definition of prayer. Let us repeat it. Prayer is a coming to God, telling
Him my need (or the need of others), committing my way unto the Lord, and then leaving
Him to deal with the case as seemeth Him best. This leaves God to answer the prayer in whatever way He sees fit; and often, His answer may be the very opposite of what would be most
acceptable to the flesh—yet, if we have really left our need in His hands, it will be His answer,
nevertheless. Let us look at two examples.
In John 11, we read of the sickness of Lazarus. The Lord “loved” him, but He was absent
from Bethany. The sisters sent a messenger unto the Lord acquainting Him of their brother’s
condition. And note particularly how their appeal was worded—“Lord, behold, he whom thou
lovest is sick.” That was all. They did not ask Him to heal Lazarus. They did not request Him to
hasten at once to Bethany. They simply spread their need before Him, committed the case into
His hands, and left Him to act as He deemed best! And what was our Lord’s reply? Did He respond to their appeal and answer their mute request? Certainly He did, though not, perhaps,
in the way they had hoped. He answered by abiding “two days still in the same place where he
was” (Joh 11:6), and allowing Lazarus to die! But in this instance that was not all. Later, He
journeyed to Bethany and raised Lazarus from the dead. Our purpose in referring here to this
case is to illustrate the proper attitude for the believer to take before God in the hour of need.
The next example will emphasize, rather, God’s method of responding to His needy child.
Turn to 2 Corinthians 12. The apostle Paul had been accorded an unheard-of privilege: He
had been transported into Paradise. His ears had listened to and his eyes had gazed upon that
which no other mortal had heard or seen this side of death. The wondrous revelation was more
than the apostle could endure. He was in danger of becoming “puffed up” by his extraordinary
experience. Therefore, a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan, was sent to buffet him lest
he be exalted above measure. And the apostle spreads his need before the Lord; he thrice be4

John Gill (1697-1771) – English Baptist minister, theologian, and Biblical scholar. Author of A Complete
Body of Doctrinal and Practical Divinity, The Cause of God and Truth, and his nine-volume Expositions of the
Old and New Testaments.

9. God’s Sovereignty and Prayer

121

seeches Him that this thorn in the flesh should be removed. Was his prayer answered? Assuredly, though not in the manner he had desired. The “thorn” was not removed, but grace was
given to bear it. The burden was not lifted, but strength was vouchsafed to carry it.
Does someone object that it is our privilege to do more than spread our need before God?
Are we reminded that God has, as it were, given us a blank check and invited us to fill it in? Is
it said that the promises of God are all-inclusive, and that we may ask God for what we will? If
so, we must call attention to the fact that it is necessary to compare Scripture with Scripture if
we are to learn the full mind of God on any subject—and that as this is done we discover God
has qualified the promises given to praying souls by saying, “If we ask any thing according to
his will he heareth us” (1Jo 5:14). Real prayer is communion with God, so that there will be
common thoughts between His mind and ours. What is needed is for Him to fill our hearts
with His thoughts, and then His desires will become our desires flowing back to Him (Psa
37:4). Here then is the meeting-place between God’s sovereignty and Christian prayer: If we
ask anything according to His will He heareth us, and if we do not so ask He does not hear us;
as saith the apostle James, “Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your lusts” or desires (4:3).
But did not the Lord Jesus tell His disciples, “Verily, verily, I say unto you, Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you” (Joh 16:23)? He did; but this promise does
not give praying souls carte blanche. 5 These words of our Lord are in perfect accord with those
of the apostle John: “If ye ask anything according to his will he heareth us.” What is it to ask
“in the name of Christ”? Surely it is very much more than a prayer formula, the mere concluding of our supplications with the words “in the name of Christ.” To apply to God for anything
in the name of Christ, it must needs be in keeping with what Christ is! To ask God in the name
of Christ is as though Christ Himself were the suppliant. We can only ask God for what Christ
would ask. To ask in the name of Christ is therefore to set aside our own wills, accepting
God’s!

E. Definition of Prayer
Let us now amplify our definition of prayer. What is prayer? Prayer is not so much an act as
it is an attitude—an attitude of dependency, dependency upon God. Prayer is a confession of
creature weakness, yea, of helplessness. Prayer is the acknowledgment of our need and the
spreading of it before God.
We do not say that this is all there is in prayer, it is not; but it is the essential, the primary
element in prayer. We freely admit that we are quite unable to give a complete definition of
prayer within the compass of a brief sentence, or in any number of words. Prayer is both an
attitude and an act, an human act, and yet there is the divine element in it too, and it is this
that makes an exhaustive analysis impossible, as well as impious, to attempt. But admitting
this, we do insist again that prayer is fundamentally an attitude of dependency upon God.
Therefore, prayer is the very opposite of dictating to God. Because prayer is an attitude of dependency, the one who really prays is submissive, submissive to the divine will; and submission to the divine will means that we are content for the Lord to supply our need according to

5

carte blanche – French: the ability to do what one wants in a particular matter.

122

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

the dictates of His own sovereign pleasure. And hence it is that we say every prayer that is offered to God in this spirit is sure of meeting with an answer or response from Him.

F. Summary
Here then is the reply to our opening question and the scriptural solution to the seeming
difficulty. Prayer is not the requesting of God to alter His purpose or for Him to form a new
one. Prayer is the taking of an attitude of dependency upon God, the spreading of our need before Him, the asking for those things that are in accordance with His will, and therefore there
is nothing whatever inconsistent between divine sovereignty and Christian prayer.
In closing this chapter we would utter a word of caution to safeguard the reader against
6
drawing a false conclusion from what has been said. We have not here sought to epitomize
the whole teaching of Scripture on the subject of prayer, nor have we even attempted to discuss in general the problem of prayer; instead, we have confined ourselves, more or less, to a
consideration of the relationship between God’s sovereignty and Christian prayer. What we
have written is intended chiefly as a protest against much of the modern teaching, which so
stresses the human element in prayer that the divine side is almost entirely lost sight of.
In Jeremiah 10:23 we are told, “It is not in man that walketh to direct his steps” (cf. Pro
16:9); and yet, in many of his prayers, man’s impulse presumes to direct the Lord as to His way
and as to what He ought to do—even implying that if only he had the direction of the affairs of
the world and of the church, he would soon have things very different from what they are. This
cannot be denied, for anyone with any spiritual discernment at all could not fail to detect this
spirit in many of our modern prayer-meetings where the flesh holds sway. How slow we all are
to learn the lesson that the haughty creature needs to be brought down to his knees and humbled into the dust. And this is where the very act of prayer is intended to put us. But man (in
his usual perversity) turns the footstool into a throne from whence he would fain direct the
Almighty as to what He ought to do!—giving the onlooker the impression that if God had half
the compassion that those who pray (?) have, all would quickly be right! Such is the arrogance
of the old nature even in a child of God.
Our main purpose in this chapter has been to emphasize the need for submitting, in prayer,
our wills to God’s. But it must also be added that prayer is much more than a pious exercise,
and far otherwise than a mechanical performance. Prayer is, indeed, a divinely appointed
means whereby we may obtain from God the things we ask, providing we ask for those things
that are in accord with His will. These pages will have been penned in vain unless they lead
both writer and reader to cry with a deeper earnestness than heretofore, “Lord, teach us to
pray” (Luk 11:1). 

6

epitomize – to make a condensed representation.

9. God’s Sovereignty and Prayer

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

1. How does God’s acting depend upon men’s prayers?
2. In what ways is prayer an act of worship?
3. Explain the proper interpretation of 1 John 5:14. Of John 16:23.
4. What is prayer?
5. If God has ordained everything that will be, why prayer?
6. What is accomplished in prayer?
7. Why can we be sure that every prayer will be answered?
8. How can we be sure our prayer will be answered positively?
9. Why is there nothing inconsistent with divine sovereignty and Christian prayer?

123

10
OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD
HIS SOVEREIGNTY
“Even so, Father: for so it seemed good
in thy sight.”—Matthew 11:26

A. Introduction
In the present chapter we shall consider, somewhat briefly, the practical application to ourselves of the great truth that we have pondered in its various ramifications in earlier pages. In
chapter twelve we shall deal more in detail with the value of this doctrine, but here we would
confine ourselves to a definition of what ought to be our attitude toward the sovereignty of
God.
Every truth that is revealed to us in God’s Word is there not only for our information, but
also for our inspiration. The Bible has been given to us not to gratify an idle curiosity, but to
edify the souls of its readers. The sovereignty of God is something more than an abstract principle that explains the rationale of the divine government: it is designed as a motive for godly
fear, it is made known to us for the promotion of righteous living, it is revealed in order to
bring into subjection our rebellious hearts. A true recognition of God’s sovereignty humbles as
nothing else does or can humble, and brings the heart into lowly submission before God—
causing us to relinquish our own self-will and making us delight in the perception and performance of the divine will.
When we speak of the sovereignty of God, we mean very much more than the exercise of
God’s governmental power, though, of course, that is included in the expression. As we have
remarked in an earlier chapter, the sovereignty of God means the Godhood of God. In its fullest and deepest meaning, the title of this book signifies the character and being of the One
Whose pleasure is performed and Whose will is executed. To truly recognize the sovereignty of
God is, therefore, to gaze upon the sovereign Himself. It is to come into the presence of the
august “Majesty on high” (Heb 1:3). It is to have a sight of the thrice holy God in His excellent
glory. The effects of such a sight may be learned from those Scriptures that describe the experience of different ones who obtained a view of the Lord God.
Mark the experience of Job, the one of whom the Lord Himself said, “There is none like him
in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil” (Job 1:8).
At the close of the book that bears his name, we are shown Job in the divine presence—and
how does he carry himself when brought face to face with Jehovah? Hear what he says: “I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eye seeth thee: Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes” (Job 42:5-6). Thus, a sight of God, God revealed in awesome
