PURITAN GOLD -- Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices by Thomas Brooks: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 12
Satan Makes the World Attractive

---

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. By Thomas Brooks.

Chapter 9. Satan Makes the World Attractive.

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
loved by God, and yet by Satan tempted him greatly. Job was highly praised by God
himself, and yet much tempted and tried. Peter was much prized by Christ; witness that
choice testimony which Christ gave of his faith and happiness, and his showing him his
glory in the mount, and that eye of pity that he cast upon him after his fearful fall—and
yet tempted by Satan. 'And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan has desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for you, that your faith fail
you not' (Luke 22:31, 32).
Pirates do not use to set upon poor empty vessels; and beggars need not fear the thief.
Those that have most of God, and are most rich in grace—shall be most assaulted by
Satan, who is the greatest and craftiest pirate in the world.
Paul had the honor of being exalted as high as heaven, and of seeing that glory which
could not be expressed; and yet he was no sooner stepped out of heaven—but he is
buffeted by Satan, 'lest he should be exalted above measure' (2 Cor. 12:2, 7). If these,
who were so really, so gloriously, so eminently beloved of God, if these, who have lived
in heaven, and set their feet upon the stars, have been tempted, let no saints judge
themselves not to be loved by God, because they are tempted. It is as natural for saints
to be tempted, who are dearly loved by God, as it is for the sun to shine, or a bird to
sing. The eagle complains not of her wings, nor the peacock of his train of feathers, nor
the nightingale of her voice—because these are natural to them. No more should saints
complain of their temptations, because they are natural to them. 'For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood—but against principalities, against powers, against the rulers of
the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places' (Eph. 6:12).
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That all the
temptations that befall the saints shall be sanctified to them by a hand of love. Ah! the
choice experiences that the saints get of the power of God supporting them, of the
wisdom of God directing them (so to handle their spiritual weapons, their graces, as not
only to resist—but to overcome), of the mercy and goodness of the Lord pardoning and
succouring of them. And therefore, says Paul, 'I received the messenger of Satan for to
buffet me, lest I should be exalted, lest I should be exalted above measure' (2 Cor.
12:7). If he had not been buffeted, who knows how his heart would have swelled; he
might have been carried higher in conceit, than before he was in his ecstasy.
Temptation is God's school, wherein he gives his people the clearest and sweetest
discoveries of his love; a school wherein God teaches his people to be more frequent
and fervent in duty. When Paul was buffeted, then he prayed thrice, that is, frequently
and fervently; a school wherein God teaches his people to be more tender, meek, and
compassionate to other poor, tempted souls than ever. Temptation is a school wherein
God teaches his people to see a greater evil in sin than ever, and a greater emptiness in
the creature than ever, and a greater need of Christ and free grace than ever. This is a
school wherein God will teach his people that all temptations are but his goldsmiths, by
which he will try and refine, and make his people more bright and glorious. The
outcome of all temptations shall be to the good of the saints, as you may see by the
temptations which Adam and Eve, and Christ and David, and Job and Peter and Paul
met with. Those hands of power and love, which bring light out of darkness, good out of
evil, sweet out of bitter, life out of death, heaven out of hell—will bring much sweet and
good to his people, out of all the temptations which come upon them.

109

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Luther said, there were three things that made a preacher: meditation, prayer and
temptation.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, wisely to consider, That
no temptations do hurt or harm the saints, so long as they are resisted by them, and
prove the greatest afflictions that can befall them. It is not Satan's tempting—but your
assenting; not his enticing—but your yielding, which makes temptations hurtful to your
soul. If the soul when it is tempted, resists temptation, and says with Christ, 'Get
behind me, Satan' (Matt. 16:23); and with that young convert, 'I am not the man I
was,' or as Luther counsels all men to answer all temptations with these words, "I am a
Christian!"—if a man's temptation is his greatest affliction, then is the temptation no sin
upon his soul, though it be a trouble upon his mind. When a soul can look the Lord in
the face, and say, 'Ah, Lord! I have many outward troubles upon me, I have lost such
and such a near mercy, and such and such desirable mercies; and yet you who knows
the heart—you know that all my crosses and losses do not make so many wounds in my
soul, nor fetch so many sighs from my heart, or tears from my eyes—as those
temptations do, which Satan dogs my soul with! When it is thus with the soul, then
temptations are only the soul's trouble, they are not the soul's sin.
Satan is a malicious and envious enemy. As his names are, so is he. His names are all
names of enmity—the accuser, the tempter, the destroyer, the devourer, the envious
one. And this malice and envy of his he shows sometimes by tempting men to such sins
as are quite contrary to the natural dispositions, as he did Vespasian and Julian, men of
sweet and excellent natures, to be most bloody murderers.
And sometimes he shows his malice by tempting men to such things as will bring them
no honor nor profit. 'Fall down and worship me' (Matt. 4:9). He tempts to blasphemy,
and atheism—the thoughts and first motions whereof cause the heart and flesh to
tremble. And sometimes he shows his malice by tempting them to those sins which they
have not found their natures prone to, and which they abhor in others.
Now, if the soul resists these, and complains of these, and groans and mourns under
these, and looks up to the Lord Jesus to be delivered from these—then shall they not be
put down to the soul's account—but to Satan's, who shall be so much the more
tormented, by how much the more the saints have been by him maliciously tempted.
Sometimes he shows his malice by letting those things abide by the soul as may most
vex and plague the soul, as Gregory observes in his leaving of Job's wife, which was not
out of his forgetfulness, carelessness, or any love or pity to Job—but to vex and torment
him, and to work him to blaspheme God, despair, and die.
Make present and decided resistance against Satan's temptations; bid defiance to the
temptation at first sight. It is safe to resist, it is dangerous to dispute. Eve lost herself
and her posterity by falling into artifices of dispute, when she should have resisted, and
stood upon terms of defiance with Satan. He who would stand in the hour of temptation
must plead with Christ, 'It is written.' He who would triumph over temptations must
plead still, 'It is written.' Satan is bold and impudent, and if you are not decided in your
resistance, he will give you fresh onsets. It is your greatest honor, and your highest
wisdom, decidedly to withstand the beginnings of a temptation; for an after-remedy
comes often too late.
110

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Catherine Bretterege once, after a great conflict with Satan, said, 'Reason not with me,
I am but a weak woman; if you have anything to say, say it to my Christ; he is my
advocate, my strength, and my redeemer, and he shall plead for me.'
Men must not seek to resist Satan's craft with craft—but by open defiance. He shoots
with Satan in his own bow—who thinks by disputing and reasoning to put him off. As
soon as a temptation shows its face, say to the temptation, as Ephraim to his idols, 'Get
you hence, what have I any more to do with you?' (Hosea 14:8). Oh! say to the
temptation, as David said to the sons of Zeruiah, 'What have I to do with you? You will
be too hard for me!' He who does thus resist temptations, shall never be undone by
temptations.
Make strong and constant resistance against Satan's temptations. Make resistance
against temptations by arguments drawn from the honor of God, the love of God, your
union and communion with God; and from the blood of Christ, the death of Christ, the
kindness of Christ, the intercession of Christ, and the glory of Christ; and from the voice
of the Spirit, the counsel of the Spirit, the comforts of the Spirit, the presence of the
Spirit, the seal of the Spirit, the whisperings of the Spirit, the commands of the Spirit,
the assistance of the Spirit, the witness of the Spirit; and from the glory of heaven, the
excellency of grace, the beauty of holiness, the worth of the soul, and the vileness or
bitterness and evil of sin—the least sin being a greater evil than the greatest temptation
in the world.
And see that you make constant resistance, as well as strong resistance. Satan will
come on with new temptations when old ones are too weak. In a calm prepare for a
storm. The tempter is restless, impudent, and subtle; he will suit his temptations to
your constitutions and inclinations. Satan loves to sail with the wind. If your knowledge
is weak—he will tempt you to error. If your conscience is tender—he will tempt you to
scrupulosity and too much preciseness, as to do nothing but hear, pray, and read. If
your consciences be wide and large—he will tempt you to carnal security. If you are
bold-spirited—he will tempt you to presumption; if timorous, to desperation; if flexible,
to inconstancy; if proud and stiff, to gross folly. Therefore still fit for fresh assaults,
make one victory a step to another. When you have overcome a temptation, take heed
of unbending your bow, and look well to it, that your bow is always bent, and that it
remains in strength. When you have overcome one temptation, you must be ready to
enter the battle with another.
As distrust in some sense, is the mother of safety; so carnal security is the gate of
danger. A man had need to fear this most of all—that he fears not at all. If Satan were
always roaring, we would be always a-watching and resisting him. And certainly he who
makes strong and constant resistance of Satan's temptations, shall in the end get above
his temptations, and for the present is secure enough from being ruined by his
temptations.
Luke 4:13, 'And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from him for
a season.' Christ had no rest until he was exactly tried with all sorts of temptations.
For a close of this, remember, that it is dangerous to yield to the least sin—to be rid of
the greatest temptation. To take this course were as if a man should think to wash
111

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
himself clean in ink, or as if a man should exchange a light cross, made of paper, for an
iron cross, which is heavy, toilsome, and bloody. The least sin set home upon the
conscience, will more wound, vex, and oppress the soul, than all the temptations in the
world can. Therefore never yield to the least sin—to be rid of the greatest temptation. I
will leave you to make the application.
He who will yield to sin to be rid of temptation, will be so much the more tempted—and
the less able to withstand temptations.

112

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

CHAPTER 5: SATAN'S DEVICES TO DESTROY & ENSNARE ALL SORTS &
RANKS OF MEN IN THE WORLD
[5 devices and their remedies]
I. DEVICES AGAINST THE GREAT AND HONORABLE OF THE EARTH
DEVICE 1: His first device to destroy the great and honorable of the earth is, By
working them to make it their business to seek themselves, to seek how to elevate
themselves, to raise themselves, to enrich themselves, to secure themselves, as you
may see in Pharaoh, Ahab, Rehoboam, Jeroboam, Absalom, Joab, Haman, and others.
Self-seeking, like the deluge, overthrows the whole world. But were the Scripture silent,
our own experiences do abundantly evidence this way and method of Satan to destroy
the great and the honorable; to bury their souls in hell, by drawing them wholly to mind
themselves, and only to mind themselves, and in all things to mind themselves, and
always to mind themselves. 'All,' said the apostle 'mind themselves' (Phil. 2:21). That
is—all comparatively, in respect of the dearth of others who let fall their private
interests, and drown all self-seeking, in the glory of God and the public good.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
self-seeking is a sin which will put men upon a plethora of sins, upon sins not only
against the law of God, the rules of the gospel—but which are against the very laws of
nature—which are so much darkened by the fall of man. It puts the Pharisees upon
opposing Christ, and Judas upon betraying Christ, and Pilate upon condemning Christ. It
puts Gehazi upon lying, and Balaam upon cursing, and Saul and Absalom upon plotting
David's ruin. It puts Pharaoh and Haman upon contriving ways to destroy those Jews
whom God did purpose to save by his mighty arm. It puts men upon using wicked
balances, and the bag of deceitful weights. It puts men upon ways of oppression and
'selling the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes' (Amos 2:6). I know not
any sin in the world but this sin of self-seeking will put men upon it—though it be their
eternal loss!
Self-love is the root of the hatred of others, 2 Tim. 3:2. First, lovers of themselves, and
then fierce, etc. The naturalists observe, that those beasts which are most cruel to
others are most loving to their own.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That self-seeking does exceedingly abase a man. It strips him of all his royalty and
glory. It makes a man become a servant to the creature, yes, often to the worst of
creatures; yes, a slave to slaves, as you may see in Judas, Demas, Balaam, and the
scribes and Pharisees.* Self-seekers bow down to the creatures, as Gideon's many
thousands bowed down to the waters. Self-seeking will make a man say anything, do
anything, and be anything, to please the lusts of others, in order to get advantages
upon others. Self-seeking transforms a man into all shapes and forms; now it makes a
man appear as an angel of light, anon as an angel of darkness. Now self-seekers are
seemingly for God, anon they are openly against God; now you shall have them crying,
'Hosanna in the highest,' and anon, 'Crucify him, crucify him;' now you shall have them
build with the saints, and anon you shall have them plotting the overthrow of the saints,
113

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
as those self-seekers did in Ezra and Nehemiah's time. Self-seekers are the basest of all
people. There is no service so base, so poor, so low—but they will bow to it. They
cannot look neither above, nor beyond their own lusts, and the enjoyment of the
creature (Rom. 1:25). These are the prime and ultimate objects of their desires.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly To dwell upon
those dreadful curses and woes that are from heaven denounced against self-seekers.
'Destruction is certain for you who buy up property so others have no place to live. Your
homes are built on great estates so you can be alone in the land.' (Is. 5:8). So
Habakkuk 2:6, 9-12: 'How terrible it will be for you who get rich by unjust means! You
believe your wealth will buy security, putting your families beyond the reach of danger.
But by the murders you committed, you have shamed your name and forfeited your
lives. The very stones in the walls of your houses cry out against you, and the beams in
the ceilings echo the complaint. How terrible it will be for you who build cities with
money gained by murder and corruption!' The materials of the house built up by
oppression shall come as joint witnesses. The stones of the wall shall cry, 'Lord, we
were built up by blood and violence; and the beam shall answer, True, Lord, even so it
is.' The stones shall cry, Vengeance, Lord! upon these self-seekers! and the beam shall
answer, Woe to him, because he built his house with blood!
So Isaiah: 'Destruction is certain for the unjust judges, for those who issue unfair laws.
They deprive the poor, the widows, and the orphans of justice. Yes, they rob widows
and fatherless children!' (Is. 10:1, 2). So Amos: 'Woe unto them that are at ease in
Zion, and trust in the mountain of Samaria. You push away every thought of coming
disaster, but your actions only bring the day of judgment closer. How terrible it will be
for you who sprawl on ivory beds surrounded with luxury, eating the meat of tender
lambs and choice calves. You sing idle songs to the sound of the harp.' (Amos 6:1, 3-6).
So Micah: 'How terrible it will be for you who lie awake at night, thinking up evil plans.
You rise at dawn and hurry to carry out any of the wicked schemes you have power to
accomplish. When you want a certain piece of land, you find a way to seize it. When you
want someone's house, you take it by fraud and violence. No one's family or inheritance
is safe with you around!' (Micah 2:1, 2).
By these scriptures, you see that self-seekers labor like a woman in travail—but their
birth proves their death, their pleasure their pain, their comforts their torment, their
glory their shame, their exaltation their desolation. Loss, disgrace, trouble and shame,
vexation and confusion, will be the certain portion of self-seekers.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That self-seekers are self-losers and self-destroyers. Absalom and Judas seek
themselves, and hang themselves. Saul seeks himself, and kills himself. Ahab seeks
himself, and loses himself, his crown and kingdom. Pharaoh seeks himself, and
overthrows himself and his mighty army in the Red Sea. Cain sought himself, and slew
two at once, his brother and his own soul. Gehazi sought change of clothing—but God
changed his clothing into a leprous skin. Haman sought himself, and lost himself. The
princes and residents sought themselves, in the ruin of Daniel—but ruined themselves,
their wives and children.
That which self-seekers think should be a staff to support them, becomes by the hand of
justice an iron rod to break them; that which they would have as springs to refresh
114

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
them, becomes a gulf utterly to consume them. The crosses of self-seekers shall always
exceed their mercies: their pain their pleasure; their torments their comforts. Every
self-seeker is a self-tormentor, a self-destroyer; he carries a hell, an executioner, in his
own bosom.
Adam seeks himself—and loses himself, paradise, and that blessed image that God had
stamped upon him. Lot seeks himself (Gen. 13:10, 11) and loses himself and his goods.
Peter seeks to save himself and miserably loses himself. Hezekiah in the business of the
ambassadors, seeks himself, and lost himself and his life too, had not God saved him by
a miracle.
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell much upon the
famous examples of those worthy saints that have denied themselves and preferred the
public good before their own particular advantage. As Moses: 'And the Lord said unto
Moses, Leave me alone so I may destroy them and erase their name from under
heaven. Then I will make a mighty nation of your descendants, a nation larger and more
powerful than they are.' (Deut. 9:14). Oh! but this offer would not take with Moses, he
being a man of brave public spirit. He is hot in his desires and prayers that the people
might be spared and pardoned; says he, 'Please pardon the sins of this people because
of your magnificent, unfailing love, just as you have forgiven them ever since they left
Egypt. Then the Lord said, "I will pardon them as you have requested.' (Num. 14:1920). Ah! should God make such an offer to many, I am afraid they would prefer their
own advantage above the public good; they would not care what became of the people,
so that they and theirs might be made great and glorious in the world; they would not
care about others, so that they might have a Babel built for them, though it was upon
the ashes and ruin of the people.
Baser spirits than these are not in hell; no, not in hell; and I am sure there are no such
spirits in heaven. Such men's hearts and principles must be changed, or they will be
undone forever. Nehemiah was a choice soul, a man of a brave public spirit, a man that
spent his time, his strength, and his estate, for the good and ease of his people. 'I
would like to mention that for the entire twelve years that I was governor of Judah—
from the twentieth until the thirty-second year of the reign of King Artaxerxes—neither I
nor my officials drew on our official food allowance. This was quite a contrast to the
former governors who had laid heavy burdens on the people, demanding a daily ration
of food and wine, besides a pound of silver. Even their assistants took advantage of the
people. But because of my fear of God, I did not act that way. I devoted myself to
working on the wall and refused to acquire any land. And I required all my officials to
spend time working on the wall. I asked for nothing, even though I regularly fed 150
Jewish officials at my table, besides all the visitors from other lands! The provisions
required at my expense for each day were one ox, six fat sheep, and a large number of
domestic fowl. And every ten days we needed a large supply of all kinds of wine. Yet I
refused to claim the governor's food allowance because the people were already having
a difficult time. Remember, O my God, all that I have done for these people, and bless
me for it.' (Neh. 5:14-19). Likewise Daniel was a man of a brave public spirit: 'Then the
other administrators and princes began searching for some fault in the way Daniel was
handling his affairs, but they couldn't find anything to criticize. He was faithful and
honest and always responsible. So they concluded, Our only chance of finding grounds
for accusing Daniel will be in connection with the requirements of his religion.' (Daniel
6:4, 5).
115

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Christ had a public spirit; he laid out himself, and laid down himself for a public good.
Oh! never leave looking and meditating upon these precious and sweet examples until
your souls are quickened and raised up, to act for the public good, more than for your
own particular advantage. Many heathens have been excellent at this.
Macrobius writes of Augustus Caesar, in whose time Christ was born, that he carried
such an entire and fatherly affection to the commonwealth, that he called it filiam suam,
his own daughter; and therefore refused to be called Dominus, the lord or master of his
country, and would only be called Pater patriae, father of his country, because he
governed it not by fear but by love; the senate and the people of Rome jointly saluting
him by the name of Pater patriae, father of his country. The people very much lamented
his death, using that speech, 'Would he had never died.'
So Marcus Regulus, to save his country from ruin, exposed himself to the greatest
sufferings that the malice and rage of his enemies could inflict. So Titus and Aristides,
and many others, have been famous for their preferring the public good above their own
advantage. My prayer is, and shall be, that all our rulers may be so spirited by God, that
they may be willing to be anything, to be nothing, to deny themselves, and to trample
their sinful selves under feet, in order to the honor of God, and a public good; that so
neither saints nor heathens may be witnesses against them in that day, wherein the
hearts and practices of all the rulers in the world shall be open and naked before him
who judges the world in righteousness and judgment.
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That self is a great hindrance to divine things; therefore the prophets and apostles were
usually carried out of themselves, when they had the clearest, choicest, highest, and
most glorious visions. Self-seeking so blinds the soul, that it cannot see a beauty in
Christ, nor an excellency in holiness; it distempers the palate, that a man cannot taste
sweetness in the word of God, nor in the ways of God, nor in the society of the people
of God. It shuts the hand against all the soul-enriching offers of Christ; it hardens the
heart against all the knocks and entreaties of Christ; it makes the soul as an empty
vine, and as a barren wilderness: 'Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to
himself' (Hosea 10:1).
There is nothing that speaks a man to be more empty and void of God, Christ, and
grace, than self-seeking. The Pharisees were great self-seekers, and great undervaluers
of Christ, his word and Spirit. There is not a greater hindrance to all the duties of piety
than self-seeking. Oh! this is that which keeps many a soul from looking after God and
the precious things of eternity. They cannot wait on God, nor act for God, nor abide in
those ways wherein they might meet with God, by reason of self. Self-seeking is that
which puts many a man upon neglecting and slighting the things of his peace. Selfseekers will neither go into heaven themselves, nor allow others to enter, that are ready
to take the kingdom by violence, as you may see in the scribes and Pharisees. Oh! but a
gracious spirit is acted quite other ways, as you may see in that sweet scripture (Cant.
7:13), 'At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up
for you, O beloved.' All the church has and is, is only for him. Let others bear fruit to
themselves, and lay up for themselves, gracious spirits will work for Christ and lay up
for Christ.

116

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
All the divine endeavors and productions of saints fall into God's bosom, and empty
themselves into his lap. As Christ lays up his merits for them, his graces for them, his
comforts for them, his crown for them; so they lay up all their fruits, and all their loves,
all their graces, and all their experiences, and all their services, only for him who is the
soul of their comforts, and the crown and top of all their royalty and glory.
Self-seekers, with Esau, prefers bowl of pottage above their birthright, and with the
men of Shechem, esteem the bramble above the vine, the olive, and the fig-tree; yes
they esteem empty things above a full Christ, and base things above a glorious Christ.
The saints' motto is, 'For you, Lord, for you; not unto us, Lord.'
DEVICE 2: By engaging them against the people of God, against those who are his
jewels, his pleasant portion, the delight of his eye and the joy of his heart. Thus he
drew Pharaoh to engage against the children of Israel—and that was his overthrow. So
he engaged Haman against the Jews—and so brought him to hang upon that gallows
that he had made for Mordecai (Esther 7). So he engaged those princes against Daniel—
which was the utter ruin of them and their relations (Dan. 6). So in Revelation 20:7-9,
"When the thousand years end, Satan will be let out of his prison. He will go out to
deceive the nations from every corner of the earth, which are called Gog and Magog. He
will gather them together for battle—a mighty host, as numberless as sand along the
shore. And I saw them as they went up on the broad plain of the earth and surrounded
God's people and the beloved city. But fire from heaven came down on the attacking
armies and consumed them."
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
none have engaged against the saints—but have been ruined by the God of saints.
Divine justice has been too hard for all who have opposed and engaged against the
saints, as is evident in Saul, Pharaoh, and Haman 'He reproved kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not my anointed, and do my prophets no harm' (Psalm 105:15). When
men of Balaam spirits and principles have been engaged against the saints, how has the
angel of the Lord met them in the way, and jostled their bones against the wall! How
has he broke their backs and necks, and by his drawn sword cut them off in the prime
of their days, and in the height of their sins!
Ah! what a harvest has hell had in our days, of those who have engaged against the
Lamb, and those who are called, chosen and faithful! Ah! how has divine justice poured
out their blood as water upon the ground! how has he laid their honor and glory in the
dust, who, in the pride and madness of their hearts, said, as Pharaoh, 'We will pursue,
we will overtake, we will divide the spoil, our lusts shall be satisfied upon them. We will
draw our sword, our hand shall destroy them' (Exod. 15:9). In the things wherein they
have spoken and done proudly, justice has been above them. History abounds in many
instances of this kind.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell some time
every morning upon the following scriptures, wherein God has engaged himself to stand
by his people and for his people, and to make them victorious over the greatest and
wisest of their enemies. 'Associate yourselves,' says the Lord by the prophet, 'O you
people, and you shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all you of far countries: gird
yourselves, and you shall be broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come
to nothing; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us.' 'Fear not, you
117

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
worm Jacob, and you men of Israel: I will help you, says the Lord, and your Redeemer,
the Holy One of Israel. Behold, I will make you a new sharp threshing instrument having
teeth: you shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as
chaff. You shall fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall
scatter them, and you shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall glory in the Holy One of Israel.'
'No weapon that is formed against you shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise
against you in judgment, you shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the
Lord, and their righteousness is of me, says the Lord.' 'Now also many nations are
gathered together against you that say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon
Zion. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel;
for he shall gather them as sheaves into the floor. Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion:
I will make your horn iron, and I will make your hoof brass, and you shall beat in pieces
many people, and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto
the Lord of the whole earth.' 'Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all
the people round about, when they shall be in the siege, both against Judah and against
Jerusalem. And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people: all
that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth
be gathered together against it.' (Is. 8:9, 41:14, 15, and 54:17. Micah 4:11-13; Zech.
12:2, 3.)
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That you
cannot engage against the saints—but you must engage against God himself, by reason
of that near and blessed union that is between God and them. You cannot be fighters
against the saints—but you will be found in the casting up of the account to be fighters
against God himself. And what greater madness than for weakness itself—to engage
against an almighty strength! The near union that is between the Lord and believers, is
set forth by that near union that is between a husband and his wife. 'They two shall be
one flesh. This is a great mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and the church; we are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,' says the apostle (Eph. 5:32). This
near union is set forth by that union that is between the head and the members, which
make up one body, and by that union that is between the graft and the stock, which are
made one by grafting. The union between the Lord and a believer is so near, that you
cannot strike a believer—but the Lord is sensible of it, and takes it as done to himself.
'Saul, Saul, why do you persecute you me?' (Acts 9:4); and 'in all their afflictions he
was afflicted' (Is. 63:9). Ah, souls! who ever engaged against God and prospered? who
ever took up the sword against him but perished by it? God can speak you to hell and
nod you to hell at pleasure. It is your greatest concernment to lay down your weapons
at his feet, and to 'Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish in the midway' (Psalm
2:12).
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That you are much engaged to the saints, as instruments for the mercies that you do
enjoy, and for the preventing and removing of many a judgment that otherwise might
have been your ruin before this day. Were it not for the saints' sake, God would quickly
make the heavens to be as brass and the earth as iron; God would quickly strip you of
your robes and glory, and set you upon the ash-heap with Job. They are the props that
bear the world from falling about your ears, and that keep the iron rod from breaking of
your bones. 'Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen
stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them'
(Psalm 106:23).
118

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Ah! had not the saints many a time cast themselves into the breach between God's
wrath and you, you had been cut off from the land of the living, and had had your
portion with those whose names are written in the dust. Many a nation, many a family,
is surrounded with blessings for the Josephs' sakes who live therein, and are preserved
from many calamities and miseries for the Moses', the Daniels', the Noahs', and the
Jobs', sakes, who dwell among them. That is a sweet word (Prov. 10:25), 'As the
whirlwind passes, so is the wicked no more: but the righteous is an everlasting
foundation, or is the foundation of the world.' The righteous is the foundation of the
world, which but for their sakes would soon shatter and fall to ruin. So the psalmist
(Psalm 75:3), 'The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the
pillars of it. Selah.'
'He could have what he would of God', said one concerning Luther. Prayer is the gate of
heaven, a key to let us into paradise. 'When the danger is over, the saint is forgotten',
is a French proverb and that which many saints in England have found by experience.
The emperor Marcus Antoninus being in Germany with his army, was enclosed in a dry
country by his enemies, who so stopped all the passages that he and his army were
likely to perish for lack of water. The emperor's lieutenant seeing him so distressed, told
him that he had heard that the Christians could obtain anything of their God by their
prayers, whereupon the emperor, having a legion of Christians in his army, desired
them to pray to their God for his and the army's delivery out of that danger, which they
presently did, and presently a great thunder fell among the enemies, and abundance of
water upon the Romans, whereby their thirst was quenched, and the enemies
overthrown without any fight.
Mary, Queen of Scots, was accustomed to say, 'That she feared Knox's prayers more
than an army of ten thousand men.'
I shall close up this last remedy with those sweet words of the psalmist: 'God is well
known in Judah; his name is great in Israel. Jerusalem is where he lives; Mount Zion is
his home. There he breaks the arrows of the enemy, the shields and swords and
weapons of his foes.' (Psalm 76:1-3).
II. DEVICE AGAINST THE LEARNED AND THE WISE
Secondly, Satan has his devices to ensnare and destroy the learned and the wise: and
that, sometimes by working them to pride themselves in their parts and abilities; and
sometimes by drawing them to rest upon their parts and abilities; and sometimes by
causing them to make light and slight of those who lack their parts and abilities, though
they excel them in grace and holiness; and sometimes by drawing them to engage their
parts and abilities in those ways and things that make against the honor of Christ, the
joy of the Spirit, the advancement of the gospel, and the liberty of the saints. The truth
of this you may see in the learned scribes and Pharisees. (John 5:44; 1 Kings 22:22-25;
1 Cor. 1:18-29.)
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider, That
you have nothing but what you have received, Christ being as well the fountain of
common gifts as of saving grace. 'What have you,' says the apostle, 'that you have not
119

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
received? And if you have received it, why do you boast as though you had not received
it?' (1 Cor. 4:7). 'Whatever you are, you owe to him who made you; and whatever you
have, you owe to him who redeemed you' (Bernard).
There are those who would hammer out their own happiness, like the spider climbing up
by the thread of her own weaving. Of all the parts and abilities that are in you, you may
well say as the young man did of the axe, 'Alas, master! it was but borrowed' (2 Kings
6:5). Alas, Lord! all I have is but borrowed from that fountain that fills all the vessels in
heaven and on earth. My gifts are not so much mine as yours: 'Of your own have we
offered unto you,' said that princely prophet (1 Chron. 29:14).
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That men's learning and trusting to their own wits, parts, and abilities, have been their
utter overthrow and ruin; as you may see in Ahithophel, and those princes that engaged
against Daniel, and in the scribes and Pharisees. God loves to confute men in their
confidences. He who stands upon his parts and abilities, does but stand upon a
quicksand that will certainly fail him. There is nothing in the world which provokes God
more to withdraw from the soul than this; and how can the soul stand, when his
strength is departed from him? Everything which a man leans upon—will be a dart that
will certainly pierce his heart through and through! Ah! how many in these days have
lost their estates, their friends, their lives, their souls, by leaning upon their admired
parts and abilities! The saints are described by their leaning upon their beloved, the
Lord Jesus (Cant. 8:5). He who leans only upon the bosom of Christ, lives the highest,
choicest, safest, and sweetest life. Miseries always lie at that man's door that leans
upon anything below the precious bosom of Christ; such a man is most in danger, and
this is none of his least plagues, that he thinks himself secure. It is the greatest wisdom
in the world to take the wise man's counsel: 'Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and
lean not to your own understanding' (Prov. 3:5).
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That you do
not transcend others more in parts and abilities, than they do you in grace and holiness.
There may be, and often is, great parts and abilities, where there is but little grace, yes,
no grace. And there may be, and often is, a great deal of grace, where there is but
weak parts and abilities. You may be higher than others in gifts of knowledge,
utterance, and learning, and those very souls may be higher than you in their
communion with God, in their delighting in God, in their dependence upon God, in their
affections to God, and in their humble, holy, and unblameable walking before God. Is it
folly and madness in a man, to make light and slight of another, because he is not so
rich in lead or iron as he, when he is a thousand thousand times richer in silver and
gold, in jewels and in pearls, than he? And is it not madness and folly with a witness, in
those who have greater parts and abilities than others, to slight them upon that
account, when that those very people that they make light and slight of, have a
thousand times more grace than they? And yet, ah! how does this evil spirit prevail in
the world!
Judas and the scribes and Pharisees had great parts—but no grace. The disciples had
grace—but weak parts. (Luke 11:1; 24:19-28.)
It was the sad complaint of Augustine in his time: 'The unlearned,' says he, 'rise up and
take heaven by violence, and we with all our learning are thrust down to hell.' It is sad
120

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
to see how many of the rabbis of these times do make an idol of their parts and
abilities, and with what an eye of pride, scorn, and contempt do they look upon those
who lack their parts, and who do not worship the idol that they have set up in their own
hearts. Paul, who was the great doctor of the Gentiles, did wonderfully transcend in all
parts and abilities the doctors and rabbis of our times, and yet, ah! how humbly, how
tenderly, how sweetly, does he carry himself towards the lowest and the weakest! 'To
the weak I became as weak, that I might win the weak: I am made all things to all men,
that I might by all means save some' (1 Cor. 9:22). 'Who is weak, and I am not weak?
Who is offended, and I burn not? Wherefore, if food causes my brother to stumble, I will
eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend' (1 Cor. 8:13).
But, ah how little of this sweet spirit is to be found in the doctors of our age, who look
sourly and speak bitterly against those who do not see as they see, nor cannot speak as
they speak. Sirs! the Spirit of the Lord, even in despised saints, will be too hard for you,
and his appearance in them, in these latter days, will be so full of spiritual beauty and
glory, as that they will darken that which you are too apt to count and call your glory.
The Spirit of the Lord will not allow his choicest jewel grace to be always buried under
the straw and stubble of parts and gifts (Is. 60:13-17).
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That there
is no such way for men to have their gifts and parts blasted and withered, as to pride
themselves in them, as to rest upon them, as to make light and slight of those who lack
them, as to engage them against those people, ways, and things, that Jesus Christ has
set his heart upon. Ah! how has God blasted and withered the parts and abilities of
many among us, that have once been famous shining lights! How is their sun darkened,
and their glory clouded! 'How is the sword of the Lord upon their arm, and upon their
right eye! how is their arm clean dried up, and their right eye utterly darkened!' as the
prophet speaks (Zech. 11:17). This is matter of humiliation and lamentation. Many
precious discerning saints see this, and in secret mourn for it; and oh! that they were
kindly sensible of God's withdrawing from them, that they may repent, keep humble,
and carry it sweetly towards God's jewels, and lean only upon the Lord, and not upon
their parts and understanding, that so the Lord may delight to visit them with his grace
at such a rate as that their faces may shine more gloriously than ever, and that they
may be more serviceable to the honor of Christ, and the faith of the saints, than
formerly they have been.
Becanus says, that the tree of knowledge bears many leaves, and little fruit. Ah! that it
were not so with many in these days.
III. DEVICE AGAINST THE SAINTS
Thirdly, Satan has his devices to destroy the saints; and one great device that he has to
destroy the saints is, By working them first to be cold, and then to divide, and then to
be bitter and jealous, and then 'to bite and devour one another' (Gal. 5:15). Our own
woeful experience is too great a proof of this. The Israelites in Egypt did not more vex
one another, than Christians in these days have done, which occasioned a deadly
consumption to fall upon some. (If we knock, we break. Dissolution is the daughter of
dissension.)

121

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell more upon one
another's graces than upon one another's weaknesses and infirmities. It is sad to
consider that saints should have many eyes to behold one another's infirmities, and not
one eye to see each other's graces, that they should use spectacles to behold one
another's weaknesses, rather than looking-glasses to behold one another's graces.
Flavius Vespasian, the emperor, was more ready to conceal the vices of his friends than
their virtues. Can you think seriously of this, Christians, that a heathen should excel
you, and not blush?
Erasmus tells of one who collected all the lame and defective verses in Homer's works—
but passed over all that was excellent. Ah! this is the practice of many professors—that
they are careful and skillful to collect all the weaknesses of others, and to pass over all
those things which are excellent in them. The Corinthians did eye more the incestuous
person's sin than his sorrow, which was likely to have drowned him in sorrow.
Tell me, saints, is it not a more sweet, comfortable, and delightful thing to look more
upon one another's graces than upon one another's infirmities? Tell me what pleasure,
what delight, what comfort is there in looking upon the enemies, the wounds, the sores,
the sickness, the diseases, the nakedness of our friends? Now sin, you know, is the
soul's enemy, the soul's wound, the soul's sores, the soul's sickness, the soul's disease,
the soul's nakedness; and ah! what a heart has that man who loves thus to look! Grace
is the choicest flower in all a Christian's garden; it is the richest jewel in all his crown; it
is his princely robes; it is the top of royalty; and therefore must needs be the most
pleasing, sweet, and delightful object for a gracious eye to be fixed upon. Sin is
darkness, grace is light; sin is hell, grace is heaven; and what madness is it to look
more at darkness than at light, more at hell than at heaven! (Not race of place—but
grace truly sets forth a man.)
Tell me, saints, does not God look more upon his people's graces than upon their
weaknesses? Surely he does. He looks more at David's and Asaph's uprightness than
upon their infirmities, though they were great and many. He eyes more Job's patience
than his passion. 'Remember the patience of Job,' not a word of his impatience (James
5:11). He who drew Alexander while he had a scar upon his face, drew him with his
finger upon the scar. God puts his fingers upon his people's scars, that no blemish may
appear. Ah! saints, that you would make it the top of your glory in this, to be like your
heavenly Father! By so doing, much sin would be prevented, the designs of wicked men
frustrated, Satan outwitted, many wounds healed, many sad hearts cheered, and God
more abundantly honored.*
Sin is Satan's work, grace is God's work; and is it not most fit that the child should eye
most and mind most, his father's work?
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That love and union makes most for your own safety and security. We shall be invincible
if we are inseparable. The world may frown upon you, and plot against you—but they
cannot hurt you. Unity is the best bond of safety in every church and commonwealth.
There was a temple of Concord among the heathens; and shall it not be found among
Christians, that are temples of the Holy Spirit?
122