PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 6 of 10
Chapters 26 through 30

---

We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach, also called Ecclesiasticus. In these chapters, Ben Sira speaks of the virtuous wife, the dangers of trade, the discipline of children, and the blessings of good health.

CHAPTER 26

Verse 1. Blessed is the husband of a good wife, for the number of his years shall be doubled.

Verse 2. A worthy woman rejoiceth her husband, and he shall fulfill the years of his life in peace.

Verse 3. A good wife is a good portion, and she shall be given in the portion of them that fear the Lord.

Verse 4. Whether a man be rich or poor, if he hath a good heart toward the Lord, he shall at all times rejoice with a cheerful countenance.

Verse 5. There are three things which my heart feareth, and before the fourth my face is made afraid:

Verse 6. The slander of a city, the gathering of a mob, and a false accusation — all these are worse than death.

Verse 7. But a grief of heart and sorrow is a woman that is jealous over another woman, and the scourge of the tongue communicating to all.

Verse 8. As a yoke of oxen that is moved to and fro, so also is a wicked woman; he that holdeth her is as though he grasped a scorpion.

Verse 9. A drunken woman is a great wrath, and her reproach and shame shall not be hid.

Verse 10. The whoredom of a woman may be known by the haughtiness of her eyes and by her eyelids.

Verse 11. Keep a strict watch over a headstrong daughter, lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, a byword in the city and a reproach among the people, and she shame thee before the multitude.

Verse 12. Behold not every body's beauty, and sit not in the midst of women.

Verse 13. For from garments cometh a moth, and from a woman cometh the wickedness of a woman.

Verse 14. Better is the churlishness of a man than a woman that doeth good but bringeth shame and reproach.

Verse 15. Now I will remember the works of the Lord, and will declare the things that I have seen. By the words of the Lord are His works made.

Verse 16. As the sun giving light looketh upon all things, so the work of the Lord is full of His glory.

Verse 17. Hath not the Lord made His saints to declare all His wondrous works, which the Lord Almighty hath firmly settled to be established for His glory?

Verse 18. He searcheth out the deep and the heart, and considereth their crafty devices; for the Lord knoweth all that may be known, and He beholdeth the signs of the world.

Verse 19. He declareth the things that are past and the things that are to come, and revealeth the steps of hidden things.

Verse 20. No thought escapeth Him, neither any word is hidden from Him.

Verse 21. He hath garnished the mighty works of His wisdom, and He is from everlasting to everlasting; unto Him nothing may be added, neither can He be diminished, and He hath no need of any counselor.

Verse 22. Oh how desirable are all His works! And that which a man may behold is but a spark.

Verse 23. All these things live and remain forever for every purpose, and they are all obedient to Him.

Verse 24. All things are double one against another, and He hath made nothing imperfect.

Verse 25. One thing establisheth the good of another, and who shall be filled with beholding His glory?

CHAPTER 27

Verse 1. Many have sinned for the sake of gain, and he that seeketh to grow rich shall turn away his eyes.

Verse 2. As a nail sticketh fast between the joinings of stones, so doth sin stick close between buying and selling.

Verse 3. Unless a man hold himself diligently in the fear of the Lord, his house shall quickly be overthrown.

Verse 4. As when one sifteth with a sieve, the refuse remaineth, so the filth of man cometh forth in his talk.

Verse 5. The furnace trieth the potter's vessels, and the trial of man is in his reasoning.

Verse 6. The fruit of a tree declareth the husbandry thereof; so is the utterance of a thought the test of the heart of man.

Verse 7. Praise no man before thou hearest him speak, for this is the trial of men.

Verse 8. If thou followest righteousness, thou shalt obtain her, and put her on as a glorious long robe.

Verse 9. The birds will resort unto their like, and truth will return unto them that practise in her.

Verse 10. As the lion lieth in wait for his prey, so do sins for them that work iniquity.

Verse 11. The discourse of a godly man is always with wisdom, but a fool changeth as the moon.

Verse 12. If thou art among the unwise, observe the time; but among the thoughtful, continue steadfastly.

Verse 13. The discourse of fools is irksome, and their sport is in the wantonness of sin.

Verse 14. The talk of him that sweareth much maketh the hair stand on end, and their brawls make one stop his ears.

Verse 15. The strife of the proud is bloodshedding, and their cursings are grievous to hear.

Verse 16. Whoso discovereth secrets loseth his credit, and shall never find a friend to his mind.

Verse 17. Love thy friend and be faithful unto him; but if thou bewrayest his secrets, follow no more after him.

Verse 18. For as a man hath destroyed his enemy, so hast thou destroyed the love of thy neighbor.

Verse 19. And as one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou let thy neighbor go and shalt not get him again.

Verse 20. Follow after him no more, for he is too far off; he is escaped as a roe out of the snare.

Verse 21. For a wound may be bound up, and after reviling there may be reconciliation; but he that bewrayeth secrets is without hope.

Verse 22. He that winketh with the eyes worketh evil, and he that knoweth him will depart from him.

Verse 23. When thou art present, he will speak sweetly, and will admire thy words; but at the last he will writhe his mouth and slander thy sayings.

Verse 24. I have hated many things, but nothing like him, and the Lord will hate him.

Verse 25. Whoso casteth a stone on high casteth it on his own head, and a deceitful stroke shall make wounds.

Verse 26. Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that setteth a trap shall be taken in it.

Verse 27. He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon him, and he shall not know whence it cometh.

Verse 28. Mockery and reproach are from the proud; but vengeance, as a lion, shall lie in wait for them.

Verse 29. They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous shall be taken in the snare, and anguish shall consume them before they die.

Verse 30. Malice and wrath, even these are abominations, and the sinful man shall have them both.

CHAPTER 28

Verse 1. He that seeketh vengeance shall find vengeance from the Lord, and He will surely keep his sins in remembrance.

Verse 2. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he hath done unto thee, and then thy sins shall be pardoned when thou prayest.

Verse 3. One man beareth hatred against another, and doth he seek pardon from the Lord?

Verse 4. He showeth no mercy to a man which is like himself, and doth he ask forgiveness of his own sins?

Verse 5. If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, who will entreat for pardon of his sins?

Verse 6. Remember thy last end, and let enmity cease. Remember corruption and death, and abide in the commandments.

Verse 7. Remember the commandments, and bear no malice to thy neighbor. Remember the covenant of the Most High, and overlook ignorance.

Verse 8. Abstain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins; for a wrathful man will kindle strife.

Verse 9. A sinful man troubleth friends, and casteth debate among them that be at peace.

Verse 10. As the fuel of the fire is, so shall the burning be; and as a man's strength is, so shall his wrath be; and according to his riches his anger shall rise.

Verse 11. A hasty contention kindleth a fire, and a hasty quarrel sheddeth blood, and a tongue that beareth witness bringeth death.

Verse 12. If thou blow upon a spark, it shall burn; if thou spit upon it, it shall be quenched; and both these come out of thy mouth.

Verse 13. Curse the whisperer and the double-tongued, for such have destroyed many that were at peace.

Verse 14. A backbiting tongue hath disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation; strong cities hath it pulled down, and overthrown the houses of great men.

Verse 15. A backbiting tongue hath cast out virtuous women, and deprived them of their labors.

Verse 16. Whoso hearkeneth unto it shall never find rest, and shall never dwell quietly.

Verse 17. The stroke of the whip maketh marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the tongue breaketh the bones.

Verse 18. Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by the tongue.

Verse 19. Well is he that is defended from it, and hath not passed through the venom thereof; who hath not drawn the yoke thereof, nor been bound in her bands.

Verse 20. For the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof are bands of brass.

Verse 21. The death thereof is an evil death, and the grave were better than it.

Verse 22. It shall not have rule over them that fear God, neither shall they be burned with the flame thereof.

Verse 23. Such as forsake the Lord shall fall into it, and it shall burn in them and not be quenched; it shall be sent upon them as a lion, and shall devour them as a leopard.

Verse 24. Look that thou hedge thy possession about with thorns, and bind up thy silver and gold.

Verse 25. And weigh thy words in a balance, and make a door and bar for thy mouth.

Verse 26. Beware thou slide not by it, lest thou fall before him that lieth in wait.

CHAPTER 29

Verse 1. He that is merciful will lend unto his neighbor, and he that strengtheneth his hand keepeth the commandments.

Verse 2. Lend to thy neighbor in time of his need, and pay thou thy neighbor again in due season.

Verse 3. Keep thy word and deal faithfully with him, and thou shalt always find that which is needful for thee.

Verse 4. Many, when a thing was lent them, reckoned it to be found and put them to trouble that helped them.

Verse 5. Till he hath received, he will kiss a man's hand; and for his neighbor's money he will speak submissly; but when he should repay, he will prolong the time, and return words of grief, and complain of the time.

Verse 6. If he prevail, the lender shall hardly receive the half, and he will count it as if he had found it.

Verse 7. If not, the borrower hath defrauded him of his money, and he hath gotten him an enemy without cause.

Verse 8. He payeth him with cursings and railings, and for honor he will pay him disgrace.

Verse 9. Many therefore have refused to lend for other men's ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded.

Verse 10. Yet have thou patience with a man in poor estate, and delay not to show him mercy.

Verse 11. Help the poor for the commandment's sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty.

Verse 12. Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend, and let it not rust under a stone to be lost.

Verse 13. Lay up thy treasure according to the commandments of the Most High, and it shall bring thee more profit than gold.

Verse 14. Shut up alms in thy storehouses, and it shall deliver thee from all affliction.

Verse 15. It shall fight for thee against thine enemies better than a mighty shield and a strong spear.

Verse 16. A good man becometh surety for his neighbor, but he that is impudent will forsake him.

Verse 17. Forget not the friendship of thy surety, for he hath given his life for thee.

Verse 18. A sinner will overthrow the good estate of his surety.

Verse 19. And he that is of an ungrateful mind will leave him in danger that delivered him.

Verse 20. Suretyship hath undone many of good estate, and shaken them as a wave of the sea.

Verse 21. Mighty men hath it driven from their houses, so that they wandered among strange nations.

Verse 22. A wicked man transgressing the commandments of the Lord shall fall into suretyship, and he that undertaketh and followeth other men's business for gain shall fall into suits.

Verse 23. Help thy neighbor according to thy power, and beware that thou thyself fall not into the same.

Verse 24. The chief thing for life is water and bread and clothing, and a house to cover shame.

Verse 25. Better is the life of a poor man in a mean cottage than delicate fare in another man's house.

Verse 26. Be it little or much, hold thee contented, and thou shalt not hear the reproach of wandering.

Verse 27. It is a miserable life to go from house to house, for where thou art a stranger thou darest not open thy mouth.

Verse 28. Thou shalt entertain and feed and give drink unto the unthankful, and moreover thou shalt hear bitter words.

Verse 29. Come, thou stranger, and furnish a table, and feed me of that thou hast ready.

Verse 30. Give place, thou stranger, to an honorable man; my brother cometh to be lodged, and I have need of mine house.

Verse 31. These things are grievous to a man of understanding: the upbraiding of house-room and the reproaching of the lender.

CHAPTER 30

Verse 1. He that loveth his son causeth him oft to feel the rod, that he may have joy of him in the end.

Verse 2. He that chastiseth his son shall have joy in him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance.

Verse 3. He that teacheth his son grieveth the enemy, and before his friends he shall rejoice of him.

Verse 4. Though his father die, yet he is as though he were not dead, for he hath left one behind him that is like himself.

Verse 5. While he lived, he saw and rejoiced in him, and when he died, he was not sorrowful.

Verse 6. He left behind him an avenger against his enemies, and one that shall requite kindness to his friends.

Verse 7. He that maketh too much of his son shall bind up his wounds, and his bowels will be troubled at every cry.

Verse 8. A horse not broken becometh headstrong, and a child left to himself becometh willful.

Verse 9. Cocker thy child and he shall make thee afraid; play with him and he will bring thee to heaviness.

Verse 10. Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow with him, and lest thou gnash thy teeth in the end.

Verse 11. Give him no liberty in his youth, and wink not at his follies.

Verse 12. Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides while he is a child, lest he wax stubborn and be disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart.

Verse 13. Chastise thy son and hold him to labor, lest his lewd behavior be an offense unto thee.

Verse 14. Better is the poor, being sound and strong of constitution, than a rich man that is afflicted in his body.

Verse 15. Health and good estate of body are above all gold, and a strong body above infinite wealth.

Verse 16. There is no riches above a sound body, and no joy above the joy of the heart.

Verse 17. Death is better than a bitter life or continual sickness.

Verse 18. Delicacies poured upon a mouth shut up are as offerings of meat set upon a grave.

Verse 19. What good doeth the offering unto an idol? For it neither eateth nor smelleth. So is he that is persecuted of the Lord.

Verse 20. He seeth with his eyes and groaneth, as a eunuch that embraceth a virgin and sigheth.

Verse 21. Give not over thy mind unto sorrow, and afflict not thyself in thine own counsel.

Verse 22. The gladness of the heart is the life of man, and the joyfulness of a man prolongeth his days.

Verse 23. Love thine own soul, and comfort thy heart. Remove sorrow far from thee, for sorrow hath killed many, and there is no profit therein.

Verse 24. Envy and wrath shorten the life, and carefulness bringeth age before the time.

Verse 25. A cheerful and good heart will have a care of his meat and diet.

This concludes Part 6 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 26 through 30. In our next reading, we shall continue with the wisdom of Ben Sira on riches, contentment, and the worship that pleaseth the Lord.