PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 14
Why Saints Persevere

---

WHY SAINTS PERSEVERE

T

HE HOPE which filled the heart of Paul concerning the Corinthian
brethren we have already seen to be full of comfort to those who
trembled as to their future. But why was it that he believed that the
brethren would be confirmed unto the end?
I want you to notice that he gives his reasons. Here they are:
God is faithful, by whom ye were called
unto the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ
(1 Corinthians 1:9).
The apostle does not say, “You are faithful.” Alas! the faithfulness of man
is a very unreliable affair; it is mere vanity. He does not say, “You have
faithful ministers to lead and guide you, and therefore I trust you will be
safe.” Oh, no! if we are kept by men we shall be but ill kept. He puts it,
“God is faithful.” If we are found faithful, it will be because God is
faithful. On the faithfulness of our covenant God the whole burden of our
salvation must rest. On this glorious attribute of God the matter hinges.
We are variable as the wind, frail as a spider’s web, weak as water. No
dependence can be placed upon our natural qualities, or our spiritual
attainments; but God abideth faithful. He is faithful in His love; He knows
no variableness, neither shadow of turning. He is faithful to His purpose;
He doth not begin a work and then leave it undone. He is faithful to His
relationships; as a Father He will not renounce His children, as a friend He
will not deny His people, as a Creator He will not forsake the work of His
own hands. He is faithful to His promises, and will never allow one of
them to fail to a single believer. He is faithful to His covenant, which He
has made with us in Christ Jesus, and ratified with the blood of His
sacrifice. He is faithful to His Son, and will not allow His precious blood
to be spilled in vain. He is faithful to His people to whom He has
promised eternal life, and from whom He will not turn away.
This faithfulness of God is the foundation and cornerstone of our hope of
final perseverance. The saints shall persevere in holiness, because God
perseveres in grace. He perseveres to bless, and therefore believers

85

persevere in being blessed. He continues to keep His people, and therefore
they continue to keep His commandments. This is good solid ground to
rest upon, and it is delightfully consistent with the title of this little book,
“ ALL OF GRACE.” Thus it is free favor and infinite mercy which ring in the
dawn of salvation, and the same sweet bells sound melodiously through
the whole day of grace.
You see that the only reasons for hoping that we shall be confirmed to the
end, and be found blameless at the last, are found in our God; but in Him
these reasons are exceedingly abundant.
They lie first, in what God has done. He has gone so far in blessing us that
it is not possible for Him to run back. Paul reminds us that He has “called
us into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ.” Has he called us? Then the
call cannot be reversed; for, “the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance.” From the effectual call of His grace the Lord never turns.
“Whom he called them he also justified, and whom he justified them he
also glorified:” this is the invariable rule of the divine procedure. There is a
common call, of which it is said, “Many are called, but few are chosen,”
but this of which we are now thinking is another kind of call, which
betokens special love, and necessitates the possession of that to which we
are called. In such a case it is with the called one even as with Abraham’s
seed, of whom the Lord said, “I have called thee from the ends of the earth,
and said unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast
thee away.”
In what the Lord has done, we see strong reasons for our preservation and
future glory, because the Lord has called us into the fellowship of His Son
Jesus Christ. It means into partnership with Jesus Christ, and I would
have you carefully consider what this means. If you are indeed called by
divine grace, you have come into fellowship with the Lord Jesus Christ, so
as to be joint-owner with Him in all things. Henceforth you are one with
Him in the sight of the Most High. The Lord Jesus bare your sins in His
own body on the tree, being made a curse for you; and at the same time He
has become your righteousness, so that you are justified in Him. You are
Christ’s and Christ is yours. As Adam stood for his descendants, so does
Jesus stand for all who are in Him. As husband and wife are one, so is
Jesus one with all those who are united to Him by faith; one by a conjugal

86

union which can never be broken. More than this, believers are members of
the Body of Christ, and so are one with Him by a loving, living, lasting
union. God has called us into this union, this fellowship, this partnership,
and by this very fact He has given us the token and pledge of our being
confirmed to the end. If we were considered apart from Christ we should
be poor perishable units, soon dissolved and borne away to destruction;
but as one with Jesus we are made partakers of His nature, and are
endowed with His immortal life. Our destiny is linked with that of our
Lord, and until He can be destroyed it is not possible that we should
perish.
Dwell much upon this partnership with the Son of God, unto which you
have been called: for all your hope lies there. You can never be poor while
Jesus is rich, since you are in one firm with Him. Want can never assail
you, since you are joint-proprietor with Him who is Possessor of Heaven
and earth. You can never fail; for though one of the partners in the firm is
as poor as a church mouse, and in himself an utter bankrupt, who could
not pay even a small amount of his heavy debts, yet the other partner is
inconceivably, inexhaustibly rich. In such partnership you are raised above
the depression of the times, the changes of the future, and the shock of the
end of all things. The Lord has called you into the fellowship of His Son
Jesus Christ, and by that act and deed He has put you into the place of
infallible safeguard.
If you are indeed a believer you are one with Jesus, and therefore you are
secure. Do you not see that it must be so? You must be confirmed to the
end until the day of His appearing, if you have indeed been made one with
Jesus by the irrevocable act of God. Christ and the believing sinner are in
the same boat: unless Jesus sinks, the believer will never drown. Jesus has
taken His redeemed into such connection with himself, that He must first
be smitten, overcome, and dishonored, ere the least of His purchased ones
can be injured. His name is at the head of the firm, and until it can be
dishonored we are secure against all dread of failure.
So, then, with the utmost confidence let us go forward into the unknown
future, linked eternally with Jesus. If the men of the world should cry,
“Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
Beloved?” we will joyfully confess that we do lean on Jesus, and that we

87

mean to lean on Him more and more. Our faithful God is an everflowing
well of delight, and our fellowship with the Son of God is a full river of
joy. Knowing these glorious things we cannot be discouraged: nay, rather
we cry with the apostle,
“Who shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord?”

88