PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 10 of 10
Final Chapters — Chapters 101 through 108

---

We come now to the final chapters of the Book of Enoch. Here the patriarch concludes his epistle with exhortations drawn from nature, comfort for the righteous dead, the miraculous birth of Noah, and a closing vision of the eternal destinies of the righteous and the wicked.

CHAPTER 101

Verse 1. Observe the heaven, all ye children of heaven, and all the works of the Most High, and fear Him, and work no evil before Him.

Verse 2. If He closes the windows of heaven, and withholds the rain and the dew from descending upon the earth on your account, what will ye do?

Verse 3. And if He sends His anger upon you because of your deeds, ye cannot petition Him; for ye spake proud and insolent words against His righteousness: therefore ye shall have no peace.

Verse 4. And see ye not the sailors of the ships, how their ships are tossed to and fro by the waves, and are shaken by the winds, and are in sore trouble?

Verse 5. And therefore do they fear because all their goodly possessions go upon the sea with them, and they have evil forebodings of heart that the sea will swallow them and they shall perish therein.

Verse 6. Are not the entire sea and all its waters, and all its movements, the work of the Most High, and has He not set limits to its doings, and confined it throughout by the sand?

Verse 7. And at His reproof it is afraid and dries up, and all its fish die and all that is in it; but ye sinners that are on the earth fear Him not.

Verse 8. Has He not made the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein? Who has given understanding and wisdom to everything that moves on the earth and in the sea?

Verse 9. Do not the sailors of the ships fear the sea? Yet sinners fear not the Most High.

CHAPTER 102

Verse 1. In those days when He hath brought a grievous fire upon you, whither will ye flee, and where will ye find deliverance? And when He launches forth His word against you, will you not be affrighted and fear?

Verse 2. And all the luminaries shall be affrighted with great fear, and all the earth shall be affrighted and tremble and be alarmed.

Verse 3. And all the angels shall execute their commands and shall seek to hide themselves from the presence of the Great Glory, and the children of earth shall tremble and quake; and ye sinners shall be cursed for ever, and ye shall have no peace.

Verse 4. Fear ye not, ye souls of the righteous, and be hopeful ye that have died in righteousness.

Verse 5. And grieve not if your soul into Sheol has descended in grief, and that in your life your body fared not according to your goodness, but wait for the day of the judgment of sinners and for the day of cursing and chastisement.

Verse 6. And yet when ye die the sinners speak over you: As we die, so die the righteous, and what benefit do they reap for their deeds?

Verse 7. Behold, even as we, so do they die in grief and darkness, and what have they more than we? From henceforth we are equal.

Verse 8. And what will they receive and what will they see for ever? Behold, they too have died, and henceforth for ever shall they see no light.

Verse 9. I tell you, ye sinners, ye are content to eat and drink, and rob and sin, and strip men naked, and acquire wealth and see good days.

Verse 10. Have ye seen the righteous how their end falls out, that no manner of violence is found in them till their death?

Verse 11. Nevertheless they perished and became as though they had not been, and their spirits descended into Sheol in tribulation.

CHAPTER 103

Verse 1. I swear unto you, ye righteous, by the glory of the Great and Honoured and Mighty One in dominion, and by His greatness I swear to you:

Verse 2. I know a mystery and have read the heavenly tablets, and have seen the holy books, and have found written therein and inscribed regarding them:

Verse 3. That all goodness and joy and glory are prepared for them, and written down for the spirits of those who have died in righteousness, and that manifold good shall be given to you in recompense for your labours, and that your lot is abundantly beyond the lot of the living.

Verse 4. And the spirits of you who have died in righteousness shall live and rejoice, and their spirits shall not perish, nor their memorial from before the face of the Great One unto all the generations of the world; wherefore no longer fear their contumely.

Verse 5. Woe to you, ye sinners, when ye have died, if ye die in the wealth of your sins, and those who are like you say regarding you: Blessed are the sinners; they have seen all their days.

Verse 6. And how they have died in prosperity and in wealth, and have not seen tribulation or murder in their life; and they have died in honour, and judgment has not been executed on them during their life.

Verse 7. Know ye, that their souls will be made to descend into Sheol and they shall be wretched in their great tribulation.

Verse 8. And into darkness and chains and a burning flame where there is grievous judgment shall your spirits enter; and the great judgment shall be for all the generations of the world. Woe to you, for ye shall have no peace.

Verse 9. Say not in regard to the righteous and good who are in life: In our troubled days we have toiled laboriously and experienced every trouble, and met with much evil and been consumed, and have become few and our spirit small.

Verse 10. And we have been destroyed and have not found any to help us even with a word: we have been tortured and destroyed, and not hoped to see life from day to day.

Verse 11. We hoped to be the head and have become the tail: we have toiled laboriously and had no satisfaction in our toil; and we have become the food of the sinners and the unrighteous, and they have laid their yoke heavily upon us.

Verse 12. They have had dominion over us that hated us and smote us; and to those that hated us we have bowed our necks but they pitied us not.

Verse 13. We sought to get away from them that we might flee and be at rest, but found no place whereunto we should flee and be safe from them.

Verse 14. And we complained to the rulers in our tribulation and cried out against those who devoured us, but they did not attend to our cries and would not hearken to our voice.

Verse 15. And they helped those who robbed us and devoured us and those who made us few; and they concealed their oppression, and they did not remove from us the yoke of those that devoured us and dispersed us and murdered us, and they concealed their murder, and remembered not that they had lifted up their hands against us.

CHAPTER 104

Verse 1. I swear unto you, that in heaven the angels remember you for good before the glory of the Great One; and your names are written before the glory of the Great One.

Verse 2. Be hopeful; for aforetime ye were put to shame through ill and affliction; but now ye shall shine as the lights of heaven, ye shall shine and ye shall be seen, and the portals of heaven shall be opened to you.

Verse 3. And in your cry, cry for judgment, and it shall appear to you; for all your tribulation shall be visited on the rulers, and on all who helped those who plundered you.

Verse 4. Be hopeful, and cast not away your hope; for ye shall have great joy as the angels of heaven.

Verse 5. What shall ye be obliged to do? Ye shall not have to hide on the day of the great judgment, and ye shall not be found as sinners, and the eternal judgment shall be far from you for all the generations of the world.

Verse 6. And now fear not, ye righteous, when ye see the sinners growing strong and prospering in their ways: be not companions with them, but keep afar from their violence; for ye shall become companions of the hosts of heaven.

Verse 7. And, although ye sinners say: All our sins shall not be searched out and be written down, nevertheless they shall write down all your sins every day.

Verse 8. And now I show unto you that light and darkness, day and night, see all your sins.

Verse 9. Be not godless in your hearts, and lie not and alter not the words of uprightness, nor charge with lying the words of the Holy Great One, nor take account of your idols; for all your lying and all your godlessness issue not in righteousness but in great sin.

Verse 10. And now I know this mystery, that sinners will alter and pervert the words of righteousness in many ways, and will speak wicked words, and lie, and practice great deceits, and write books concerning their words.

Verse 11. But when they write down truthfully all my words in their languages, and do not change or minish ought from my words but write them all down truthfully — all that I first testified concerning them —

Verse 12. Then, I know another mystery, that books will be given to the righteous and the wise to become a cause of joy and uprightness and much wisdom.

Verse 13. And to them shall the books be given, and they shall believe in them and rejoice over them, and then shall all the righteous who have learnt therefrom all the paths of uprightness be recompensed.

CHAPTER 105

Verse 1. In those days the Lord bade them to summon and testify to the children of earth concerning their wisdom: Show it unto them; for ye are their guides, and a recompense over the whole earth.

Verse 2. For I and My Son will be united with them for ever in the paths of uprightness in their lives; and ye shall have peace: rejoice, ye children of uprightness. Amen.

CHAPTER 106

Verse 1. And after some days my son Methuselah took a wife for his son Lamech, and she became pregnant by him and bore a son.

Verse 2. And his body was white as snow and red as the blooming of a rose, and the hair of his head and his long locks were white as wool, and his eyes beautiful. And when he opened his eyes, he lighted up the whole house like the sun, and the whole house was very bright.

Verse 3. And thereupon he arose in the hands of the midwife, opened his mouth, and conversed with the Lord of righteousness.

Verse 4. And his father Lamech was afraid of him and fled, and came to his father Methuselah.

Verse 5. And he said unto him: I have begotten a strange son, diverse from and unlike man, and resembling the sons of the God of heaven; and his nature is different, and he is not like us, and his eyes are as the rays of the sun, and his countenance is glorious.

Verse 6. And it seems to me that he is not sprung from me but from the angels, and I fear that in his days a wonder may be wrought on the earth.

Verse 7. And now, my father, I am here to petition thee and implore thee that thou mayest go to Enoch, our father, and learn from him the truth, for his dwelling place is amongst the angels.

Verse 8. And when Methuselah heard the words of his son, he came to me to the ends of the earth; for he had heard that I was there, and he cried aloud, and I heard his voice and I came to him. And I said unto him: Behold, here am I, my son, wherefore hast thou come to me?

Verse 9. And he answered and said: Because of a great cause of anxiety have I come to thee, and because of a disturbing vision have I approached.

Verse 10. And now, my father, hear me: unto Lamech my son there hath been born a son, the like of whom there is none, and his nature is not like man's nature, and the colour of his body is whiter than snow and redder than the bloom of a rose, and the hair of his head is whiter than white wool, and his eyes are like the rays of the sun, and he opened his eyes and thereupon lighted up the whole house.

Verse 11. And he arose in the hands of the midwife, and opened his mouth and blessed the Lord of heaven.

Verse 12. And his father Lamech became afraid and fled to me, and did not believe that he was sprung from him, but that he was in the likeness of the angels of heaven; and behold I have come to thee that thou mayest make known to me the truth.

Verse 13. And I, Enoch, answered and said unto him: The Lord will do a new thing on the earth, and this I have already seen in a vision, and make known to thee that in the generation of my father Jared some of the angels of heaven transgressed the word of the Lord.

Verse 14. And behold they commit sin and transgress the law, and have united themselves with women and commit sin with them, and have married some of them, and have begot children by them.

Verse 15. And they shall produce on the earth giants, not according to the spirit, but according to the flesh, and there shall be a great punishment on the earth, and the earth shall be cleansed from all impurity.

Verse 16. Yea, there shall come a great destruction over the whole earth, and there shall be a deluge and a great destruction for one year.

Verse 17. And this son who has been born unto you shall be left on the earth, and his three children shall be saved with him: when all mankind that are on the earth shall die, he and his seed shall be saved.

Verse 18. And now make known to thy son Lamech that he who has been born is in truth his son, and call his name Noah; for he shall be left to you, and he and his sons shall be saved from the destruction, which shall come upon the earth on account of all the sin and all the unrighteousness, which shall be consummated on the earth in his days.

Verse 19. And after that there shall be still more unrighteousness than that which was first consummated on the earth; for I know the mysteries of the holy ones; for He, the Lord, has showed me and informed me, and I have read them in the heavenly tablets.

CHAPTER 107

Verse 1. And I saw written on them that generation upon generation shall transgress, till a generation of righteousness arises, and transgression is destroyed and sin passes away from the earth, and all manner of good comes upon it.

Verse 2. And now, my son, go and make known to thy son Lamech that this son, which has been born, is in truth his son, and that this is no lie.

Verse 3. And when Methuselah had heard the words of his father Enoch — for he had shown to him everything in secret — he returned and showed them to Lamech and called the name of that son Noah, for he would comfort the earth after all the destruction.

CHAPTER 108

Verse 1. Another book which Enoch wrote for his son Methuselah and for those who will come after him, and keep the law in the last days.

Verse 2. Ye who have done good shall wait for those days till an end is made of those who work evil; and an end of the might of the transgressors.

Verse 3. And wait ye indeed till sin has passed away, for their names shall be blotted out of the book of life and out of the holy books, and their seed shall be destroyed for ever, and their spirits shall be slain, and they shall cry and make lamentation in a place that is a chaotic wilderness, and in the fire shall they burn; for there is no earth there.

Verse 4. And I saw there something like an invisible cloud; for by reason of its depth I could not look over, and I saw a flame of fire blazing brightly, and things like shining mountains circling and sweeping to and fro.

Verse 5. And I asked one of the holy angels who was with me and said unto him: What is this shining thing? For it is not a heaven but only the flame of the fire which blazes, and the voice of weeping and crying and lamentation and strong pain.

Verse 6. And he said unto me: This place which thou seest — here are cast the spirits of sinners and blasphemers, and of those who work wickedness, and of those who pervert everything that the Lord hath spoken through the mouth of the prophets — even the things that shall be.

Verse 7. For some of them are written and inscribed above in the heaven, in order that the angels may read them and know that which shall befall the sinners, and the spirits of the humble, and of those who have afflicted their bodies, and been recompensed by God; and of those who have been put to shame by wicked men:

Verse 8. Who love God and loved neither gold nor silver nor any of the good things which are in the world, but gave over their bodies to torture.

Verse 9. Who, since they came into being, longed not after earthly food, but regarded everything as a passing breath, and lived accordingly, and the Lord tried them much, and their spirits were found pure so that they should bless His name.

Verse 10. And all the blessings destined for them I have recounted in the books. And He hath assigned them their recompense, because they have been found to be such as loved heaven more than their life in the world, and though they were trodden under foot of wicked men, and experienced abuse and reviling from them and were put to shame, yet they blessed Me.

Verse 11. And now I will summon the spirits of the good who belong to the generation of righteousness, and I will transform those who were born in darkness, who in the flesh were not recompensed with such honour as their faithfulness deserved.

Verse 12. And I will bring forth in shining light those who have loved My holy name, and I will seat each on the throne of his honour.

Verse 13. And they shall be resplendent for times without number; for righteousness is the judgment of God; for to the faithful He will give faithfulness in the habitation of upright paths.

Verse 14. And they shall see those who were born in darkness led into darkness, while the righteous shall be resplendent.

Verse 15. And the sinners shall cry aloud and see them resplendent, and they indeed will go where days and seasons are prescribed for them.

This concludes our reading of the Book of Enoch. May the God of all ages, who revealeth secrets and maketh known the end from the beginning, grant unto all who hear these words both wisdom and discernment, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.