PURITAN GOLD -- The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 13
The Work of Conversion


The Mystery of Providence. By John Flavel.

Chapter 3. The Work of Conversion.

Chapter 3: The Work of Conversion
In nothing does Providence shine forth more gloriously in this world
than in ordering the occasions, instruments and means of conversion
of the people of God. However skilfully its hand had moulded your
bodies, however tenderly it had preserved them and however
bountifully it had provided for them; if it had not also ordered some
means or other for your conversion, all the former favours and
benefits it had done for you had meant little. This, O this, is the most
excellent benefit you ever received from its hand. You are more
indebted to it for this, than for all your other mercies. And in
explaining this performance of Providence, I cannot but think your
hearts must be deeply affected. This is a subject which every gracious
heart loves to steep its thoughts in. It is certainly the sweetest history
that ever they repeated; they love to think and talk of it. The places
where, and instruments by whom this work was wrought are
exceedingly endeared to them for the work’s sake, yea, endeared to
that degree, that, for many years after, their hearts have melted when
they have but passed occasionally by those places or but seen the
faces of those persons that were used as instruments in the hand of
Providence for their good. As no doubt but Jacob’s Bethel was ever
after that night sweet to his thoughts (Gen. 48. 3), so other saints
have had their Bethels as well as he. O blessed places, times, and
instruments! O the deep, the sweet impressions, never to be erased

out of the memory or heart, that this Providence has made upon
those on whom it wrought this blessed effect at years of discretion,
and in a more perceptible way!
But lest any poor soul should be discouraged by the display of this
Providence because he cannot remember the time, place,
instruments and manner when and by which conversion work was
wrought, I will therefore premise this necessary distinction, to
prevent injury to some, while I design benefit to others.
Conversion, as to the subjects of it, may be considered two ways;
either as it is more clearly wrought in person of riper years, who in
their youthful days were more profane and vile; or upon persons in
their tender years, into whose hearts grace was more imperceptibly
and indiscernibly instilled by God’s blessing upon pious education.
In the former sort, the distinct acts of the Spirit, illuminating,
convincing, humbling, drawing them to Christ and sealing them are
more evident and discernible. In the latter, these are more obscure
and confused. They can remember that God gave them an esteem
and liking of godly persons, care of duty and conscience of sin; but as
to the time, place, instruments and manner of the work, they can
give but a slender account of them. However, if the work is savingly
wrought in them, there is no reason they should be troubled because
the circumstances of it are not so evident to them as they are to
others. Let the substance and reality of the work appear and there is
no reason to afflict yourselves because of the lack of evidence of such
circumstance.
But where the circumstances as well as substance are clear to a man,
when we can call to remembrance the time when, the place where,
the instrument by whom that work was wrought, it must needs be

exceedingly sweet, and they cannot but yield a fresh delight to the
soul every time they are reflected upon.
There are many of the following occasions which, it may be, we took
for stragglers when they first befell us, but they proved scouts sent
out from the main body of Providence, which they make way for.
Now there are various things in those providences that respect this
work, which are exceedingly sweet and taking, as namely:
The wonderful strangeness and unaccountableness of this work of
Providence in casting us into the way and ordering the occasions,
yea, the minutest circumstances about this work. Thus you find that
the Eunuch, at that very instant when he was reading the prophet
Esaias, had an interpreter, one among a thousand that joins his
chariot just as his mind was by a fit occasion prepared to receive the
first light of the knowledge of Christ (Acts 8. 26-30).
And how strange was that change, however far it went, upon Naaman
the Syrian (2 Kings 5. 1-4)! that the Syrians in their incursion should
bright away this girl – likely her beauty was the inducement – and
she must be present to Naaman’s wife, and relate to her the power of
God that accompanied the prophet; though you find in that
particular case there had never been an instance given before (Luke
4. 27). Doubtless the whole of this affair was guided by the signal
direction of Providence.
So for the conversion of the Samaritans, it is observed that Christ
must needs go that way (John 4. 4) – it lay just in the road between
Judea and Galilee – and at the sixth hour, i.e., high noon, he rests
himself upon Jacob’s well, still seeming to have no other design but
his own refreshment by sitting and drinking there. But O what a train
of blessed providences follow this which seemed but an accidental

thing! First the woman of Samaria and then many more in that city
are brought to believe in Christ (verses 29 and 41).
it is noted by Melchior Adams in the Life of Junius how much of an
atheist he was in his younger years; but in order to bring about his
conversion to God, first, a wonderful preservation of his life in a
public tumult at Lyons in France must take place, which forces from
him the acknowledgment of a Deity. Then his father sends for him
home and with much gentleness persuades him to read the
Scriptures. He lights upon the first of John, and with it he feels a
divine supernatural majesty and power seizing his soul, which
brought him over by a complete conversion to Jesus Christ. Thus, as
the woman of Tekoa told David, does God devise means to bring
back His banished (2 Sam. 14. 14).
Lavater tells us that many Spanish soldiers, going into the wars of
Germany, were there converted to Christ, by going into the cities and
towns where godly ministers and Christians were.
Robert Bolton, though an excellent scholar, yet in his younger years
he was a very irreligious person and a jeerer of holy men; but being
cast into the company of godly Mr Peacock was by him brought to
repentance and proved a famous instrument in the Church of Christ.
A scrap of paper, accidentally coming to view, has been used as an
occasion of conversion. This was the case of a minister in Wales, who
had two livings, but took little care of either. Being at a fair, he
bought something at a pedlar’s stall, and tore off a leaf of Mr Perkins’
Catechism to wrap it in, and reading a line or two in it, God sent it
home so as it did the work.
The marriage of a godly man into a carnal family has been ordered by
Providence for the conversion and salvation of many therein. Thus

we read in the life of that renowned English worthy, John Bruen, that
in his second match it was agreed that he should have one year’s diet
in his mother-in-law’s house. During his abode there that year the
Lord was pleased by this means graciously to work upon her soul, as
also upon his wife’s sister and half-sister, their brothers William and
Thomas Fox, with one or two of t he servants in that family.
The reading of a good book has been the means of bringing others to
Christ. And thus we find many of the German divines converted by
reading Luther’s books; yea, and what is more strange, Sleyden, in
his Commentary, tells us that Vergerius, though he were an eye and
ear witness to that doleful case of Spira, which one would think
should move a stone, yet still continued so firm to the pope’s interest
that when he fell into some suspicion among the cardinals he
resolved to purge himself by writing a book against the German
apostates. But while he read the Protestant books, out of no other
design but to confute them, while he is weighing the arguments, he is
himself convinced and brought to Christ. He, finding himself thus
overcome by the truth, imparts his conviction to his brother, also a
zealous papist. This brother deplores the misery of his case and seeks
to reclaim him; but Vergerius entreating him to weigh well the
Protestant arguments, he also yields, and so both immediately gave
themselves to preaching justification by the free grace of God
through the blood of Christ.
Yea, not only the reading of a book or hearing a minister, but, which
is most remarkable, the very mistake or forgetfulness of a minister
has been improved by Providence for this end and purpose.
Augustine, once preaching to his congregation, forgot the argument
which first he proposed and attacked the error of the Manichees
beside his first intention. By this discourse he converted one Firmus,

his hearer, who fell down at his feet weeping and confessing he had
lived a Manichee many years.
Another I knew who, going to preach, took up another Bible than
that he designed, in which, not only missing his notes but the chapter
also in which his text lay, was put to some loss thereby. But after a
short pause he resolved to speak on any other Scripture that might
be presented to him and accordingly read that text: ‘The Lord is not
slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness’ (2 Pet.
3. 9). And though he had nothing prepared, yet the Lord helped him
to speak both methodically and pertinently from it, by which
discourse a gracious change was wrought upon one in the
congregation who has since given good evidence of a sound
conversion and acknowledged this sermon to be the first and only
means thereof.
The accompanying of others in a neighbourly civil visit has been
overruled to the same end. Thus many of the Jews accompanied
Mary unto Bethany, designing only to manifest their civil respect, but
there they met Christ, saw the things which He did, and believed on
Him (John 11. 45).
Firmin4 tells us of one who had lived many years in a town where
Christ had been as clearly and as long preached as in any town in
England. This man, when he was about seventy-six years of age, went
to visit a sick neighbour. ‘A Christian friend of mine,’ says my author,
‘came to see him also, and finding this old man there, whom he
judged to be one that lived upon his own stock, civility, good works,
etc., he purposely fell into that discourse, to shew how many persons
lived upon their duties, but never came to Christ. The old man sitting
by the bedside heard him, and God was pleased to convince him that
he was such a person, who had lived upon himself without Christ to

that day; and would say afterwards, ‘Had I died before three-score
and sixteen, I had perished, for I knew not Christ.’
The committing of a godly man to prison has been the method of
Providence to save the soul of a poor keeper. So Paul was made a
prisoner to make his keeper a spiritual freeman (Acts 16. 27). The
like success had Dr Barnes in Queen Mary’s days, who afterwards
celebrated the Lord’s Supper in prison with his converted keeper.
The scattering of ministers and Christians by persecution from cities
and towns into the ignorant and barbarous parts of the country, has
been the way of Providence to find out and bring home some lost
sheep that were found there to Jesus Christ (Acts 8. 1, 4). The like
signal event has since followed upon the like scattering of godly
ministers, of which there are many outstanding instances at this day.
A servant running away from his master, probably out of no other
design but to live an idle life, yet falling into such places and
companies as Providence ordered in a design to him unknown, has
thereby been brought to be the servant of Christ. This was the very
case of Onesimus who ran away from his master Philemon to Rome,
where by a strange Providence, possibly a mere curiosity to see the
prisoners, he there falls into Paul’s hands, who begat him to Christ in
his bonds (Philemon 10-16).
Going to hear a sermon in jest has proved some men’s conversion in
earnest. The above-named Mr Firmin tells us of a notorious
drunkard whom the drunkards called ‘father’ that one day would
needs go to hear what Wilson said, out of no other design, it seems,
but to scoff at that holy man. But in the prayer before the sermon his
heart began to thaw, and when he read his text: ‘Sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee’ (John 5. 14), he could not contain, and
in that sermon the Lord changed his heart, though so bitter an

enemy that the minister on lecture-days was afraid to go to church
before his shop door. ‘Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how small a
portion is known of him?’
The dropping of some grave and weighty word accidentally in the
presence of vain carnal persons, the death of a husband, wife or
child, a fit of sickness, with a thousand other such like occasions,
have been thus improved by Providence to the conversion of souls.
And no less remarkable and wonderful are the designs of Providence
in ordering the removals and governing the movements of ministers
from place to place, for the conversion of souls. Thus often it carries
them to places where they did not intend to go, God having,
unknown to them, some elect vessels there who must be called by the
Gospel.
Thus Paul and Timothy, a sweet and lovely pair, when they were
travelling through Phrygia and Galatia, were forbidden to preach the
Word in Asia, to which probably their minds inclined (Acts 16. 6),
and when ‘they essayed to go into Bithynia, the Spirit suffered them
not’ (verse 7). But a man of Macedonia, i.e., an angel in the shape or
habit of a man of that country, appeared to Paul in a vision and
prayed him saying: ‘Come over into Macedonia, and help us’ (verse
9), and there did God open the heart of Lydia.
I knew a pious minister, now with God, who, falling in his study upon
a very rousing subject, intended for his own congregation, was
strongly moved, when he had finished it, to go to a rude, vile, profane
people about five miles off and first preach it to them. After many
wrestlings with himself, not being willing to quench any motion that
might be supposed to come from the Spirit of God, he obeyed and
went to this people, who had then no minister of their own and few
durst come among them. And there did the Lord, beyond all

expectation, open a door, and several profane ones received Christ in
that place and engaged this minister to a weekly lecture among them,
in which many souls were won to God.
the same holy man at another time, being upon a journey, passed by
a company of vain persons, who were wrestling upon a green near
the road. Just as he came near the place one of them had thrown his
antagonist and stood triumphing in his strength and activity. this
good man rode up to them, and turning his speech to this person,
told him: ‘Friend, I see that you are a strong man, but let not the
strong man glory in his strength: you must know that you are not to
wrestle with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses. How sad will it be that Satan should at last
trip up the heels of your hope, and give you an eternal overthrow!’
After about a quarter of an hour’s serious discourse upon this
subject, he left them and went on his journey, but this discourse
made such an impression, that the person had no rest till he confided
his trouble to a godly minister, who wisely following the work upon
his soul, saw at last the blessed issue thereof in the gracious change
of the person, of which he afterwards gave the minister a joyful
account. O how unsearchable are the methods of Providence in this
matter!
Nay, what is yet more wonderful, the Providence of God has
sometimes ordered the very malice of Satan and wickedness of men
as an occasion of eternal good to their souls. A very memorable
example of this I shall here give the reader, faithfully relating what,
not many years past, occurred in my own observation in this place, to
the astonishment of many spectators.
In the year 1673, there came into this port5 a ship of Poole, in her
return from Virginia. In this ship was one of that place, a lusty young

man of twenty-three years of age, who was surgeon in the ship. This
person in the voyage fell into a deep melancholy, which the devil
greatly improved to serve his own design for the ruin of this poor
man. However, it pleased the Lord to restrain him from any attempts
upon his own life until he arrived here. But shortly after his arrival,
upon the Lord’s day, early in the morning, being in bed with his
brother, he took a knife prepared for that purpose and cut his own
throat, and then leapt out of the bed, and though the would was deep
and large, yet thinking it might not soon enough dispatch his
wretched life, desperately thrust it into his stomach and so lay
wallowing in his own blood till his brother awakening made a cry for
help. Hereupon a physician and a surgeon coming in, found the
wound in his throat mortal, and all they could do at present was only
to stitch it and apply a plaster with the design rather to enable him to
speak for a little while than with any expectation of cure; for before
that, he breathed through the wound and his voice was inarticulate.
In this condition I found him that morning, and apprehending him
to be within a few minutes of eternity, I laboured to work upon his
heart the sense of his condition, telling him I had but little time to do
anything for him, and therefore I desired him to let me know what
his own apprehensions of his present condition were. He told me he
hoped in God for eternal life. I replied that I feared his hopes were
ill-grounded, for the Scripture tells us: ‘No murderer hath eternal life
abiding in him.’ But this was self-murder, the grossest of all murders,
and insisting upon the aggravation and heinousness of the fact, I
perceived his vain confidence began to fall and some meltings of
heart appeared in him. He then began to lament with many tears his
sin and misery and asked me if there might yet be hope for one that
had destroyed himself and shed his own blood. I replied, the sin
indeed is great but not unpardonable, and if the Lord gave him
repentance unto life, and faith to apply to Jesus Christ, it should be

certainly pardoned to him. Finding him unacquainted with these
things, I explained to him the nature and necessity of faith and
repentance, which he greedily sucked in and with great vehemence
cried to God that He would work them upon his soul, and intreated
me also to pray with him and for him that it might be so. I prayed
with him and the Lord thawed his heart exceedingly in that duty.
Loth he was to part with me, but the duties of the day necessitating
me to leave him, I briefly summed up what was most necessary in my
parting counsel to him and took my leave, never expecting to see him
more in this world. But beyond my own and all men’s expectation, he
continued all that day and panted most ardently after Jesus Christ.
No discourses pleased him but Christ and faith, and in this frame I
found him in the evening. He rejoiced greatly to see me again and
intreated me to continue my discourses upon these subjects; and
after all told me: ‘Sir, the Lord has given me repentance for this sin;
yea, and for every other sin. I see the evil of sin now, so as I never
saw it before. O, I loathe myself; I am a vile creature in my own eyes!
I do also believe; Lord, help my unbelief. I am heartily willing to take
Christ upon His own terms. One thing only troubles me. I doubt this
bloody sin will not be pardoned. Will Jesus Christ apply His blood to
me, that have shed my own blood?’ I told him Christ shed His blood
even for them that with wicked hands had shed the blood of Christ,
and that was a sin of deeper guilt than his. ‘Well,’ said he, ‘I will cast
myself upon Christ. Let him do by me what he will.’ And so I parted
with him that night.
Next morning the wounds were to be opened, and then the opinion
of the surgeons was that he would immediately expire. Accordingly,
at his desire, I came that morning and found him in a most serious
frame. I prayed with him, and then the wound in his stomach was
opened, and by this time the ventricle itself was swollen out of the
orifice of the wound and lay like a livid discoloured tripe upon his

body and was also cut through; so that all concluded it was
impossible for him to live. However they stitched the wound in the
stomach, enlarged the orifice and fomented it, and wrought it again
into his body, and so stitching up the skin, left him to the disposal of
Providence.
But so it was that both the deep wound in his throat and this in his
stomach healed, and the more dangerous wound sin had made upon
his soul, was, I trust, effectually healed also. I spent many hours with
him in that sickness, and, after his return home, received this
account from Mr Samuel Hardy, a minister in that town, part of
which I shall transcribe.
Dear Sir,
I was much troubled at the sad providence in your own, but did
much rejoice that he fell into such hands for his body and soul. You
have taken much pains with him, and I hope to good purpose. I
think, if ever a great and thorough work were done such a way, it is
now, and if never the like, I am persuaded now it is. Never grow
weary of such good works. One such instance is, methinks, enough
to make you to abound in the work of the Lord all your days. . . .
O how unsearchable are the ways of Providence in leading men to
Christ! Let none be encouraged by this to sin that grace may abound.
These are rare and singular instances of the mercy of God, and such
as no presumptuous sinner can expect to find. It is only recited here
to the honour of Providence, which works for the recovery of sinners
in ways that we do not understand.
As Providence order very strange occasions to awaken and arouse
souls at first, so it works no less wonderfully in carrying on the
work to perfection. This it does in two ways.

First, by quickening and reviving dying convictions and troubles for
sin. Souls, after their first awakening, are apt to lose the sense and
impression of their first troubles for sin; but Providence is vigilant to
prevent it, and effectually prevents it. Sometimes Providence directs
the minister to some discourse or passage that shall fall as pat as if
the case of such a person had been studied by him and designedly
spoken to. How often have I found this in the cases of many souls
who have professed they have stood amazed to hear the very
thoughts of their hearts revealed by the preacher, who knew nothing
of them! Sometimes Providence directs them to some proper rousing
Scripture that suits their present case, and sometimes permits them
to fall into some new sin which awakens all their former troubles
again and puts a new efficacy and activity into the conscience. The
world is full of instances of all these cases, and because most
Christians have experience of these things in themselves, it will be
needless to recite them here. Search but a few years back, and you
may remember that, according to this account, at least in some
particulars, Providence ordered the matter with you. Have you not
found some rod or other prepared by Providence to rouse you out of
your security? Why, this is so common a thing with Christians that
they many times presage an affliction coming from the frames they
find their own hearts in.
Secondly, Providence gives great assistance to the work of the Spirit
upon the soul, by ordering, supporting, relieving and cheering
means, to prop up and comfort the soul when it is over-burdened
and ready to sink in the depths of troubles. I remember Mr Bolton
gives us one instance which fits both these cases, the reviving of
convictions, and seasonable supports in the depths of troubles. It is
of a person that by convictions had been fetched off from his wicked
companions and entered into a reformed course of life. But after this,
through the enticement of his old companions, the subtlety of Satan

and corruption of his own heart, he again relapsed into the ways of
sin. Then was providentially brought to his view that Scripture,
Proverbs 1. 24-26. This renewed his trouble, yea, aggravated it to a
greater height than ever, insomuch that he could scarcely think, as it
seems by the relation, his sin could be pardoned. But in this
condition that text, Luke 17. 4, was presented to him, which sweetly
settled him in a sure and glorious peace.
Nor can we here forget that miraculous work of Providence, in a time
of great extremity, which was wrought for that good gentlewoman
Mrs Honeywood, who under a deep and sad desertion, refused and
put off all comfort, seeming to despair utterly of the grace and mercy
of god. A worthy minister being one day with her and reasoning
against her desperate conclusions, she took a Venice-glass from the
table and said: ‘Sir, I am as sure to be damned as this glass is to be
broken’, and therewith threw it forcibly to the ground. But to the
astonishment of both, the glass remained whole and sound, which
the minister taking up with admiration, rebuked her presumption
and showed her what a wonder Providence had wrought for her
satisfaction, and it greatly altered the attitude of her mind. ‘How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!’
(Rom. 11. 33). ‘Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how little a portion
is heard of him!’ (Job 26. 14).
And now let me expostulate a little with your soul, reader. Have you
been duly aware of your obligation to Providence for this inestimable
favour? O what it has done for you! There are various kinds of
mercies conveyed to men by the hand of Providence, but none like
this; in all the treasury of its benefits none is found like this. Did it
cast you into the way of conversion, and order the means and
occasions of it for you, when you little thought of any such thing?
How dear and sweet should the remembrance of it be to your soul!

methinks it should astonish and melt you every time you reflect upon
it. Such mercies should never grow stale or look like common things
to you, for do but seriously consider the following particulars.
How surprising was the mercy which Providence performed for you
in that day! Providence had a design upon you for your eternal good,
which you did not understand. The time of mercy was now fully
come; the decree was now ready to bring forth that mercy, with
which it had gone big from eternity, and its gracious design must be
executed by the hand of Providence, so far as concerned the external
means and instruments. How aptly did it cause all things to fall in
with that design, though you did not know the meaning of it? Look
over all the before-mentioned examples, and you will see the blessed
work of conversion begun upon those souls, when they minded it no
more than Saul did a kingdom that morning he went out ‘to seek his
father’s asses’ (1 Sam. 9. 3, 20). Providence might truly have said to
you in that day, as Christ said to Peter: ‘What I do thou knowest not
now, but thou shalt know it hereafter’ (John 13. 7). God’s thoughts
are not as our thoughts; but as the heavens are higher than the earth
so are His thoughts higher than ours, and His ways than our ways.
Little did Zacchaeus think when he climbed up into the sycamore
tree to see Christ as He passed that way what a design of mercy
Christ had upon him, who took thence the occasion of becoming both
his Guest and Saviour (Luke 19. 5-8). And as little did some of you
think what the aim of Providence was when you went, some out of
custom, others out of curiosity, if not worse motives to hear such a
sermon. O how stupendous are the ways of God!
What a distinguishing and seasonable mercy was ushered in by
Providence in that day! It brought you to the means of salvation in a
good hour. In the very nick of time, when the angel troubled the
waters, you were brought to the pool (John 5. 4). Now the accepted

day was come, the Spirit was in the ordinance or providence that
converted you, and you were set in the way of it. It may be you had
heard many hundred sermons before, but nothing would stick till
now, because the hour was not come. The Lord did, as it were, call in
the word for such a man, such a woman, and Providence said: ‘Lord,
here he is, I have brought him before thee.’ There were many others
under that sermon that received no such mercy. You yourselves had
heard many before, but not to that advantage, as it is said: ‘And
many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and
none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian’ (Luke 4. 27).
So there were many poor, unconverted souls beside you under the
Word that day, and it may be, to none of them was salvation sent that
day but to you. O blessed Providence that set you in the way of mercy
at that time!
What a weighty and important mercy was providentially directed to
your souls that day. There are mercies of all sizes and kinds in the
hands of Providence to dispense to the sons of men. Its left hand is
full of blessings as well as its right. It has health and riches, honours
and pleasures, as well as Christ and salvation to dispense. The world
is full of its left hand favours, but the blessings of its right hand are
invaluably precious and few there be that receive them. It performs
thousands of kind offices for men; but among them all, this is the
chiefest, to lead and direct them to Christ. For consider, of all
mercies, this comes through most and greatest difficulties (Eph. 1.
19, 20).
This is a spiritual mercy, excelling in dignity of nature all others,
more than gold excels the dirt under your feet (Rev. 3. 18). One such
gift is worth thousands of other mercies.

This is a mercy immediately flowing out of the fountain of God’s
electing love, a mercy never dropped into any but an elect vessel (1
Thess. 1. 4, 5).
This is a mercy that infallibly secures salvation; for as we may argue
from conversion to election, looking back, so from conversion to
salvation, looking forward (Heb. 6. 9).
Lastly, this is an eternal mercy, one which will stick by you when
father, mother, wife, children, estate, honours, health and life shall
fail you (John 4. 14).
O, therefore, set a special mark upon that Providence that set you in
the way of this mercy. It has performed that for you which all the
ministers on earth and angels in heaven could never have performed.
This is a mercy that puts weight and value into the smallest
circumstance that relates to it.

Footnotes
4. Giles Firmin (1614-97), Puritan minister of Shalford, Essex and
author of The Real Christian.
5. Dartmouth
