PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 10
Keeping the Heart in Want and in Duty

---

Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 5. Keeping the Heart in Want and in Duty.

guilty Herod cried out, "John Baptist is risen from the dead." Such a
conscience is the devil's anvil, on which he fabricates all those swords
and spears, with which the guilty sinner pierces and wounds himself;
guilt is to danger what fire is to gun-powder; a man need not fear to
walk among many barrels of powder if he have no fire about him.
Rule 10. Exercise holy trust in times of great distress.
Make it your business to trust God with your lives and comforts, and
then your hearts will be at rest about them. So did David, Psal. 57:3.
"At what time I am afraid, I will trust in thee;" q. d. Lord, if at any
time a storm rise, I will make bold to shelter me from it under the
covert of thy wings. Go to God by acts of faith and trust, and never
doubt but he will secure you, Isa. 62:3. "Thou wilt keep him in
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in
thee." God takes it well when thou comest to him thus; "Father, my
life, my liberty, or estate, are hunted after, and I cannot secure them;
O let me leave them in thy hand: The poor leaveth himself with
thee;" and doth his God fail him? No, "thou art the helper of the
fatherless," Psal. 10:14 that is, thou art the helper of the destitute
one, that hath none to go to but God. And that is a sweet scripture,
Psal. 112:7. "He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord;" he doth not say, his ear shall be privileged from
the report of evil tidings, he may hear as sad tidings as other men,
but his heart shall be privileged from the terror of those tidings, "his
heart is fixed."
Rule 11. Consult the honour of religion more, and your personal
safety less.
Is it for the honour of religion, think you, that Christians should be
as timorous as hares, to start at every sound? Will not this tempt the
world to think, that whatever you talk, yet your principles are no
better than other men's? O what mischief may the discoveries of your
fears before them do! It was a noble saying of Nehemiah, chap. 6:11.
"Should such a man as I flee? And who, being as I am, would flee?"

Were it not better you should die, than that the world should be
prejudiced against Christ by your example? For, alas! how apt is the
world, who judge more by what they see in your practices, than by
what they understand of your principles, to conclude from your
timorousness, that how much soever you commend faith, and talk of
assurance, yet you dare trust to those things no more than they when
it comes to the trial. O let not your fears lay such a stumbling-block
before the blind world.
Rule 12. He that will secure his heart from fear, must first secure the
eternal interest of his soul in the hands of Jesus Christ.
When this is done, then you may say, Now world do thy worst. You
will not be very solicitous about a vile body, when you are once
assured it shall be well to all eternity with your precious souls. "Fear
not them (saith Christ) that can kill the body, and after that have no
more that they can do." The assured Christian may smile with
contempt upon all his enemies, and say, Is this the worst that you
do? What say you, Christians? Are you assured that your souls are
safe, that within a few moments of your dissolution they shall be
received by Christ into an everlasting habitation? Well, if you be sure
of that, never trouble yourselves about the instruments and means of
your dissolution.
Objection. O, but a violent death is terrible to nature!
Answer. But what matter is it, when thy soul is in heaven, whether it
were let out at thy mouth, or at thy throat? Whether thy familiar
friends, or barbarous enemies, stand about thy dead body, and close
thine eyes? Alas! it is not worth the making so much to do about;
Nihil corpus sentit in nervo cum anima sit in cœlo, thy soul shall not
be sensible in heaven how thy body is used on earth; no, it shall be
swallowed up in life.
Rule 13. Learn to quench all slavish creature-fears, in the reverential
fear of God.

This is a cure by diversion: It is a rare piece of Christian wisdom to
turn those passions of the soul which most predominate into
spiritual channels; to turn natural anger into spiritual zeal, natural
mirth into holy cheerfulness, and natural fear into an holy dread and
awe of God. This method of cure Christ prescribes in that
forementioned place, Mat. 10 like to that which is in Isa. 8:12, 13 fear
not their fear; but how shall we help it? Why, "sanctify the Lord of
hosts himself, and let him be your fear and your dread." Natural fear
may be allayed for the present by natural reason, or the removal of
the occasion, but then it is but like a candle blown out with a puff of
breath, which is easily blown in again; but if the fear of God
extinguish it, then it is like a candle quenched in water, which cannot
easily be rekindled.
Rule 14. Lastly, Pour out those fears to God in prayer, which the devil
and your own unbelief pour in upon you in times of danger.
Prayer is the best out-let to fear; where is the Christian that cannot
set his probatum est to this direction? I will give you the greatest
example in the world to encourage you in the use of it, even the
example of Jesus Christ, Mark 14:32. When the hour of his danger
and death drew nigh, he gets into the garden, separates from the
disciples, and there wrestles mightily with God in prayer, even unto
an agony: in reference to which the apostle saith, Heb. 5:7. "Who in
the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong cries and tears, to him that was able to
save him from death, and was heard in that he feared." He was heard
as to strength and support to carry him through it, though not as to
deliverance, or exemption from it.
Now, O that these things might abide with you, and be reduced to
practice in these evil days, that many trembling souls may be
established by them.

Keeping the Heart in the Time of Outward
Want
Season 5. 'The fifth season to excite this diligence in keeping the
heart, is a time of straits and outward pinching wants; although at
such times we should complain to God, and not of God, (the throne
of grace being erected for a time of need, Heb. 4:16) yet when the
waters of relief run low, and want begins to pinch hard, how prone
are the best hearts to distrust the fountain! when the meal in the
barrel, and the oil in the cruse are almost spent, our faith and
patience are almost spent too. Now it is difficult to keep down the
proud and unbelieving heart in an holy quietude and sweet
submission at the foot of God: It is an easy thing to talk of trusting
God for daily bread, while we have a full barn or purse: but to say as
the prophet, Hab. 3:17. "Though the fig-tree should not blossom,
neither fruit be in the vine, &c. yet will I rejoice in the Lord:" surely
this is not easy.' The fifth case therefore shall be this:
Case 5. How a Christian may keep his heart from distrusting God; or
repining against him, when outward wants are either felt or feared.
This case deserves to be seriously pondered, and especially to be
studied now, since it seems to be the design of providence to empty
the people of God of their creature-fulness, and acquaint them with
those straits which hitherto they have been altogether strangers to.
Now, to secure the heart from the fore-mentioned dangers attending
this condition, these following considerations, through the blessing
of the Spirit, may prove effectual. And the first is this;
Considerations
Consideration 1. That if God reduce you to straits and necessities, yet
he deals no otherwise therein with you, than he hath done with some
of the choicest and holiest men that ever lived.

Your condition is not singular; though you have hitherto been
strangers to wants, other saints have daily conversed, and been
familiarly acquainted with them. Hear what blessed Paul speaks, not
of himself only, but in the name of other saints reduced to like
exigencies, 1 Cor. 4:11. "Even to this present hour we both hunger
and thirst, and are naked and buffeted, and have no certain dwellingplace." To see such a man as Paul going up and down the world with
a naked back, and empty belly, and not a house to put his head in,
one that was so far above thee in grace and holiness, one that did
more service for God in a day, than perhaps thou hast done in all thy
days, and yet you repine as if hardly dealt with! Have you forgot what
necessities and straits even a David hath suffered? How great was his
straits and necessities? 1 Sam. 25:8. "Give, I pray thee (saith he to
Nabal) whatsoever cometh to thy hand, to thy servants, and to thy
son David." Renowned Musculus was forced to dig in the town ditch
for a maintenance. Famous Ainsworth (as I have been credibly
informed) was forced to sell the bed he lay on to buy bread. But what
speak I of these? Behold a greater than any of them, even the Son of
God, "who is the heir of all things, and by whom the worlds were
made;" yet sometimes would have been glad of any thing, having
nothing to eat, Mark 11:12, 13. "And on the morrow, when they were
come from Bethany, he was hungry; and seeing a fig-tree afar off,
having leaves, he came if haply he might find [any thing] thereon."
Well then, hereby God hath set no mark of hatred upon you, neither
can you infer the want of love from the want of bread. When thy
repining heart puts the question, Was there ever any sorrow like unto
mine? Ask these worthies, and they will tell thee, though they did not
complain and fret as thou dost, yet they were driven to as great
straits as thou art.
Consid. 2. If God leave you not in this necessitous condition without
a promise, you have no reason to repine or despond under it.
This is a sad condition indeed to which no promise belongs. I
remember Mr. Calvin, upon these words, Isa. 9:1. "Nevertheless the

dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation," &c. solves the
doubt, in what sense the darkness of the captivity was not so great as
the lesser incursions made by Tiglath Pileser. In the captivity the city
was destroyed, and the temple burnt with fire, there was no
comparison in the affliction; but yet the darkness should not be such,
and the reason (saith he) is this, Huic certain promissionem esse
additam, cum in priorbus nulla csset; i.e. there was a certain promise
made to this, but none to the other.
It is better to be as low as hell with a promise, than in paradise
without one. Even the darkness of hell itself would be comparatively
no darkness at all, were there but a promise to enlighten it. Now God
hath left many sweet promises for the faith of his poor people to feed
on in this condition: such are these: Psal. 34:9, 10. "O fear the Lord,
ye his saints, for there is no want to them that fear him; the lions do
lack and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want nothing
that is good." Ps. 33:18, 19. "The eye of the Lord is upon the
righteous, to keep them alive in famine." Ps. 84:11. "No good thing
will he with-hold from them that walk uprightly." Rom. 8:32. "He
that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" Isa. 41:17. "When
the poor and the needy seek water, and there is none, and their
tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them." Here you see, first, their extreme wants,
water being put even for the necessaries of life. (2.) Their certain
relief, I the Lord will hear them; in which it is supposed that they cry
unto him in their straits, and he hears their cry.
Having therefore these promises, why should not your distrustful
hearts conclude like David's, Psal. 23:1. "The Lord is my Shepherd, I
shall not want."
Objection. But these promises imply conditions: if they were
absolute, they would afford more satisfaction.

Solution. What are those tacit conditions you speak of but these: (1.)
That either he will supply or sanctify your wants: (2.) That you shall
have so much as God sees fit for you. And doth this trouble you?
Would you have the mercy whether sanctified or no? Whether God
sees it fit for you or no? Methinks the appetites of saints after earthly
things should not be so ravenous, to seize greedily upon any
enjoyment, not caring how they have it.
But oh, when wants pinch, and we see not whence supplies should
come, then your faith in the promise shakes, and we, like murmuring
Israel cry, "He gave bread, can he give water also?" O unbelieving
hearts! When did his promise fail? Whoever trusted them, and was
ashamed? May not God upbraid thee with thine unreasonable
infidelity; as Jer. 2:31. "Have I been a wilderness unto you?" &c. Or
as Christ said to the disciples, "Since I was with you, lacked ye any
thing?" Yea, may you not upbraid yourselves, may you not say with
good old Polycarp, These many years I have served Christ, and found
him a good master. Indeed he may deny what your wantonness, but
not what your real wants call for. He will not regard the cry of your
lusts, nor yet despise the cry of your faith; though he will not indulge
and humour your wanton appetites, yet he will not violate his own
faithful promises. These promises are your best security for eternal
life; and it is strange if they should not satisfy you for daily bread:
remember ye the words of the Lord, and solace your hearts with
them amidst all your wants. It is said of Epicurus, that in the
dreadful fits of the cholic, he often refreshed himself, Ob memoriam
inventorum,—by calling to mind his inventions in philosophy: and of
Possidonius the philosopher, that in a great fit of the stone he
solaced himself with discourses of moral duty; and when the pain
twinged him, he would say, Nihil agis, dolor; quamvis sis molestus,
nunquam confitebor te esse malum:—O pain, thou dost nothing:
though thou art a little troublesome, I will never confess thee to be
evil. If upon such grounds as these they could support themselves
under such grinding and racking pains, and even delude their
diseases by them, how much rather should the precious promises of
God, and the sweet experiences which have gone along step by step

with them, make you to forget all your wants, and comfort you in
every strait.
Consid. 3. If it be bad now, it might have been worse; hath God
denied thee the comforts of this life? He might have denied thee
Christ, peace, and pardon also, and then thy case had been woful
indeed. You know God hath done so to millions in the world: how
many such wretched objects may your eyes behold every day, that
have no comfort in hand, nor yet in hope, are miserable here, and
will be so to eternity; that have a bitter cup, and nothing to sweeten
it; no, not so much as an hope that it will be better. But it is not so
with you, though you be poor in this world, "yet rich in faith, and
heirs of the kingdom which God hath promised," Jam. 2:5. O learn to
set spiritual riches over against temporal poverty. Balance all your
present troubles with your spiritual privileges. Indeed if God had
denied your souls the robes of righteousness to clothe them, the
hidden manna to feed them, the heavenly mansions to receive them;
if your souls were left destitute as well as your bodies, you might well
be pensive; but this consideration hath enough to bring the
considering soul to rest under any outward strait. It was bravely said
by Luther, when want began to pinch him, 'Let us be contented with
our hard fare (said he,) for do not we feast with angels upon Christ
the bread of life?" "And blessed be God (saith Paul) who hath
abounded to us in all spiritual blessings," Eph. 1:3.
Consid. 4. This affliction, though great, is not such an affliction but
God hath far greater, with which he chastises the dearly beloved of
his soul in this world: and should he remove this, and inflict those,
you would account your present state a very comfortable state, and
bless God to be as now you are.
What think ye, sirs? Should God remove your present troubles,
supply all your outward wants, give you the desire of your hearts in
creature comforts, but hide his face from you, shoot his arrows into
your souls, and cause the venom of them to drink up your spirits?
Should he leave you but a few days to the buffeting of Satan, and his

blasphemous injections; should he hold your eyes but a few nights
waking with horrors of conscience, tossing to and fro till the dawning
of the day: should he lead you through the chambers of death, shew
you the visions of darkness, and make his terrors set themselves in
array against you: Then tell me if you would not count it a choice
mercy to be back again in your former necessitous condition, with
peace of conscience; and count bread and water, with God's favour, a
happy state? O then, take heed of repining. Say not God deals hardly
with you, lest you provoke him to convince you, by your own sense
and feeling, that he hath worse rods than these for unsubmissive and
froward children.
Consid. 5. If it be bad now, it mill be better shortly.
O keep thy heart by that consideration: the meal in the barrel is
almost spent; well, be it so, why should that trouble me, if I am
almost beyond the need and use of all these things. The traveller hath
spent almost all his money, but a shilling or two left: well, saith he,
though my money be almost spent, yet my journey is almost finished
too; I am near home, and then I shall be fully supplied. If there be no
candles in the house, yet it is a comfort to think that it is almost day,
and then there will be no need of candles. I am afraid, Christian, thou
misreckonest thyself when thou thinkest thy provision is almost
spent, and you have a great way to travel: many years to live, and
nothing to live upon; it may not be half so many as thou supposest;
in this be confident, if thy provision be spent, either fresh supplies
are coming, though thou seest not from whence, or thou art nearer
thy journey's end than thou reckonest thyself to be. Desponding soul,
doth it become a man or woman travelling upon the road to the
heavenly city, and almost arrived there, within a few day's journey of
his Father's house, where all his wants shall be supplied, to take on
thus about a little meat, drink, or clothes which he fears he shall
want by the way? It was a noble saying of the forty Martyrs, famous
in the Ecclesiastical story, when turned out naked in a frosty night to
be starved to death, with these words they comforted one another,
δριμμυς ο χειμων, &c. The winter indeed is sharp and cold, but

heaven is warm and comfortable; here we shiver for cold, but
Abraham's bosom will make amends for all.
Objections
Objection 1. But I may die for want.
Solution (1.) Who ever did so? When were the righteous forsaken?
(2.) If so, your journey is ended, and you are fully supplied.
Objec. 2. But I am not sure of that; were I sure of heaven, it were
another matter.
Sol. Are you not sure of that? Then you have other matters to trouble
yourselves about than these: methinks these should be the least of all
your cares: I do not find that souls perplexed and troubled about the
want of Christ, pardon of sin, &c. are usually very anxious, or
solicitous about these things. He that seriously puts such questions
as these, What shall I do to be saved? How shall I know my sin is
pardoned? doth not usually trouble himself with, "What shall I eat,
what shall I drink, or wherewithal shall I be clothed?"
Consid. 6. Doth it become the children of such a Father to distrust
his all-sufficiency, or repine at any of his dispensations;
Do you well to question his care and love upon every new exigence?
Say, have you not been ashamed of this formerly? Hath not your
Father's seasonable provisions for you in former straits, put you to
the blush, and made you resolve never to question his love and care
any more? and yet will you renew your unworthy suspicions of him
again? Disingenuous child! reason thus with thyself; if I perish for
want of what is good and needful for me, it must either be because
my Father knows not my wants, or hath not wherewith to supply
them: or else regards not what becomes of me. Which of these shall I
charge upon him? Not the first; for, Mark 6:32. "My Father knows
what I have need of;" my condition is not hid from him: nor the
second, "For the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness of it," Psal. 24:1.

His name is God all-sufficient, Gen. 17:1. Not the last, for, "as a father
pities his children, so the Lord pities them that fear him," Ps. 103:13.
"The Lord is exceedingly pitiful, and of tender mercy," Jam. 5:11. "He
hears the young ravens when they cry," Job 38:41 and will he not
hear me? "Consider, saith Christ, the fowls of the air," Matth. 6:26.
Not the fowls at the door, that are every day fed by hand, but the
fowls of the air that have none to provide for them. Doth he feed and
clothe his enemies, and will he forget his children? He heard the very
cry of Ishmael in distress, Gen. 21:17. O my unbelieving heart! dost
thou yet doubt? Remember Hagar and the child.
Consid. 7. Your poverty is not your sin, but your affliction only! If by
sinful means you have not brought it upon yourselves; and if it be but
an affliction, it may be borne the easier for that.
It is hard indeed to bear an affliction coming upon us as the fruit and
punishment of sin; when men are under trouble upon that account,
they use to say, O! if it were but a single affliction coming from the
hand of God by way of trial, I could bear it, but I have brought it
upon myself by sin, it comes as the punishment of sin: the marks of
God's displeasure are upon it; it is the guilt within that troubles and
galls more than the want without.
But it is not so here, and therefore you have no reason to be cast
down under it.
Objections
Objection. 1. But though there be no sting of guilt, yet this condition
wants not other stings: As first, the discredit of religion; I cannot
comply with mine engagements in the world, and thereby religion is
like to suffer.
Solution. It is well you have an heart to discharge every duty, yet if
God disable you by providence, it is no discredit to your profession,
because you do not that which you cannot do, so long as it is your
desire and endeavour to do what you can and ought to do; and in this

case God's will is, that lenity and forbearance be exercised towards
you, Deut. 24:12, 13.
Object. 2. But it grieves me to behold the necessities of others whom
I was wont to relieve and refresh, but now cannot.
Sol. If you cannot, it ceases to be your duty, and God accepts the
drawing out of your soul to the hungry in compassion and desire to
help them, though you cannot draw forth a full purse to relieve and
supply them.
Object. 3. But I find such a condition full of temptations, a sore clog
in the way to heaven.
Sol. Every condition in the world hath its clogs and attending
temptations; and were you in a prosperous condition, you might
there meet with more temptations and fewer advantages than you
now have: For though I confess poverty hath its temptations as well
as prosperity, yet I am confident prosperity hath not these excellent
advantages that poverty hath: For here you have an opportunity to
discover the sincerity of your love to God, when you can live upon
him, and find enough in him, and constantly follow him, even when
all external inducements and motives fail. And thus I have shewed
you how to keep your hearts from the temptations and dangers
attending a poor and low condition in the world, when want pinches,
and the heart begins to sink, then improve and bless God for these
helps to keep it.
Season 6. 'The sixth season of expressing this diligence in keeping
the heart, is the season of duty; when we draw nigh to God in public,
private, or secret duties, then it is time to look to the heart; for the
vanity of the heart seldom discovers itself more than at such times.
How oft doth the poor soul cry out, O Lord! how fain would I serve
thee, but vain thoughts will not let me; I came to open my heart to
thee, to delight my soul in communion with thee, but my corruptions
have set upon me; Lord, call off these vain thoughts, and suffer them

not to prostitute the soul which is espoused to thee before thy face.'
The sixth case then is this,

Keeping the Heart in the Time of Duty
Case 6. How the heart may be kept from distractions by vain
thoughts, in the time of duty.
There is a twofold distraction or wandering of the heart in duty: (1.)
Voluntary and habitual, Psalm 78:8. "They set not their hearts aright,
and their spirit was not steadfast with God." This is the case of
formalists, and proceeds from the want of an holy bent and
inclination of the heart to God; their hearts are under the power of
their lust, and therefore it is no wonder they go after their lust, even
when they are about holy things, Ezek. 33:31. (2.) Involuntary and
lamented distractions, Rom. 7:21–24. "I find then a law, that when I
would do good, evil is present with me; O wretched man that I am,"
&c. This proceeds not from the want of a holy bent and aim, but from
the weakness and imperfection of grace. And in this case the soul
may make the like complaint against its own corruptions that Abijah
did against Jeroboam, 2 Chron. 13:6, 7. "Yet Jeroboam the son of
Nebat is risen up against his lord, when Rehoboam was young and
tender-hearted, and could not withstand him, and there are gathered
unto him vain men, the children of Belial." Grace hath dominion, but
lusts are mutinous and seditious, during the infancy thereof. But it is
not my business to shew you how these distractions come into the
heart, but rather how to get and keep them out of the heart: in order
whereunto take these ten following helps.
Helps
Help 1. Sequester yourselves from all earthly employments, and set
apart some time for solemn preparation to meet God in duty: You
come reeking hot out of the world into God's presence, but you will
find a tang of it in your duties: It is with the heart a few minutes

since plunged in the world, now at the feet of God, just as with the
sea after a storm, which still continues working, muddy, and
disquiet, though the wind be laid, and the storm over: Thy heart
must have sometime to settle. There are few musicians that can take
down a lute or viol, and play presently upon it, without some time to
tune it; there are few Christians can presently say, as Psal. 57:7. "O
God, my heart is fixed, it is fixed." O when thou goest to God in any
duty, take thy heart aside, and say, O my soul, I am now addressing
myself to the greatest work that ever a creature was employed about:
I am going into the awful presence of God about business of
everlasting moment.
Oh my soul, leave trifling now, be composed, watchful, serious, this
is no common-work; it is God-work, soul-work, eternity-work. I am
now going forth bearing seed, which will bring forth fruit to life or
death in the world to come; pause a while upon thy sins, wants,
troubles; keep thy thoughts a while on these before thou address
thyself to duty. David first mused, and then spake with his tongue,
Psalm 39:3, 4. So Psal. 45:1. "My heart is inditing," &c.
Help 2. Having composed the heart by previous meditation,
presently set a guard upon thy senses: How often are poor Christians
in danger of losing the eyes of their mind by those of their body; for
this Job covenanted with his senses, chap. 31:1. for this David
prayed, Psal. 119:37. "Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity,
and quicken thou me in thy way." This may serve to expound that
mystical Arabian proverb, which advises to 'shut the windows that
the house may be light:' it were excellent if you could say in your
outsets upon duty, as an holy man once did, when he came off from
duty: Claudimini, oculi mei, claudimini, &c. 'Be shut, O mine eyes, be
shut: for it is impossible you should ever see such beauty and glory in
any creature, as I have now seen in God.' You had need avoid all
occasions of distraction from without, for be sure you will meet
enough from within. Intention of spirit in the work of God, locks up
the eye and ear against vanity. When Marcellus entered the gates of
Syracuse, Archimedes was so intent about his mathematical scheme,