PURITAN GOLD -- Religious Affections by Jonathan Edwards: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 11
Part II: No Certain Signs VIII-X

---

VIII. Nothing can certainly be determined concerning the nature of the affections, by this,
that comforts and joys seem to follow awakenings and convictions of conscience, in a certain
order.
Many persons seem to be prejudiced against affections and experiences that come in such a
method, as has been much insisted on by many divines; first, such awakenings, fears, and awful
apprehensions, followed with such legal humblings, in a sense of total sinfulness and
helplessness, and then, such and such light and comfort; they look upon all such schemes, laying
down such methods and steps, to be of men's devising; and particularly if high affections of joy
follow great distress and terror, it is made by many an argument against those affections. But such
prejudices and objections are without reason or Scripture. Surely it cannot be unreasonable to
suppose, that before God delivers persons from a state of sin and exposedness to eternal
destruction, he should give them some considerable sense of the evil he delivers from; that they
may be delivered sensibly, and understand their own salvation, and know something of what God
does for them. As men that are saved are in two exceeding different states, first a state of
condemnation, and then in a state of justification and blessedness: and as God, in the work of the
salvation of mankind, deals with them suitably to their intelligent rational nature; so its seems
reasonable, and agreeable to God's wisdom, that men who are saved should be in these two states
sensibly; first, that they should, sensibly to themselves, be in a state of condemnation, and so in a
state of woeful calamity and dreadful misery, and so afterwards in a state of deliverance and
happiness; and that they should be first sensible of their absolute extreme necessity, and afterwards
of Christ's sufficiency and God's mercy through him.
And that it is God's manner of dealing with men, to "lead them into a wilderness, before he
speaks comfortably to them," and so to order it, that they shall be brought into distress, and made
to see their own helplessness and absolute dependence on his power and grace, before he appears
to work any great deliverance for them, is abundantly manifest by the Scripture. Then is God wont
to "repent himself for his professing people, when their strength is gone, and there is none shut up
20"Associating with godly men does not prove that a man has grace: Ahithophel was

David's companion. Sorrows for the afflictions of the church, and desires for the
conversion of souls, do not prove it. These things may be found in carnal men, and so
can be no evidence of grace."—Stoddard's Nature of Saving Conversion, p. 82.

34
or left," and when they are brought to see that their false gods cannot help them, and that the rock
in whom they trusted is vain, Deut. 32:36, 37. Before God delivered the children of Israel out of
Egypt, they were prepared for it, by being made to "see that they were in an evil case," and "to cry
unto God, because of their hard bondage," Exod. 2:23, and 5:19. And before God wrought that
great deliverance for them at the Red Sea, they were brought into great distress, the wilderness had
shut them in, they could not turn to the right hand nor the left, and the Red Sea was before them,
and the great Egyptian host behind, and they were brought to see that they could do nothing to help
themselves, and that if God did not help them, they should be immediately swallowed up; and then
God appeared, and turned their cries into songs. So before they were brought to their rest, and to
enjoy the milk and honey of Canaan, God "led them through a great and terrible wilderness, that he
might humble them and teach them what was in their heart, and so do them good in their latter
end," Deut. 8:2, 16. The woman that had the issue of blood twelve years, was not delivered, until
she had first "spent all her living on earthly physicians, and could not be healed of any," and so
was left helpless, having no more money to spend; and then she came to the great Physician,
without any money or price, and was healed by him, Luke 8:43, 44. Before Christ would answer
the request of the woman of Canaan, he first seemed utterly to deny her, and humbled her, and
brought her to own herself worthy to be called a dog; and then he showed her mercy, and received
her as a dear child, Matt. 15:22, &c. The Apostle Paul, before a remarkable deliverance, was
"pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that he despaired even of life; but had the
sentence of death in himself, that he might not trust in himself, but in God that raiseth the dead," 2
Cor. 1:8, 9, 10. There was first a great tempest, and the ship was covered with the waves, and just
ready to sink, find the disciples were brought to cry to Jesus, "Lord save us, we perish;" and then
the winds and seas were rebuked, and there was a great calm, Matt. 8:24, 25, 26. The leper,
before he is cleansed, must have his mouth stopped, by a covering on his upper lip, and was to
acknowledge his great misery and utter uncleannesss by rending his clothes, and crying, "Unclean,
unclean," Lev. 13:45. And backsliding Israel, before God heals them, are brought to
"acknowledge that they have sinned, and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord," and to see that
"they lie down in their shame, and that confusion covers them," and "that in vain is salvation
hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains," and that God only can save them,
Jer. 3:23, 24, 25. Joseph, who was sold be his brethren, and therein was a type of Christ, brings
his brethren into great perplexity and distress, and brings them to reflect on their sin, and to say,
We are verily guilty; and at last to resign up themselves entirely into his hands for bondmen; and
then reveals himself to them, as their brother and their savior.
And if we consider those extraordinary manifestations which God made of himself to saints
of old, we shall find that he commonly first manifested himself in a way which was terrible, and
then by those things that were comfortable. So it was with Abraham; first, a horror of great
darkness fell upon him, and then God revealed himself to him in sweet promises, Gen. 15:12, 13.
So it was with Moses at Mount Sinai; first, God appeared to him in all the terrors of his dreadful
Majesty, so that Moses said, "I exceedingly fear and quake," and then he made all his goodness to
pass before him, and proclaimed his name, "The Lord God gracious and merciful," &c. So it was
with Elijah; first, there is a stormy wind, and earthquakes and devouring fire, and then a still,
small, sweet voice, 1 Kings 19. So it was with Daniel; he first saw Christ's countenance as
lightning, that terrified him, and caused him to faint away; and then be is strengthened and
refreshed with such comfortable words as these, "O Daniel, a man greatly beloved," Dan. 10. So it
was with the apostle John, Rev. 1. And there is an analogy observable in God's dispensations and
deliverances which he works for his people, and the manifestations which he makes of himself to
them, both ordinary and extraordinary.
But there are many things in Scripture which do more directly show, that this is God's
ordinary manner in working salvation for the souls of men, and in the manifestations God makes
of himself and of his mercy in Christ, in the ordinary works of his grace on the hearts of sinners.
The servant that owed his prince ten thousand talents, is first held to his debt, and the king
pronounces sentence of condemnation upon him, and commands him to be sold, and his wife and
children, and payment to be made; and thus he humbles him, and brings him to own the as whole
of the debt to be just, and then forgives him all. The prodigal son spends all he has, and is brought
to see himself in extreme circumstances, and to humble himself, and own his unworthiness, before
he is relieved and feasted by his father, Luke 15. Old inveterate wounds must be searched to the
bottom, in order to healing: and the Scripture compares sin, the wound of the soul, to this, and

35
speaks of healing this wound without thus searching of it, as vain and deceitful, Jer. 7:11. Christ,
in the work of his grace on the hearts of men, is compared to rain on the new mown grass, grass
that is cut down with a scythe, Psal. 72:6, representing his refreshing, comforting influences on
the wounded spirit. Our first parents, after they had sinned, were first terrified with God's majesty
and justice, and had their sin, with its aggravations, set before them by their Judge, before they
were relieved by the promise of the seed of the woman. Christians are spoken of as those "that
have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before them," Heb. 6:18, which representation
implies great fear and sense of danger, preceding. To the like purpose, Christ is called "a hiding
place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, and as rivers of water in a dry place, and as
the shadow of a great rock in a weary land," Isa. 32 at the beginning. And it seems to be the
natural import of the word gospel, glad tidings, that it is news of deliverance and salvation, after
great fear and distress. There is also reason to suppose, that God deals with particular believers, as
he dealt with his church, which he first made to hear his voice in the law, with terrible thunders
and lightning and kept her under that schoolmaster to prepare her for Christ; and then comforted
her with the joyful sound of the gospel from Mount Zion. So likewise John the Baptist came to
prepare the way for Christ, and prepare men's hearts for his reception, by showing them their sins,
and by bringing the self-righteous Jews off from their own righteousness, telling them that they
were "a generation of vipers," and showing them their danger of "the wrath to come," telling them
that "the axe was laid at the root of the trees," &c.
And if it be indeed God's manner (as I think the foregoing considerations show that it
undoubtedly is), before he gives men the comfort of a deliverance from their sin and misery, to
give them a considerable sense of the greatness and dreadfulness of those evils, and their extreme
wretchedness by reason of them; surely it is not unreasonable to suppose, that persons, at least
oftentimes, while under these views, should have great distresses and terrible apprehensions of
mind; especially if it be considered what these evils are that they have a view of; which are no other
than great and manifold sins, against the infinite majesty of the great Jehovah, and the suffering of
the fierceness of his wrath to all eternity. And the more so still, when we have many plain
instances in Scripture of persons that have actually been brought into great distress, by such
convictions, before they have received saving consolations: as the multitude at Jerusalem, who
were "pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren,
what shall we do?" And the apostle Paul, who trembled and was astonished, before he was
comforted; and the gaoler, when "he called for a light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell
down before Paul and Silas, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved?"
From these things it appears to be very unreasonable in professing Christians to make this
an objection against the truth and spiritual nature of the comfortable and joyful affections which
any have, that they follow such awful apprehensions and distresses as have been mentioned.
And, on the other hand, it is no evidence that comforts and joys are right, because they
succeed great terrors, and amazing fears of hell.21 This seems to be what some persons lay a great
weight upon; esteeming great terrors an evidence of the great work of the law as wrought on the
heart, well preparing the way for solid comfort; not considering that terror and a conviction of
conscience are different things. For though convictions of conscience do often cause terror; yet
they do not consist in it; and terrors do often arise from other causes. Convictions of conscience,
through the influences of God's Spirit, consist in conviction of sinfulness of heart and practices
and of the dreadfulness of sins as committed against a God of terrible majesty, infinite holiness and
hatred of sin, and strict justice in punishing of it. But there are some persons that have frightful
apprehensions of hell, a dreadful pit ready to swallow them up, and flames just ready to lay hold of
them, and devils around them, ready to seize them; who at the same time seem to have very little
proper enlightenings of conscience really convincing them of their sinfulness of heart and life. The
devil, if permitted, can terrify men as well as the Spirit of God, it is a work natural to him, and he
has many ways of doing it, in a manner tending to no good.
21Mr. Shepard speaks of "men's being cast down as low as hell by sorrow and lying

under chains, quaking in apprehension of terror to come, and then raised up to
heaven in joy, not able to live; and yet not rent from lust: and such are objects of pity
now, and are likely to be the objects of terror at the great day."—Parable of the Ten
Virgins, Part I. p. 125.

36
He may exceedingly affright persons, by impressing on them images and ideas of many
external things, of a countenance frowning, a sword drawn, black clouds of vengeance, words of
an awful doom pronounced,22 hell gaping, devils coming, and the like, not to convince persons of
things that are true, and revealed in the word of God, but to lead them to vain and groundless
determinations; as that their day is past, that they are reprobated, that God is implacable, that he has
come to a resolution immediately to cut them off, &c.
And the terrors which some persons have, are very much owing to the particular
constitution and temper they are of. Nothing is more manifest than that some persons are of such a
temper and frame, that their imaginations are more strongly impressed with everything they are
affected with, than others; and the impression on the imagination reacts on the affection, and raises
that still higher; and so affection and imagination act reciprocally, one on another, till their affection
is raised to a vast height, and the person is swallowed up, and loses as possession of himself.23
And some speak of a great sight they have of their wickedness, who really, when the
matter comes to be well examined into and thoroughly weighted, are found to have little or no
convictions of conscience. They tell of a dreadful hard heart, and how their heart lies like a stone;
when truly they have none of those things in their minds or thoughts, wherein the hardness of
men's heart does really consist. They tell of a dreadful load and sink of sin, a heap of black and
loathsome filthiness within them; when, if the matter be carefully inquired into, they have not in
view anything wherein the corruption of nature does truly consist, nor have they any thought of
any particular thing wherein their hearts are sinfully defective, or fall short of what ought to be in
them, or any exercises at all of corruption in them. And many think also they have great
convictions of their actual sins, who truly have none. They tell how their sins are set in order
before them, they see them stand encompassing them round in a row, with a dreadful, frightful
appearance; when really they have not so much as one of the sins they gave been guilty of in the
course of their lives, coming into view, that they are affected with the aggravations of.
And if persons have had great terrors which really have been from the awakening and
convincing influences of the Spirit of God, it doth not thence follow that their terrors must needs
issue in true comfort. The unmortified corruption of the heart may quench the Spirit of God (after
he has been striving) by leading men to presumptuous, and self-exalting hopes and joys, as well as
otherwise. It is not every woman who is really in travail, that brings forth a real child; but it may be
a monstrous production, without anything of the form or properties of human nature belonging to
it. Pharaoh's chief baker after he had lain in the dungeon with Joseph, had a vision that raised his
hopes and he was lifted out of the dungeon, as well as the chief butler; but it was to be hanged.
But if comforts and joys do not only come after great terrors and awakenings, but there be
an appearance of such preparatory convictions and humiliations, and brought about very distinctly,
by such steps, and in such a method as has frequently been observable in true converts; this is no
certain sign that the light and comforts which follow are true and saving. And for these following
reasons:
First, As the devil can counterfeit all the saving operations and graces of the Spirit of God,
so he can counterfeit those operations that are preparatory to grace. If Satan can counterfeit those
effects of God's Spirit, which are special, divine and sanctifying, so that there shall be a very great
resemblance, in all that can be observed by others; much more easily may he imitate those works of
God's Spirit which are common, and which men, while they are yet his own children, are the
subjects of. These works are in no wise so much above him as the other. There are no works of
22"The way of the Spirit's working when it does convince men, is by enlightening

natural conscience. The Spirit does not work by giving a testimony, but by assisting
natural conscience to do its work. Natural conscience is the instrument in the hand
of God to accuse, condemn, terrify, and to urge to duty. The Spirit of God leads men
into the consideration of their danger, and makes them to be affected therewith;
Prov. 20:17; "The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward
parts of the belly." Stoddard's Guide to Christ, p. 44.
23The famous Mr. Perkins distinguishes between "those sorrows that come through
convictions of conscience, and melancholic passions arising only from mere
imagination, strongly conceived in the brain; which, he says, usually come on a
sudden, like lightning into a house."—Vol. I. of his works, page 385.

37
God that are so high and divine, and above the powers of nature, and out of reach of the power of
all creatures, as those works of his Spirit, whereby he forms the creature in his own image, and
makes it to be a partaker of the divine nature. But if the devil can be the author of such
resemblances of these as have been spoken of, without doubt he may of those that are of an
infinitely inferior kind. And it is abundantly evident in fact, that there are false humiliations and
false submissions, as well as false comforts.24 How far was Saul brought, though a very wicked
man, and of a haughty spirit, when he (though a great king) was brought, in conviction of his sin,
as it were to fall down, all in tears, weeping aloud, before David his own subject (and one that he
had for a long time mortally hated, and openly treated as an enemy), and condemn himself before
him, crying out, "Thou art more righteous than I: for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have
rewarded thee evil!" And at another time, "I have sinned, I have played the fool, I have erred
exceedingly," 1 Sam. 24:16, 17, and chap. 26:21. And yet Saul seems then to have had very little
of the influences of the Spirit of God, it being after God's Spirit had departed from him, and given
him up, and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him. And if this proud monarch, in a pang of
affection, was brought to humble himself so low before a subject that he hated, and still continued
an enemy to, there doubtless may be appearances of great conviction and humiliation in men,
before God, while they yet remain enemies to him, and though they finally continue so. There is
oftentimes in men who are terrified through fears of hell, a great appearance of their being brought
off from their own righteousness, when they are not brought off from it in all ways, although they
are in many ways that are more plain and visible. They have only exchanged some ways of trusting
in their own righteousness, for others that are more secret and subtle. Oftentimes a great degree of
discouragement, as to many things they used to depend upon, is taken for humiliation: that is called
a submission to God, which is no absolute submission, but has some secret bargain in it, that it is
hard to discover.
Secondly, If the operations and effects of the Spirit of God, in the convictions, and
comforts of true converts, may be sophisticated, then the order of them may be imitated. If Satan
can imitate the things themselves, he may easily put them one after another, in such a certain order.
If the devil can make A, B, and C, it is as easy for him to put A first, and B next, and C next, as to
range item in a contrary order. The nature of divine things is harder for the devil to imitate, than
their order. He cannot exactly imitate divine operations in their nature, though his counterfeits may
be very much like them in external appearance, but he can exactly imitate their order. When
counterfeits are made, there is no divine power needful in order to the placing one of them first,
and another last. And therefore no order or method of operations and experiences is any certain
sign of their divinity. That only is to be trusted to, as a certain evidence of grace, which Satan
cannot do, and which it is impossible should be brought to pass by any power short of divine.
Thirdly, We have no certain rule to determine how far God's own Spirit may go in those
operations and convictions which in themselves are not spiritual and saving, and yet the person that
is the subject of them never be converted, but fall short of salvation at last. There is no necessary
connection in the nature of things, between anything that a natural man may experience while in a
state of nature, and the saving grace of God's Spirit. And if there be no connection in the nature of
things, then there can be no known and certain connection at all, unless it be by divine revelation.
But there is no revealed certain connection between a state of salvation, and anything that a natural
man can be the subject of, before he believes in Christ. God has revealed no certain connection
between salvation, and any qualifications in men, but only grace and its fruits. And therefore we
do not find any legal convictions, or comforts, following these legal convictions, in any certain
method or order, ever once mentioned in the Scripture, as certain signs of grace, or things peculiar
to the saints; although we do find gracious operations and effects themselves, so mentioned,
thousands of times. Which should be enough with Christians who are willing to have the word of
24The venerable Mr. Stoddard observes, "A man may say, that now he can justify God

however he deals with him, and not be brought off from his own righteousness; and
that some men do justify God from a partial conviction of the righteousness of their
condemnation; conscience takes notice of their sinfulness, and tells them that they
may be righteously damned; as Pharaoh, who justified God, Exod. 9:27. And they give
some kind of consent to it but many times it does not continue; they have only a pang
upon them, that usually dies away after a little time."—Guide to Christ, p. 71.

38
God, rather than their own philosophy, and experiences and conjectures, as their sufficient and
sure guide in things of this nature.
Fourthly, Experience does greatly confirm, that persons seeming to have convictions and
comforts following one another in such a method and order, as is frequently observable in true
converts, is no certain sign of grace.25 I appeal to all those ministers in this land, who have had
much occasion of dealing with souls in the late extraordinary season, whether there have not been
many who do not prove well, that have given a fair account of their experiences, and have seemed
to be converted according to rule, i.e., with convictions and affections, succeeding distinctly and
exactly, in that order and method, which has been ordinarily insisted on, as the order of the
operations of the Spirit of God in conversion.
And as a seeming to have this distinctness as to steps and method, is no certain sign that a
person is converted; so a being without it, is no evidence that a person is not converted. For
though it might be made evident to a demonstration, on Scripture principles, that a sinner cannot be
brought heartily to receive Christ as his Savior, who is not convinced of his sin and misery, and of
his own emptiness and helplessness, and his just desert of eternal condemnation; and that therefore
such convictions must be some way implied in what is wrought in his soul; yet nothing proves it to
be necessary, that all those things which are implied or presupposed in an act of faith in Christ,
must be plainly and distinctly wrought in the soul, in so many successive and separate works of
the Spirit, that shall be each one plain and manifest, in all who are truly converted. On the contrary
(as Mr. Shepard observes), sometimes the change made in a saint, at first work, is like a confused
chaos; so that the saints know not what to make of it. The manner of the Spirit's proceeding in
them that are born of the Spirit, is very often exceeding mysterious and unsearchable; we, as it
were, hear the sound of it, the effect of it is discernible; but no man can tell whence it came, or
whither it went. And it is oftentimes as difficult to know the way of the Spirit in the new birth, as
in the first birth; Eccl. 11:5, "Thou knowest not what is the way of the Spirit, or how the bones do
grow in the womb of her that is with child; even so thou knowest not the works of God, that
worketh all." The ingenerating of a principle of grace in the soul, seems in Scripture to be
compared to the conceiving of Christ in the womb, Gal. 4:19. And therefore the Church is called
Christ's mother, Cant. 3:11. And so is every particular believer, Matt. 12:49, 50. And the
conception of Christ in the womb of the blessed virgin, by the power of the Holy Ghost, seems to
be a designed resemblance of the conception of Christ in the soul of a believer, by the power of the
same Holy Ghost. And we know not what is the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow,
either in the womb, or heart that conceives this holy child. The new creature may use that language
in Psal. 139:14, 15, "I am fearfully and wonderfully made; marvellous are thy works, and that my
soul knoweth right well. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret."
Concerning the generation of Christ, both in his person, and also in the hearts of his people, it may
be said, as in Isa. 53:8, "Who can declare his generation?" We know not the works of God, that
worketh all. "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing" (Prov. 25:2), and to have "his path as it
were in the mighty waters, that his footsteps may not be known;" and especially in the works of
his Spirit on the hearts of men, which are the highest and chief of his works. And therefore it is
said, Isa. 40:13, "Who hath directed the Spirit of the Lord, or being his counselor hath taught
him?" It is to be feared that some have gone too far towards directing the Spirit of the Lord, and
marking out his footsteps for him, and limiting him to certain steps and methods. Experience
plainly shows, that God's Spirit is unsearchable and untraceable, in some of the best of Christians,
in the method of his operations, in their conversion. Nor does the Spirit of God proceed
discernibly in the steps of a particular established scheme, one half so often as is imagined. A
scheme of what is necessary, and according to a rule already received and established by common
opinion, has a vast (though to many a very insensible) influence in forming persons' notions of the
steps and method of their own experiences. I know very well what their way is; for I have had
25Mr. Stoddard, who had much experience of things of this nature, long ago

observed, that converted and unconverted men cannot be certainly distinguished by
the account they give of their experience; the same relation of experiences being
common to both. And that many persons have given a fair account of a work of
conversion, that have carried well in the eye of the world for several years, but have
not proved well at last.—Appeal to the Learned, p. 75, 76.

39
much opportunity to observe it. Very often, at first, their experiences appear like a confused chaos,
as Mr. Shepard expresses it: but then those passages of their experience are picked out, that have
most of the appearance of such particular steps that are insisted on; and these are dwelt upon in the
thoughts, and these are told of from time to time, in the relation they give: these parts grow brighter
and brighter in their view; and others, being neglected, grow more and more obscure: and what
they have experienced is insensibly strained to bring all to an exact conformity to the scheme that is
established. And it becomes natural for ministers, who have to deal with them, and direct them that
insist upon distinctness and clearness of method, to do so too. But yet there has been so much to
be seen of the operations of the Spirit of God, of late, that they who have had much to do with
souls, and are not blinded with a seven-fold vail of prejudice, must know that the Spirit is so
exceeding various in the manner of his operating, that in many cases it is impossible to trace him,
or find out his way.
What we have principally to do with, in our inquiries into our own state, or directions we
give to others, is the nature of the effect that God has brought to pass in the soul. As to the steps
which the Spirit of God took to bring that effect to pass, we may leave them to him. We are often
in Scripture expressly directed to try ourselves by the nature of the fruits of the Spirit; but nowhere
by the Spirit's method of producing them.26 Many do greatly err in their notions of a clear work of
conversion; calling that a clear work, where the successive steps of influence, and method of
experience are clear: whereas that indeed is the clearest work (not where the order of doing is
clearest, but) where the spiritual and divine nature of the work done, and effect wrought, is most
clear.
IX. It is no certain sign that the religious affections which persons have are such as have in
them the nature of true religion, or that they have not, that they dispose persons to spend much
time in religion, and to be zealously engaged in the external duties of worship.
This has, very unreasonably of late, been looked upon as an argument against the religious
affections which some have had, that they spend so much time in reading, praying, singing,
hearing sermons, and the like. It is plain from the Scripture, that it is the tendency of true grace to
cause persons to delight in such religious exercises. True grace had this effect on Anna the
prophetess: Luke 2:27, "She departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings and
prayers night and day." And grace had this effect upon the primitive Christians in Jerusalem: Acts
2:46, 47, "And they continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from
house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God." Grace
made Daniel delight in the duty of prayer, and solemnly to attend it three times a day, as it also did
David: Psal. 55:17, "Evening, morning, and at noon will I pray." Grace makes the saints delight in
singing praises to God: Psal. 135: 3, "Sing praises unto his name, for it is pleasant." And 147:1,
"Praise ye the Lord; for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is pleasant, and praise is
comely." It also causes them to delight to hear the word of God preached: it makes the gospel a
joyful sound to them, Psal. 89:15, and makes the feet of those who publish these good tidings to
be beautiful: Isa. 52:7, "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeth good
tidings!" &c. It makes them love God's public worship: Psal. 26:8, "Lord, I have loved the
habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwelleth." And 27:4, "One thing have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
26Mr. Shepard, speaking of the soul's closing with Christ, says, "As a child cannot tell

how his soul comes into it, nor it may be when; but afterwards it sees and feels that
life; so that he were as bad as a beast, that should deny an immortal soul; so here."—
Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part II. p. 171.
"If the man do not know the time of his conversion, or first closing with
Christ; the minister may not draw any peremptory conclusion from thence, that he is
not godly."—Stoddard's Guide to Christ, p. 83.
"Do not think there is no compunction, or sense of sin, wrought in the soul,
because you cannot so clearly discern and feel it, nor the time of the working, and
first beginning of it. I have known many that have come with their complaints, that
they were never humbled, they never felt it so; yet there it hath been, and many
times they have seen it, by the other spectacles, and blessed God for it.—Shepard's
Sound Believer, page 38. The late impression in Boston.

40
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple." Psal. 84:1, 2, &c. "How
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of
the Lord.—Yea, the sparrow hath found a house and the swallow a nest for herself, where she
may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King and my God. Blessed are they that
dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee. Blessed is the man in whose heart are the ways
of them, who passing through the valley of Baca—go from strength to strength, everyone of them
in Zion appeareth before God." Ver 10, "A day in thy courts is better than a thousand."
This is the nature of true grace. But yet, on the other hand, persons' being disposed to
abound and to be zealously engaged in the external exercises of religion, and to spend much time in
them, is no sure evidence of grace; because such a disposition is found in many that have no grace.
So it was with the Israelites of old, whose services were abominable to God; they attended the
"new moons, and Sabbaths, and calling of assemblies, and spread forth their hands, and made
many prayers," Isa. 1:12-15. So it was with the Pharisees; they "made long prayers, and fasted
twice a week." False religion may cause persons to be loud and earnest in prayer: Isa. 58: 4, "Ye
shall not fast as ye do this day, to cause your voice to be heard on high." That religion which is not
spiritual and saving, may cause men to delight in religious duties and ordinances: Isa. 58:2, "Yet
they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook
not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice: they take delight in
approaching to God." It may cause them to take delight in hearing the word of God preached, as it
was with Ezekiel's hearers: Ezek. 33:31, 32, "And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and
they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them: for with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goeth after their covetousness. And lo, thou art unto
them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument:
for they hear thy words, but they do them not." So it was with Herod; he heard John the Baptist
gladly, Mark 6:20. So it was with others of his hearers, "for a season they rejoiced in his light,"
John 5:35. So the stony ground hearers heard the word with joy.
Experience shows, that persons, from false religion, may be inclined to be exceeding
abundant in the external exercises of religion; yea, to give themselves up to them, and devote
almost their whole time to them. Formerly a sort of people were very numerous in the Romish
church, called recluses, who forsook the world, and utterly abandoned the society of mankind, and
shut themselves up close in a narrow cell, with a vow never to stir out of it, nor to see the face of
any of mankind any more (unless that they might be visited in case of sickness), to spend all their
days in the exercise of devotion and converse with God. There were also in old time, great
multitudes called Hermits and Anchorites, that left the world to spend all their days in lonesome
deserts, to give themselves up to religious contemplations and exercises of devotion; some sorts of
them having no dwellings, but the caves and vaults of the mountains, and no food, but the
spontaneous productions of the earth. I once lived, for many months, next door to a Jew (the
houses adjoining one to another), and had much opportunity daily to observe him; who appeared to
me the devoutest person that I ever saw in my life; great part of his time being spent in acts of
devotion, at his eastern window, which opened next to mine, seeming to be most earnestly
engaged, not only in the daytime, but sometimes whole nights.
X. Nothing can be certainly known of the nature of religious affections by this, that they
much dispose persons with their mouths to praise and glorify God. This indeed is implied in what
has been just now observed, of abounding and spending much time in the external exercises of
religion, and was also hinted before; but because many seem to look upon it as a bright evidence of
gracious affection, when persons appear greatly disposed to praise and magnify God, to have their
mouths full of his praises, and affectionately to be calling on others to praise and extol him, I
thought it deserved a more particular consideration.
No Christian will make it an argument against a person, that he seems to have such a
disposition. Nor can it reasonably be looked upon as an evidence for a person, if those things that
have been already observed and proved, be duly considered, viz., that persons, without grace,
may have high affections towards God and Christ, and that their affections, being strong, may fill
their mouths and incline them to speak much, and very earnestly, about the things they are affected
with, and that there may be counterfeits of all kinds of gracious affection. But it will appear more
evidently and directly, that this is no certain sign of grace, if we consider what instances the
Scripture gives us of it in those that were graceless. We often have an account of this, in the
multitude that were present when Christ preached and wrought miracles; Mark 2:12, "And

41
immediately he arose, took up his bed, and went forth before them all, insomuch that they were all
amazed, and glorified God, saying, We never saw it on this fashion." So Matt. 9:8, and Luke
5:26. Also Matt. 15:31, "Insomuch that the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to
speak, the maimed to be whole, the lame to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorified the God
of Israel." So we are told, that on occasion of Christ's raising the son of the widow of Nain, Luke
7:16, "There came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is risen up
among us; and, That God hath visited his people." So we read of their glorifying Christ, or
speaking exceeding highly of him: Luke 4:15, "And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified
of all." And how did they praise him, with loud voices, crying, "Hosanna to the Son of David;
hosanna in the highest; blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord," a little before he was
crucified! And after Christ's ascension, when the apostles had healed the impotent man, we are
told, that all men glorified God for that which was done, Acts 4:21. When the Gentiles in Antioch
of Pisidia, heard from Paul and Barnabas, that God would reject the Jews, and take the Gentiles to
be his people in their room, they were affected with the goodness of God to the Gentiles, "and
glorified the word of the Lord:" but all that did so were not true believers; but only a certain elect
number of them; as is intimated in the account we have of it, Acts 13:48: "And when the Gentiles
heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed." So of old the children of Israel at the Red Sea, "sang God's praise; but soon
forgat his works." And the Jews in Ezekiel's time, "with their mouth showed much love, while
their heart went after their covetousness." And it is foretold of false professors and real enemies of
religion, that they should show a forwardness to glorify God: Isa. 66:5, "Hear the word of the
Lord, ye that tremble at his word. Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's
sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified."
It is no certain sign that a person is graciously affected, if, in the midst of his hopes and
comforts, he is greatly affected with God's unmerited mercy to him that is so unworthy, and seems
greatly to extol and magnify free grace. Those that yet remain with unmortified pride and enmity
against God, may, when they imagine that they have received extraordinary kindness from God,
cry out of their unworthiness, and magnify God's undeserved goodness to them, from no other
conviction of their ill deservings, and from no higher principle than Saul had, who, while he yet
remained with unsubdued pride and enmity against David, was brought, though a king, to
acknowledge his unworthiness, and cry out, "I have played the fool, I have erred exceedingly,"
and with great affection and admiration, to magnify and extol David's unmerited and unexampled
kindness to him, 1 Sam. 25:16-19, and 26:21, and from no higher principle than that from whence
Nebuchadnezzar was affected with God's dispensations, that he saw and was the subject of, and
praises, extols and honors the King of heaven; and both he, and Darius, in their high affections,
call upon all nations to praise God, Dan. 3:28, 29, 30, and 4:1, 2, 3, 34, 35, 37, and 6:25, 26, 27.