PURITAN GOLD -- The Heart of Christ by Thomas Goodwin: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 7
A Second Sort of Demonstration of Christ's Heart Toward Sinners

---

A Second Sort of Demonstration of Christ's
Heart Toward Sinners
For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the

feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are,
yet without sin.—Hebrews 4:15.
A second sort of demonstrations, from several engagements now, lying
upon Christ in heaven.
II. There is a second sort of demonstrations, which may be drawn from
many other several engagements continuing and lying upon Christ now
he is in heaven, which must necessarily incline his heart towards us as
much, yea more, than ever. As:
1. The continuance of all those near and intimate relations and alliances
unto us of all sorts, which no glory of his can make any alteration in, and
therefore not in his heart and love, nor a declining any respects and
offices of love, which such relations do call for at his hands. All relations
that are natural, such as between father and child, husband and wife,
brother and brother, look what world they are made for, in that world
they forever hold, and can never be dissolved. These fleshly relations,
indeed, do cease in that other world, because they were made only for this
world; as, "the wife is bound to her husband but so long as he lives,"
Romans 7:2. But these relations of Christ unto us were made in order to
"the world to come," as the Epistle to the Hebrews calls it; and therefore
are in their full vigour and strength, and receive their completion therein.
Wherefore it is that Christ is said to be "the same today, yesterday, and
forever," Hebrews 13:8. To illustrate this by the constant and indissoluble
tie of those relations of this world, to which no difference of condition,
whether of advancement or abasement, can give any discharge, we see in
Joseph, when advanced, how as his relations continued, so his affections
remained the same to his poor brethren, who yet had injured him, and
also to his father. So Genesis 45 where in the same speech he mentions
both his own greatest dignities and advancement: "God hath made me a
father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler throughout all the
land of Egypt;" so Genesis 45:8, and yet further he forgets not his
relations, "I am Joseph, your brother," Genesis 45:4, even the same man
still. And his affections appeared also to be the same; for he "wept over
them, and could not refrain himself," as you have it, Genesis 45:1-2. And
the like he expresses to his father, "Go to my father, and say, Thus saith
thy son Joseph, God hath made me lord over all Egypt," Genesis 45:9

(and yet thy son Joseph still).
Take another instance, wherein there was but the relation of being of the
same country and alliance, in Esther, when advanced to be queen of an
hundred, twenty, and seven provinces; who when she was in the arms of
the greatest monarch on earth, and enjoyed highest favour with him, yet
then she cries out, "How can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto
my people, or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred!" So
Esther 8:6. She considered but her relation, and how does it work in her
veins by a sympathy of blood! Now much more does this hold good of
husband and wife, for they are in a nearer relation yet. Let the wife have
been one that was poor and mean, fallen into sickness, and let the
husband be as great and glorious as Solomon in all his royalty, all
mankind would cry shame on such a man, if he should not now own his
wife, and be a husband in all love and respect to her still. But beyond all
these relations, the relation of head and members, as it is most natural, so
it obliges most; "No man ever yet hated his own flesh," says the apostle,
though diseased and leprous, "but loveth and cherishes it." Ephesians
5:29. And it is the law of nature, that "if one member be honoured, all the
members are to rejoice with it," 1 Corinthians 12:26; "and if one member
suffer, all the rest are to suffer with it." "Even so is Christ," as 1
Corinthians 12:12. And these relations are they that do move Christ to
continue his love unto us. "Jesus knowing that he was to depart out of
this world, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them
unto the end," John 13:1. And the reason thereof is put upon his relation
to them: they were "his own," and his own by virtue of all relations
whatsoever, his own brethren, his own spouse, his own flesh; and "the
very world will love its own," as himself speaks, much more will he
himself love his own. "He that provides not for his own family is worse
than an infidel," 1 Timothy 5:8. says the apostle. Now though Christ be in
heaven, yet his people are his family still; they are retainers to him,
though they be on earth, and this as truly as those that stand about his
person now he is in his glory. So that speech evidently declares, "Of
whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named;" Ephesians 3:15.
they all together make up but one and the same family to him as their
Lord. Christ is the founder, the subject and the most perfect exemplar
and pattern to us, of the relations that are found on earth.

(1.) First, he is the founder of all relations and affections that accompany
them both in nature and grace. As therefore the Psalmist argues—"Shall
he not see who made the eye?"—so do I. Shall not he who put all these
affections into parents and brothers, suitable to their relations, shall not
he have them much more in himself? Though our father Abraham, being
in heaven, "be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not, yet, O Lord,
thou art our Father, and our Redeemer," Isaiah 63:16. The prophet
speaks it of Christ, as appears by Isaiah 63:1-2, and in a prophecy of the
Jews' call; and he speaks it of Christ, as supposed in heaven, for he adds,
"Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness
and thy glory." Isaiah 63:15. There are but two things that should make
him to neglect sinners: his holiness, as they are sinners, and his glory, as
they are mean and low creatures. Now he there mentions both, to show
that notwithstanding either as they are sinners he rejects them not, and
as they are base and mean, he despises them not.
(2.) He is the subject of all relations, which no creature is. If a man be a
husband, yet not a father or a brother, but Christ is all, no one relation
being sufficient to express his love, by which he loves and owns us. And
therefore he calls his church both sister and spouse, Song of Songs 5:1.
(3.) He is the pattern and exemplar of all these our relations, and they all
are but the copies of his. Thus, in Ephesians 5, Christ is made the pattern
of the relation and love of husbands. "Husbands," says the apostle, "love
your wives, as Christ loved his church," so Ephesians 5:25. Indeed,
Ephesians 5:31-33, the marriage of Adam, and the very words he then
spoke of cleaving to a wife, are made but the types and shadows of
Christ's marriage to his church. Herein I speak, says he, "concerning
Christ and the church, and this is a great mystery." First, a mystery; that
is, this marriage of Adam was ordained hiddenly, to represent and signify
Christ's marriage with his church. And secondly, it is a great mystery,
because the thing thereby signified is in itself so great, that this is but a
shadow of it. And therefore all those relations, and the affections of them,
and the effects of those affections, which you see and read to have been in
men, are all, and were ordained to be, as all things else in this world are,
but shadows of what is in Christ, who alone is the truth and substance of
all similitudes in nature, as well as the ceremonial types.

If therefore, no advancement does or ought to alter such relations in men,
then not in Christ. "He is not ashamed to call us brethren," as in Hebrews
2:11. And yet the apostle had just before said of him, Hebrews 2:10, "We
see Jesus crowned with glory and honour." Indeed, and as when one
member suffers the rest are touched with a sympathy, so is it with Christ.
Paul persecuted the saints, the members, and "Why persecutest thou
me?" Acts 9:4. cries the Head in heaven; the foot was trodden on, but the
Head felt it, though "crowned with glory and honour." "We are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone," Ephesians 5:30; and therefore as Esther
said, so says Christ, "How can I endure to see the evil that befalls my
people?" If a husband has a wife that is mean, and he becomes a king, it
were his glory, and not his shame, to advance her; yea, it were his shame
to neglect her, especially if, when the betrothal was first made, she was
then rich and glorious, and a king's daughter, but since that fallen into
poverty and misery. Now, Christ's spouse, though now she be fallen into
sin and misery, yet when she was first given to Christ by God the Father,
who from all eternity made the match, she was looked upon as all
glorious; for in election at first both Christ and we were by God
considered in that glory which he means to bring him and us unto at last,
that being first in God's intention, which is last in execution.
For God at the beginning does look at the end of his works, and at what
he means to make them; and so he then, primitively intending to make us
thus glorious, as we shall be, he brought and presented us to his Son in
that glass of his decrees under that face of glory by which at last he meant
to endow us. He showed us to him as appareled with all those jewels of
grace and glory which we shall wear in heaven. He did this then, even as
he brought Eve unto Adam, whose marriage was in all the type of this; so
that as this was the first idea that God took us up in, and that we
appeared in before him, so also wherein he presented us then to Christ,
and as it were said, such a wife will I give thee; and as such did the second
person marry us, and undertook to bring us to that estate. And that God
ordained us thus to fall into sin and misery was but to illustrate the story
of Christ's love, and thereby to render this our lover and husband the
more glorious in his love to us, and to make this primitive condition
whereunto God meant again to bring us the more eminently illustrious;
and, therefore, we being married unto him, when we were thus glorious

in God's first intention, although in his decrees about the execution of
this, or the bringing us to this glory, we fall into meanness and misery
before we attain to it, yet the marriage still holds.
Christ took us to run the same fortune with us, and that we should do the
like with him; and hence it was, that we being fallen into sin, and so our
flesh become frail and subject to infirmities, that he therefore "took part
of the same," as Hebrews 2:14. And answerably on the other side, he
being now advanced to the glory ordained for him, he can never rest till
he has restored us to that beauty wherein at first we were presented to
him, and till he has purged and "cleansed us, that so he may present us to
himself a glorious church," as you have it, Ephesians 5:26-27, even such
as in God's first intention we were shown to him to become, having that
native and original beauty, and possessing that estate, wherein he looked
upon us when he first took liking to us and married us. This is argued
there from this very relation of his being our husband, Ephesians 5:2526; and therefore, though Christ be now in glory, yet let not that
discourage you, for he has the heart of a husband towards you, being
"betrothed unto you forever in faithfulness and in lovingkindness," as
Hosea 2:19, and the idea of that beauty is so imprinted on his heart,
which from everlasting was ordained you, that he will never cease to
sanctify and to cleanse you till he has restored you to that beauty which
once he took such a liking of.
A second engagement. This love of his unto us is yet further increased by
what he both did and suffered for us here on earth before he went to
heaven. "Having loved his own" so far as to die for them, he will certainly
"love them unto the end," John 13:1, even to eternity. We shall find in all
sorts of relations, both spiritual and natural, that the having done much
for any beloved of us does beget a further care and love towards them;
and the like effect those eminent sufferings of Christ for us have certainly
produced in him. We may see this in parents, for besides that natural
affection planted in mothers towards their children, as they are theirs, the
very pains, hard labour, and travail they were at in bringing them forth,
increases their affections towards them, and that in a greater degree than
fathers bear; and therefore, the eminency of affection is attributed unto
that of the mother towards her child, and put upon this, that it is "the son

of her womb," Isaiah 49:15. And then the performing of that office and
work of nursing them themselves, which yet it is done with much trouble
and disquiet, does in experience yet more endear those their children
unto them, which they so nurse to an apparent difference of bowels and
love, in comparison of that which they put forth to others of their own
children which they nursed not; and, therefore, in the same place of
Isaiah, as the mother's affection to "the son of her womb," so to her
"sucking child" is mentioned as being the highest instance of such love.
And as thus in paternal affection, so also in conjugal, in such mutual loves
in the pursuing of which there have any difficulties or hardships been
encountered; and the more those lovers have suffered the one for the
other, the more is the edge of their desires whetted and their love
increased, and the party for whom they suffered is thereby rendered the
more dear unto them.
And it is thus in these natural relations, so also in spiritual. We may see it
in holy men, as in Moses, who was a mediator for the Jews, as Christ is
for us, Moses therein being but Christ's type and shadow, and therefore I
the rather instance in him. He under God had been the deliverer of the
people of Israel out of Egypt with the hazard of his own life, and had led
them in the wilderness, and given them that good law that was their
wisdom in the sight of all the nations, and by his prayers kept off God's
wrath from them. And who ever, of all those heroes we read of, did so
much for any nation, who yet were continually murmuring at him, and
had like once to have stoned him? And yet what he had done for them did
so mightily engage his heart, and so immovably point and fix it unto their
good, that although God in his wrath against them offered to make of him
alone a greater and mightier nation than they were, yet Moses refused
that offer, the greatest that ever any son of Adam was tempted with, and
still went on to intercede for them, and, among other, used this very
argument to God, even the consideration of what he had already done for
them, as "with what great might and power he had brought them out of
Egypt," thereby to move God to continue his goodness unto them; so
Exodus 32:11, and elsewhere. And this overcame God, as you may read in
the Exodus 32:14. Yea, so set was Moses his heart upon them, that he not
only refused that former offer which God made him, but he made an offer
unto God of himself to sacrifice his portion in life for their good:

"Rather," says he, "blot me out of the book of life," so Exodus 32:32.
And we may observe the like zealous love in holy Paul, towards all those
converts of his whom in his epistles he wrote unto; towards whom that
which so much endeared his affections was the pains, the cost, the travail,
the care, and the sufferings that he had had in bringing them unto Christ.
Thus, towards the Galatians how solicitous was he! How afraid to lose his
labour on them! "I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour
in vain:" so he expresses himself, Galatians 4:11 and Galatians 4:19, he
utters himself yet more deeply, "My little children (says he), of whom I
again travail in birth, until Christ be formed in you." He professes himself
content to be in travail again for them, rather than lose that about which
he had been in travail for them once before.
Now from both these examples, whereof the one was Christ's type, and
the other the very copy and pattern of Christ's heart, we may raise up our
hearts to the persuasion of that love and affection which must necessarily
be in the heart of Christ, from that which he has done and suffered for us.
First, for Moses; did Moses ever do that for that people which Christ has
done and suffered for you? He acknowledged that he had "not borne that
people in his womb;" but Christ bore us all, and we were the "travail of
his soul," and for us he endured the birth-throes of death (as Peter calls
them in Acts 2:24). And then for Paul, "Was Paul crucified for you?" (says
Paul likewise of himself). But Christ was, and he speaks it the more to
enhance the love of Christ. Or if Paul had been crucified, would or could it
have profited us? No. If therefore Paul was contented to have been in
travail again for the Galatians, when he feared their falling away, then
how does Christ's heart work much more toward sinners! He having put
in so infinite a stock of sufferings for us already, which he is loath to lose,
and has so much love to us besides, that if we could suppose that
otherwise we could not be saved, he could be content to be in travail
again, and to suffer for us afresh. But he needed to do this but once, as
the apostle to the Hebrews speaks, so perfect was his priesthood. Be
assured then, that his love was not spent or worn out at his death, but
increased by it. His love it was that caused him to die, and to "lay down
his life for his sheep" John 10:15; and "greater love than this hath no
man," John 15:13, said himself before he did it. But now, having died, this

must necessarily cause him from his soul to cleave the more unto them.
A cause or a person that a man has suffered much for, according to the
proportion of his sufferings, is one's love and zeal thereunto; for these do
lay a strong engagement upon a man, because otherwise he loses the
thanks and the honour of all that is already done and passed by him.
"Have you suffered so many things in vain?" says the apostle to the
Galatians 3:4, where he makes a motive and an incitement of it, that
seeing they had endured so much for Christ, and the profession of him,
they would not now lose all for want of doing a little more. And does not
the same disposition remain in Christ? Especially seeing the hard work is
over and dispatched which he was to do on earth; and that which now
remains for him to do in heaven is far more sweet and full of glory, and as
the "reaping in joy," of what he had here "sown in tears." If his love was
so great, as to hold out the enduring so much; then now when that brunt
is over, and his love is become a tried love, will it not continue? If when
tried in adversity (and that is the surest and strongest love), and the
greatest adversity that ever was; if it then held, will it not still do so in his
prosperity much more? Did his heart stick to us and by us in the greatest
temptation that ever was; and will his glorious and prosperous estate take
it off, or abate his love unto us? Certainly not! "Jesus the same today,
yesterday, and forever," Hebrews 13:8. When he was in the midst of his
pains, one for whom he was then a-suffering, said unto him, "Lord,
remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom;" and could Christ
mind him then? As you know he did, telling him, "This day shalt thou be
with me in paradise." Luke 23:42-43. Then surely when Christ came to
paradise he would do it much more; and remember him too, by the surest
token that ever was, and which he can never forget, namely, the pains
which he was then enduring for him. He remembers both them and us
still, as the prophet speaks of God. And if he would have us "remember
his death till he comes," 1 Corinthians 11:24-26, so to cause our hearts to
love him, then certainly himself does it in heaven much more. No
question but he remembers us, as he promised to do that good thief, now
he is in his kingdom. And so much for this second engagement.
A third engagement is the engagement of an office which still lies upon
him, and requires of him all mercifulness and graciousness towards

sinners that do come unto him. And therefore while he continues, in that
place, and invested with that office, as he forever does, his heart must
necessarily continue full of tenderness and bowels. Now that office is the
office of his priesthood, which this text mentions as the foundation of our
encouragement to "come boldly to the throne of grace, for grace and
mercy…seeing we have a great high priest entered into the heavens"
Hebrews 4:15-16.
Two things I am to show to make up this demonstration.
First, that this office of high priesthood is an office erected wholly for the
showing of grace and mercy.
And secondly, that this office does therefore lay upon Christ a duty to be
in all his dispensations full of grace and mercy, and therefore his heart
remains most certainly suited and framed thereunto.
For the first, the office of high priesthood is altogether an office of grace.
And I may call it the pardon-office, set up and erected by God in heaven;
and Christ he is appointed the lord and master of it. And as his kingly
office is an office of power and dominion, and his prophetical office an
office of knowledge and wisdom, so his priestly office is an office of grace
and mercy. The high priest's office did properly deal in nothing else. If
there had not been a mercy-seat in the holy of holies, the high priest had
not at all been appointed to have gone into it. It was mercy, and
reconciliation, and atonement for sinners that he was to treat about, and
so to officiate for at the mercy-seat. He had had otherwise no work, nor
anything to do when he should come into the most holy place.
Now this was but a typical allusion unto this office of Christ's in heaven.
And therefore the apostle (in the text), when he speaks of this our high
priest's being entered into heaven, he makes mention of a throne of grace,
and this in answer to that in the type both of the high priest of old, and of
the mercy-seat in the holy of holies. And further to confirm this, the
apostle goes on to open that very type, and to apply it unto Christ, unto
this very purpose which we have now in hand. And this in the very next
words to my text, Hebrews 5:1-3, in which he gives a full description of a
high priest, and all the properties and essential requirements that were to

be in him, together with the eminent and principal end that that office
was ordained for. Now the great and essential qualifications there
specified, that were to be in a high priest, are mercy and grace, and the
ends for which he is there said to be ordained are works of mercy and
grace. And besides what the words in their single standing do hold forth
to this purpose, observe that they come in to back and confirm that
exhortation in the text, wherein he had set forth Christ as a "high priest
touched with the feeling of infirmities." And that therefore we should
"come with boldness for grace and mercy…for every high priest (says he)
taken from among men, is ordained for men in things pertaining to God,
that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin" Hebrews 5:1 (One who
can have compassion.) So that these words are a confirmation of what he
had before said, and do set out Christ the substance, in his grace and
mercifulness, under Aaron and his sons the shadows; and all this for the
comfort of believers.
Now for the ends for which those high priests were appointed, they speak
all nothing but grace and mercy unto sinners; it is said, he was one
"ordained for men, to offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins." There is
both the finis cujus, the end for whom, and the finis cui, the end for
which, he was ordained.
(1.) For whom. He was ordained for men that is, for men's cause, and for
their good. Had it not been for the salvation of men, God had never made
Christ a priest. So that he is wholly to employ all his interest and power
for them for whose cause he was ordained a priest, and that in all things
that are between God and them. He is to transact, all things that are to be
done by us towards God, or for us with God, he is to take up all our
quarrels with God, and to mediate a reconciliation between us and him.
He is to procure us all favour from God, and to do all that which God
would have done for our salvation. And that he might do this willingly,
kindly, and naturally for us, as every high priest was "taken from among
men," so was Christ, that he might be a priest of our own kind, and so be
more kind unto us, than the nature of an angel could have been. And how
much this conduces to his being a merciful high priest, I shall show
shortly.
(2.) The end for which every high priest was ordained, shows this: he was

to "offer gifts and sacrifices for sins:" sacrifices for sins, to pacify God's
wrath against sin, and gifts to procure his favour. You know the apostle,
in the foregoing words, had mentioned grace and mercy, and encouraged
us to come with boldness unto this high priest for both; and answerably
to encourage us the more, he says, the high priest by his office was to
offer for both: gifts for to procure all grace, and sacrifices to procure all
mercy for us, in respect of our sins. Thus you see the ends which he is
ordained for all matter of grace and mercy, and so of encouragement unto
men for the obtaining of both, Hebrews 5:1.
(3.) The qualification that was required in a high priest was, that he
should be "one that could have compassion," and this is set forth in
Hebrews 5:2. He that was high priest was not chosen into that office for
his deep wisdom, great power, or exact holiness; but for the mercy and
compassion that was in him. That is it which is here made the special,
and therefore the only mentioned, property in a high priest as such; and
the special essential qualification that was inwardly and internally to
constitute him and fit him for that office, as God's appointment did
outwardly and externally, as Hebrews 5:4 has it. And the word
δυνάμενος, "that can" or "is able," imports an inward faculty, a spirit, a
disposition, a heart that knows how to be compassionate. And it is the
same word that the apostle had before used to express Christ's heart by,
even in the words of the text, δυνάμενον συμπαθῆσαι, that is, "who can
be touched with the feeling of our infirmities." And he had also used it of
him afore that, in the point of mercy in Hebrews 2:18, δύναται, "he is
able" to succor, which is not meant of any external power (which we
usually call ability), but of an internal touch in his will; he has a heart able
to forgive, and to afford help.
Now, therefore, if this be so essential a property to a high priest as such,
then it is in Christ most eminently. And as Christ had not been fit to have
been God's king, if he had not had all power and strength in him, which is
essential to constitute him a king, so not to have been God's high priest, if
he had not had such an heart for mercifulness; yea, and no longer to have
been a priest than he should continue to have such a heart. Even as that
which internally qualifies a minister for the ministry is his gifts, which if
he loses, he is no longer to be in that office; or as reason makes a man a

man, which if he loses he becomes a beast; thus no longer should Christ
continue to be a priest than he hath a heart that "can have compassion,"
as this second verse has it. And the word which we translate "to have
compassion," is exceedingly emphasized, and the force of it observable; it
is in the original μετριοπαθεῖν, and signifies "to have compassion
according to every one's measure and proportion." He had said of Christ
in the words of my text, that he was "touched with the feeling of our
infirmities," or that "he had a suffering with us in all our evils;" and this
word also here used imports a suffering.
But then, some greatly distressed souls might question thus: Though he
pities me, and is affected, yet my misery and sins being great, will he take
them in to the full, lay them to heart, to pity me according to the
greatness of them? To meet with this thought therefore, and to prevent
even this objection about Christ's pity, the apostle sets him out by what
was the duty of the high priest, who was his shadow; that he is one that
"can have compassion according to the measure of every one's distress;"
and one that considers every circumstance in it, and will accordingly
afford his pity and help, and if it be great, he has a great fellow-feeling of
it, for he is a great high priest. Your misery can never exceed his mercy.
The word here used comes from μετρὸν, a measure, and παθεῖν, to suffer.
And that it is the apostle's scope to hold this forth in this word, is evident
by what follows, for he on purpose makes mention of those several
degrees, proportions, and ranks of sinners under the old law, who were
capable of mercy and compassion, "who can have compassion" (says he)
"on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way." In the old law you
may read of several degrees and kinds of sinners, for which God
appointed or measured out differing and proportional sacrifices,
Leviticus 4:2, 5 and another for sins against knowledge, or such as were
wittingly committed, Leviticus 6:2-3, compared with Leviticus 6:6.
Now when any sinner came to the high priest to make atonement for him,
the priest was wise to consider the kind and proportion of his sin; as
whether it were a sin of mere ignorance, or whether it was against
knowledge; and accordingly he was to proportion a sacrifice, and to
mediate for him. And so he did, "pity him according to measure," or
according to reason or discretion, as in the margin it is varied. And

therefore the apostle here mentions both the ignorant, those that sin out
of mere ignorance, and them that are gone out of the way, namely, by
willful and witting iniquity. And so by this property that was to be in the
high priest, does he here set forth Christ. As the measure of any man's
need and distress is from sin and misery, accordingly is he affected
towards him. And as we have sins of several sizes, accordingly has he
mercies, and puts forth a mediation proportional; whether they be
ignorances, or sins of daily incursion, or else sins more gross and
presumptuous. And therefore let neither of them discourage any from
coming unto Christ for grace and mercy.
So that (for the closure of this) here is both the qualification disposing
him for this office, merciful compassionateness; and here are the ends of
this office, even to deal mercifully with all sorts of sinners, according to
the proportion and measure of their sins and miseries. From each of
which do arise these corollaries, which make up the demonstration in
hand, as the conclusion: 1. That he is no longer fit for this place, unless he
continues to be of a gracious disposition, and one that can have
compassion. 2. That he can no longer be faithful in the discharge of this
office, according to the ends for which it was appointed, unless he shows
all grace and mercy unto them that come unto his throne of grace for it.
And that is the second thing which I at first propounded: that this office
did lay a duty upon him to have compassion; and it necessarily follows
from the former. And answerably to confirm this, we have both these two
brought to our hands in one place together, and which is a parallel place
to this last interpreted. It is Hebrews 2:17, "That he might be a merciful
and a faithful high priest." He is at once here said to be both merciful and
faithful; and both are attributed to him, in respect of this high priest's
office, "faithful high priest;" and that, as it is to be executed in heaven,
after the days of his flesh ended. For the apostle giving the reason of it,
and showing what it is that fits him to be such a high priest, adds
Hebrews 2:18, "in that himself hathsuffered;" so that it relates to the time
after his sufferings ended. Now in that he is said to be merciful, this
relates to that internal disposition of his heart, before spoken of,
qualifying him for this office; and in that he is said to be faithful, that
respects his execution of it; he is faithful in the discharge of the duty

which that place lays on him.
So then this goes further than the former, for it shows, that to exercise
mercy is the duty of his place, and that if he will be faithful, he must be
merciful. For faithfulness in any office, imports an exact performance of
something appointed by him, who designs one to that office, and that as a
duty; and that this is a true description of faithfulness, and also that this
faithfulness so described is in Christ, we have at once implied, in that
which immediately follows in the beginning of Hebrews 3:2, "Who was"
(says the apostle, going on to speak of Christ) "faithful to him that
appointed him, as Moses also was faithful in all his house;" we have the
same thing as expressly spoken in that fore-quoted place, Hebrews 5, in
the next words to those we even now opened, Hebrews 5:3, "And by
reason hereof he ought to offer for sins." He speaks it of Christ's type, the
high priest (as the former also he had done), but thereby to show that it is
Christ's duty also to mediate for all that come to him, "He ought to do it."
Now then, to enforce this consideration for the help of our faith herein: If
this office does by God's appointment thus bind him to it, and if it be the
duty of his place, then certainly he will perform it most exactly, for else he
does not do his duty. And our comfort may be that his faithfulness lies in
being merciful; therefore, you see, they are both here joined together.
Everyone is to do the proper duty of his place, and exactly to see to that.
And therefore the apostle, Romans 12 exhorting to the discharge of the
duties of each office in the church, Romans 12:7, he says, "Let him that
hath a ministry," committed to him, "wait on his ministry;" and, among
others, if his place of ministration be to "shew mercy," as Romans 12:8
(which was an office in the church, upon which lay the care of the poor
and sick) he is to "do it with cheerfulness." And so says Christ of himself,
Isaiah 61:1-2, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, to bind up the
brokenhearted, to open the prison doors to them that are bound," to visit
and relieve them, and "to preach good tidings to the meek." Such kind of
souls are they that he has the charge of. He is the great shepherd and
bishop of souls, 1 Peter 2:25, and the sick, and the broken, they are his
sheep, his charge, his diocese, as Ezekiel 34:16 has it. And to tend such as
these, he looks forever upon it as his duty, as his own expression upon the
like occasion imports, in John 10:16, "Other sheep I have" (says Christ),
"them I must bring." Observe how he puts an I must upon it; looking at it

as his duty, strictly laid upon him by his place of being a shepherd. And
the proper duty of his place being to show mercy, he does it with
cheerfulness, as the apostle speaks. For mercy makes one do what they do
with cheerfulness. And Christ, as he is the bishop, so the , the deacon also
(for he bears all offices to his church), as of the circumcision, so of the
uncircumcision also; so he is called, in Romans 15:8. And these offices of
high priest, shepherd, bishop, he has still in heaven; for"he continues a
priest forever," Hebrews 7:24.
Now, therefore, to conclude this head: Never fear that Christ's great
advancement in heaven should in any way alter his disposition, for this
his very advancement engages him the more. For although he is "entered
into the heavens," yet consider further that it is here added, to be a high
priest there; and so long; fear not, for his place itself will call for mercy
from him unto them that treat with him about it. And although in the
heavens he is "advanced far above all principalities and powers," yet still
his high priesthood goes with him, and accompanies him; for "such an
high priest became us, as was higher than the heavens," Hebrews 7:26.
And further, though he sits at God's right hand, and on his Father's
throne, yet that throne it is a "throne of grace," as the text has it, upon
which he sits. And as the mercy-seat in the type was the farthest and
highest thing in the holy of holies, so the throne of grace (which is an
infinite encouragement unto us) is the highest seat in heaven. So that if
Christ will have and keep the greatest place in heaven, the highest
preferment that heaven itself can bestow upon him, it engages him unto
grace and mercy. The highest honour there has this attribute of grace
annexed to it in its very title, "A throne of grace;" and as Solomon says, "A
king's throne is established by righteousness," Proverbs 25:5, it continues
firm by it, so is Christ's throne by grace. Grace was both the first founder
of his throne, or his raiser to it, and also it is the establisher of it.
First, it is the founder of it; for the reason why God did set him up in that
place was, because he had more grace and mercy in his heart than all the
creatures had, or could be capable of. All favorites are usually raised for
something that is eminent in them, either beauty, pleasantness of wit,
state policy, or the like. Now if you ask what moved God to advance
Christ to this high throne, it was his grace. So Psalm 45:2, "Grace is

poured into thy lips," and so dwells much more in his heart; "therefore
God hath blessed thee," so it follows, namely, with all those glories in
heaven, which are God's blessings to his Son.
And then, secondly, grace is the upholder of his throne; so Psalm 45:4,
"In thy majesty…prosper thou," as well "because of meekness" as of
"righteousness," and also because of "truth;" that is the word of truth,
"the gospel of our salvation," as Paul exegetically expounds it, Ephesians
1:13. These are the pillars and supporters of his throne and majesty. And
there are two of them, you see, that are of grace (meekness, and the
gospel of our salvation), unto one of justice, or righteousness, and yet that
one is for us too. And these establish Christ's throne. So it follows in
Psalm 45:6, "Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever," and you know who
applies this unto Christ, Hebrews 1:8. Fear not then, when as meekness
supports his majesty, and grace his throne, and when as he holds his
place by showing these. Thus, much from that office that is laid upon
Christ as he is a priest.
A fourth engagement, which added to the former may mightily help our
faith in this is his own interest, both in that our salvation is the purchase
of his blood, and also that his own joy, comfort, happiness, and glory are
increased and enlarged by his showing grace and mercy, in pardoning,
relieving, and comforting his members here on earth, under all their
infirmities. So that, besides the obligation of an office undertaken by him
for us, there is the addition of a mighty interest of his own, coincident
therewith, to fix his heart unto faithfulness for us, in all that does concern
us. We see that advocates and attorneys who plead for others, although
that they have no share in the estate for which they plead, no title to, or
interest therein, yet when they have undertaken a client's cause (if
honest), how diligent will they be to promote and carry it for that their
client, simply because it is their office, and the duty of their place; and yet
they have but a very small fee given them, in comparison to that estate
which often they follow suit about. How much more would their diligence
be whetted, if the lands and estates they sue for were their own, or a
purchase of theirs for their wives' jointure, or children's portions!
Now such is the pardoning of our sins, the salvation of our souls, and the
conforming of our hearts unto Christ; these are the purchase of Christ's

blood, and while he is exercised in promoting these, he does good to his
own child and spouse, which is in effect a doing good unto himself. Yes,
to do these, brings in to himself more comfort and glory than it procures
to them. And therefore the apostle, in the beginning of the following
chapter (namely, Hebrews 3), says, that Christ is engaged to faithfulness
in the execution of his office, not as a mere servant only, who is trusted by
his master, but as an owner, who has an interest of possession in the
things committed to his care, and a revenue from these. So Hebrews 3:5,
"Moses verily" (says he) "was faithful as a servant in God's house, but
Christ as a Son over his own house," that is, as an heir of all, "whose
house (or family) are we," says the apostle, Hebrews 3:6. If a physician
for his fee will be faithful, although he be a stranger, much more will he
be so if he is father to the patient, so as his own life and comfort are
bound up in that of the child's, or when much of his estate and comings in
are from the life of the party unto whom he ministers physic. In such a
case they shall be sure to want for no care and cost, and to lack no
cordials that will comfort them, lack no means that will cure them and
keep them healthful, and lack no fit diet that may nourish and strengthen
them as the care of that prince of the eunuchs, in the first of Daniel was to
have those children committed to his charge, to eat and drink of the best,
because that on their looks and good liking his place depended. Now so
God has ordered it, even for an everlasting obligation of Christ's heart
unto us, that his giving grace, mercy, and comfort to us, is one great part
of his glory, and on the revenue of his happiness in heaven, and of his
inheritance there.
First, to explain how this may be, consider, that the human nature of
Christ in heaven has a double capacity of glory, happiness and delight;
one on that mere fellowship and communion with his Father and the
other persons, through his personal union with the Godhead. Which joy
of his in this fellowship, Christ himself speaks of in Psalm 16:11, as to be
enjoyed by him, "In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand
are pleasures for evermore." And this is a constant and settled fullness of
pleasure, such as admits not any addition or diminution, but is always
one and the same, and absolute and entire in itself; and of itself alone
sufficient for the Son of God, and heir of all things to live upon, though he
should have had no other comings in of joy and delight from any

creature. And this is his natural inheritance.
But God has bestowed upon him another capacity of glory, and a revenue
of pleasure to come in another way, and answerably another fullness,
namely, from his church and spouse, which is his body. Thus Ephesians 1,
when the apostle had spoken the highest things of Christ's personal
advancement in heaven that could be uttered, as of his "sitting down at
God's right hand, far above all principalities and powers," Ephesians
1:20-21. Yet, Ephesians 1:22, he adds this unto all, "and gave him to be a
head to the church, which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in
all." So that although he of himself personally be so full, the fullness of
the Godhead dwelling in him, that he overflows to the filling all things;
yet he is pleased to account—and it is so in the reality—his church, and
the salvation of it, to be another fullness unto him, super-added unto the
former. As Son of God he is complete, and that of himself; but as a head,
he yet has another additional fullness of joy from the good and happiness
of his members. And as all pleasure is the companion, and the result of
action, so this arises unto him, from his exercising acts of grace, and from
his continual doing good unto, and for those his members; or as the
apostle expresses it, from his filling them with all mercy, grace, comfort,
and felicity, himself becoming yet more full, by filling them; and this is
his inheritance also, as that other was.
So as a double inheritance Christ has to live upon: one personal, and due
unto him, as he is the Son of God, the first moment of his incarnation,
before he had wrought any one piece of work towards our salvation;
another acquired, purchased, and merited by his having performed that
great service and obedience; and certainly, besides the glory of his
person, there is the glory of his office of mediator, and of headship to his
church. And though he is never so full of himself, yet he despises not this
part of his revenue that comes in from below. Thus much for explication.
Now, secondly for the confirmation and making up the demonstration in
hand. This super-added glory and happiness of Christ is enlarged and
increased still, as his members come to have the purchase of his death
more and more laid forth upon them; so as when their sins are pardoned,
their hearts more sanctified, and their spirits comforted, then comes he to
see the fruit of his labour, and is comforted thereby, for he is the more

glorified by it, yes, he is much more pleased and rejoiced in this than
themselves can be. And this must necessarily keep up in his heart his care
and love unto his children here below, to water and refresh them every
moment (as Isaiah 27:3). For in thus putting forth acts of grace and
favour, and in doing good unto them, he does but good unto himself,
which is the surest engagement in the world. And therefore the apostle
exhorts men to love their wives upon this ground, that in so doing they
love themselves: "So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies:
he that loveth his wife loveth himself," Ephesians 5:28, so strict and near
is that relation. Now, the same holds true of Christ in his loving his
church. And therefore in the same place the love of Christ unto his church
is held forth as the pattern and exemplar of ours; so Ephesians 5:25,
"Even as Christ also loved the church." And so it may well be argued, by
comparing the one speech with the other, that Christ in loving his church
does but love himself; and then the more love and grace he shows unto
the members of his body, the more he shows love unto himself. And
accordingly it is further added there, Ephesians 5:27, that he daily
"washes and cleanses his church," that is, both from the guilt and power
of sin, "that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having
spot or wrinkle." Observe, it is to himself. So that all that he does for his
members is for himself, as truly, yes more fully, than for them; and his
share of glory out of theirs is greater than theirs, by how much the glory
of the cause is greater than that of the effect. And thus indeed the
Scripture speaks of it, as while it calls the saints the "glory of Christ," in 2
Corinthians 8:23. And Christ, in John 17:13, 22-23, says that he is
"glorified in them." And Psalm 45, where Christ is set forth as Solomon in
all his royalty and majesty; yet, Psalm 45:11, he is said "greatly to desire
or delight in the beauty" of his queen, that is, the graces of the saints; and
that not with an ordinary delight, but he "greatly desires;" his desire is
increased as her beauty is. For that is there brought in as a motive unto
her to be more holy and conformed unto him, "to incline her ear, and
forsake her father's house," Psalm 45:10. "So shall the king greatly desire
thy beauty." Christ has a beauty that pleases him as well as we have,
though of another kind; and therefore ceases not till he has got out every
spot and wrinkle out of his spouse's face, as we heard the apostle speak
even now, "so to present her glorious unto himself," that is, delightful and
pleasing in his eye.

And suitably unto this, to confirm us yet more in it, Christ in that sermon
which was his solemn farewell before his going to heaven, assures his
disciples that his heart would be so far from being weaned from them,
that his joy would still be in them, to see them prosper and bring forth
fruit in John 15:9-11, where his scope is to assure them of the continuance
of his love unto them when he should be gone; so John 15:9-10, "As my
Father hath loved me, so have I loved you; continue in my love." As if he
had said, Fear not you my love, nor the continuance of it in my absence;
but look you to do your duty. And to give them assurance of this, he
further tells them, that even when he is in heaven, in the greatest fullness
of pleasure at God's right hand, yet even then his joy will be in them, and
in their well doing; so John 15:11, "These things have I spoken unto you,
that my joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be full." He speaks
just like a father that is taking his leave of his children, and comforting
them at his departure, and giving them good counsel to take good courses
when he is gone from them, to keep his commandments, and to love one
another; so John 15:10, 12, and backs it with this motive, "so shall my joy
remain in you." It is as fathers used to speak, and it will be for your good
too, your joy will be also full.
To open which words a little, the word remain, used concerning their
abiding in his love, and his joy abiding in them, is used in reference to the
continuing of both these towards them in heaven. And when Christ says,
"that my joy may remain in you," it is as if he had said, that I may even in
heaven have cause to rejoice in you when I shall hear and know of you,
that you agree and are loving each to other, and keep my
commandments. The joy which he there calls his joy, "my joy," is not to
be understood objectivè, of their joy in him, as the object of it; but
subjectivè, of the joy that should be in himself, and which he should have
in them. So Augustine long since interpreted it. Quidnam, says he, est
illud gaudium Christi in nobis, nisi quod ille dignatur gaudere de nobis?
What is Christ's joy in us, but that which he vouchsafes to have of and for
us? And it is evident by this, that otherwise, if it were their joy which he
meant in that first sentence, then that other that follows, "and your joy
shall be full," were a tautology. He speaks therefore of his joy and theirs,
as of two distinct things; and both together were the greatest motives that
could be given to encourage and quicken his disciples in obedience. Now,

take an estimate of Christ's heart herein, from those two holy apostles
Paul and John, who were smaller resemblances of this in Christ. What,
next to immediate communion with Christ himself, was the greatest joy
they had to live upon in this world, but only the fruit of their ministry,
appearing in the graces both of the lives and hearts of such as they had
begotten unto Christ?
See how Paul utters himself, 1 Thessalonians 2:19, "What is our hope,"
says he, "or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Ye are our glory and our joy," 1
Thessalonians 2:20. And in the 3 John 1:3, John says the like, that he
greatly rejoiced of that good testimony he had heard of Gaius; for says he,
"I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in the truth," 3
John 1:4. Now what were Paul and John but instruments by whom they
believed and were begotten? and not on whom. Neither of these were
crucified for them; nor were these children of theirs the travail of their
souls. How much more then unto Christ, whose interest in us and our
welfare is so infinitely much greater, must his members be his joy and his
crown? And to see them to come in to him for grace and mercy, and to
walk in truth, rejoices him much more; for he thereby sees of the travail
of his soul, and so is satisfied. Certainly what Solomon says of parents,
Proverbs 10:1, that "a wise son maketh a glad father," is much more true
of Christ. Holiness, and fruitfulness, and comfortableness in our spirits
while we are here below, do make glad the heart of Christ, our
"everlasting Father." Himself has said it, I beseech you believe him, and
carry yourselves accordingly. And if part of his joy arise from hence, that
we thrive and do well, then doubt not of the continuance of his affections;
for love unto himself will continue them towards us, and readiness to
embrace and receive them when they come for grace and mercy.
There is a fifth engagement, which his having our very nature, which he
still wears in heaven, and which the end or intention which God had
ordained Christ's assuming it, does put upon him forever. For one great
end and project of that personal union of our nature unto the Godhead in
the second Person forever was that he might be a merciful high priest. So
that as his office lays it as a duty upon him, so his becoming a man
qualifies him for that office and the performance of it, and so may afford
a further demonstration of the point in hand. This we find both to have

been an essential requirement in our high priest, to qualify him the better
for mercy and bowels; and also one of those great ends which God had in
the assumption of our nature.
First, an essential requirement, on purpose to make him the more
merciful. So, Hebrews 5:1, the place even now insisted on, when yet this
primary qualification I then passed over, and reserved unto this mention,
it is said, "Every high priest taken from among men is ordained for men,"
and that to this end, "that so he might be one that can have compassion,"
namely with a pity that is natural and kindly, such as a man bears to one
of his own kind. For otherwise the angels would have made higher and
greater high priests than one of our nature; but then they would not have
pitied men, as men do their brethren, of the same kind and nature with
them.
And secondly, this was also God's end and intention in ordaining Christ's
assumption of our nature, which that other place before cited, namely
Hebrews 2:16-17 holds forth, "Verily he took not on him the nature of
angels, but the seed of Abraham," that is a human nature and that made
of the same stuff that ours is of, and "it behooved him to be made like us
in all things, that he might be a merciful high priest," "to the end he might
become," or "be made merciful."
But was not the Son of God as merciful (may some say) without the
taking of our nature, as afterwards, when he had assumed it? Or is his
mercy thereby made larger than of itself it should have been, had he not
took the human nature on him?
I answer, Yes. He is as merciful, but yet:
[1.] Hereby is held forth an evident demonstration (and the greatest one
that could have been given unto men) of the everlasting continuance of
God's mercies unto men, by this, that God is for everlasting become a
man; and so we thereby assured that he will be merciful unto men, who
are of his own nature, and that forever. For as his union with our nature
is for everlasting, so thereby is sealed up to us the continuation of these
his mercies, to be for everlasting; so that he can and will no more cease to
be merciful unto men, than himself can now cease to be a man; which can

never be. And this was the end of that assumption.
[2.] But, secondly, that was not all. His taking our nature not only adds
unto our faith, but in some way or other adds even to his being merciful.
Therefore it is said, "that he might be made merciful." That is, merciful in
such a way as otherwise God of himself had never been; namely, even as a
man. So this union of both natures, God and man, was projected by God
to make up the rarest compound of grace and mercy in the result of it that
ever could have been, and thereby was fully fitted and accommodated to
the healing and saving of our souls. The greatest of that mercy that was in
God, that contributes the stock and treasury of those mercies to be
bestowed on us, and unto the greatness of these mercies, nothing is or
could be added by the human nature assumed; but rather Christ's
manhood had all his largeness of mercy from the Deity. So that, had he
not had the mercies of God to enlarge his heart towards us, he could
never have held out to have forever been merciful unto us. But then, this
human nature assumed, that adds a new way of being merciful. It
assimilates all these mercies, and makes them the mercies of a man; it
makes them human mercies, and so gives a naturalness and kindness
unto them to our capacities. So that God does now in as kindly and as
natural a way pity us, who are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, as a
man pities a man, thereby to encourage us to come to him, and to be
familiar with God, and treat with him for grace and mercy, as a man
would do with a man; as knowing that in that man Christ Jesus (whom
we believe upon) God dwells, and his mercies work in and through his
heart in a human way.
I will no longer insist upon this notion now, because I shall have occasion
to touch upon it again, and add unto it under that next third general
head, of showing the way how Christ's heart is affected towards sinners.
Only take we notice what comfort this may afford unto our faith, that
Christ must cease to be a man if he continue not to be merciful; seeing the
very plot of his becoming a man was, that he might be merciful unto us,
and that in a way so familiar to our apprehensions, as our own hearts give
the experience of the like, and which otherwise, as God, he was not
capable of. And add but this bold word to it, though a true one, that he
may now as soon cease to be God as cease to be a man. The human

nature, after he had once assumed it, being raised up to all the natural
rights of the Son of God; whereof one (and that now made natural unto
him) is to continue forever united. And he may as soon cease to be either
as cease to be ready to show mercy. So that not only the scope of Christ's
office, but also the intention of his assuming our nature, lays a further
engagement upon him, and that more strong than any or than all the
former.