PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 14
The Increase of Faith


THE INCREASE OF FAITH

H

OW CAN WE OBTAIN an increase of faith? This is a very
earnest question to many. They say they want to believe, but
cannot. A great deal of nonsense is talked upon this subject. Let
us be strictly practical in our dealing with it. Common sense is as much
needed in religion as anywhere else. “What am I to do in order to believe?”
One who was asked the best way to do a certain simple act, replied that
the best way to do it was to do it at once. We waste time in discussing
methods when the action is simple. The shortest way to believe is to
believe. If the Holy Spirit has made you candid, you will believe as soon as
truth is set before you. You will believe it because it is true. The gospel
command is clear; “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be
saved.” It is idle to evade this by questions and quibbles. The order is
plain; let it be obeyed.
But still, if you have difficulty, take it before God in prayer. Tell the great
Father exactly what it is that puzzles you, and beg Him by His Holy
Spirit to solve the question. If I cannot believe a statement in a book, I am
glad to inquire of the author what he means by it; and if he is a true man
his explanation will satisfy me; much more will the divine explanation of
the hard points of Scripture satisfy the heart of the true seeker. The Lord
is willing to make himself known; go to Him and see if it is not so. Repair
at once to your closet, and cry, “O Holy Spirit, lead me into the truth!
What I know not, teach Thou me.”
Furthermore, if faith seems difficult, it is possible that God the Holy Spirit
will enable you to believe if you hear very frequently and earnestly that
which you are commanded to believe. We believe many things because we
have heard them so often. Do you not find it so in common life, that if you
hear a thing fifty times a day, at last you come to believe it? Some men
have come to believe very unlikely statements by this process, and
therefore I do not wonder that the good Spirit often blesses the method of
often hearing the truth, and uses it to work faith concerning that which is
to be believed. It is written, “Faith cometh by hearing”; therefore hear
often. If I earnestly and attentively hear the gospel, one of these days I

57

shall find myself believing that which I hear, through the blessed operation
of the Spirit of God upon my mind. Only mind you hear the gospel, and
do not distract your mind with either hearing or reading that which is
designed to stagger you.
If that, however, should seem poor advice, I would add next, consider the
testimony of others. The Samaritans believed because of what the woman
told them concerning Jesus. Many of our beliefs arise out of the testimony
of others. I believe that there is such a country as Japan; I never saw it,
and yet I believe that there is such a place because others have been there. I
believe that I shall die; I have never died, but a great many have done so
whom I once knew, and therefore I have a conviction that I shall die also.
The testimony of many convinces me of that fact. Listen, then, to those
who tell you how they were saved, how they were pardoned, how they
were changed in character. If you will look into the matter you will find
that somebody just like yourself has been saved. If you have been a thief,
you will find that a thief rejoiced to wash away his sin in the fountain of
Christ’s blood. If unhappily you have been unchaste, you will find that
men and women who have fallen in that way have been cleansed and
changed. If you are in despair, you have only to get among God’s people,
and inquire a little, and you will discover that some of the saints have been
equally in despaind joys, that He may produce in sinners a better mind
toward their God. Be thankful for the providence which has made you
poor, or sick, or sad; for by all this Jesus works the life of your spirit and
turns you to Himself. The Lord’s mercy often rides to the door of our
hearts on the black horse of affliction. Jesus uses the whole range of our
experience to wean us from earth and woo us to Heaven. Christ is exalted
to the throne of Heaven and earth in order that, by all the processes of His
providence, He may subdue hard hearts unto the gracious softening of
repentance.
Besides, He is at work at this hour by all His whispers in the conscience,
by His inspired Book, by those of us who speak out of that Book, and by
praying friends and earnest hearts. He can send a word to you which shall
strike your rocky heart as with the rod of Moses, and cause streams of
repentance to flow forth. He can bring to your mind some heart-breaking
text out of Holy Scripture which shall conquer you right speedily. He can
mysteriously soften you, and cause not conscience, and against the Holy

58

Spirit, and against the love of Jesus, there is yet space for repentance.
Though you may be as hard as unbelieving at times and they will be
pleased to tell you how the Lord delivered them. As you listen to one after
another of those who have tried the word of God, and proved it, the divine
Spirit will lead you to believe. Have you not heard of the African who was
told by the missionary that water sometimes became so hard that a man
could walk on it? He declared that he believed a great many things the
missionary had told him; but he would never believe that. When he came to
England it came to pass that one frosty day he saw the river frozen, but he
would not venture on it. He knew that it was a deep river, and he felt
certain that he would be drowned if he ventured upon it. He could not be
induced to walk the frozen water till his friend and many others went upon
it; then he was persuaded, and trusted himself where others had safely
ventured. So, while you see others believe in the Lamb of God, and notice
their joy and peace, you will yourself be gently led to believe. The
experience of others is one of God’s ways of helping us to faith. You have
either to believe in Jesus or die; there is no hope for you but in Him.
A better plan is this — note the authority upon which you are commanded
to believe, and this will greatly help you to faith. The authority is not
mine, or you might well reject it. But you are commanded to believe upon
the authority of God himself. He bids you believe in Jesus Christ, and you
must not refuse to obey your Maker. The foreman of a certain works had
often heard the gospel, but he was troubled with the fear that he might not
come to Christ. His good master one day sent a card around to the works
— “Come to my house immediately after work.” The foreman appeared at
his master’s door, and the master came out, and said somewhat roughly,
“What do you want, John, troubling me at this time? Work is done, what
right have you here?” “Sir,” said he, “I had a card from you saying that I
was to come after work.” “Do you mean to say that merely because you
had a card from me you are to come up to my house and call me out after
business hours?” “Well, Sir,” replied the foreman, “I do not understand
you, but it seems to me that, as you sent for me, I had a right to come.”
“Come in, John,” said his master, “I have another message that I want to
read to you,” and he sat down and read these words: “Come unto me, all
ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” “Do you think
after such a message from Christ that you can be wrong in coming to him?”

59

The poor man saw it all at once, and believed in the Lord Jesus unto
eternal life, because he perceived that he had good warrant and authority
for believing. So have you, poor soul! You have good authority for coming
to Christ, for the Lord himself bids you trust Him.
If that does not breed faith in you, think over what it is that you have to
believe — that the Lord Jesus Christ suffered in the place and stead of
sinners, and is able to save all who trust Him. Why, this is the most
blessed fact that ever men were told to believe; the most suitable, the most
comforting, the most divine truth that was ever set before mortal minds. I
advise you to think much upon it, and search out the grace and love which
it contains. Study the four Evangelists, study Paul’s epistles, and then see
if the message is not such a credible one that you are forced to believe it.
If that does not do, then think upon the person of Jesus Christ — think of
who He is, and what He did, and where He is, and what He is. How can
you doubt Him? It is cruelty to distrust the ever truthful Jesus. He has
done nothing to deserve distrust; on the contrary, it should be easy to rely
upon Him. Why crucify Him anew by unbelief? Is not this crowning Him
with thorns again, and spitting upon Him again? What! is He not to be
trusted? What worse insult did the soldiers pour upon Him than this?
They made Him a martyr; but you make Him a liar — this is worse by far.
Do not ask how can I believe? But answer another question — How can
you disbelieve?
If none of these things avail, then there is something wrong about you
altogether, and my last word is, submit yourself to God! Prejudice or pride
is at the bottom of this unbelief. May the Spirit of God take away your
enmity and make you yield. You are a rebel, a proud rebel, and that is why
you do not believe your God. Give up your rebellion; throw down your
weapons; yield at discretion, surrender to your King. I believe that never
did a soul throw up its hands in self-despair, and cry, “Lord, I yield,” but
what faith became easy to it before long. It is because you still have a
quarrel with God, and resolve to have your own will and your own way,
that therefore you cannot believe. “How can ye believe,” said Christ, “that
have honor one of another?” Proud self creates unbelief. Submit, O man.
Yield to your God, and then shall you sweetly believe in your Savior. May

60

the Holy Ghost now work secretly but effectually with you, and bring
you at this very moment to believe in the Lord Jesus! Amen.

61

REGENERATION AND THE
HOLY SPIRIT

Y

E MUST BE BORN AGAIN.” This word of our Lord Jesus has
appeared to flame in the way of many, like the drawn sword of
the cherub at the gate of Paradise. They have despaired, because
this change is beyond their utmost effort. The new birth is from above, and
therefore it is not in the creature’s power. Now, it is far from my mind to
deny, or ever to conceal, a truth in order to create a false comfort. I freely
admit that the new birth is supernatural, and that it cannot be wrought by
the sinner’s own self. It would be a poor help to my reader if I were
wicked enough to try to cheer him by persuading him to reject or forget
what is unquestionably true.
But is it not remarkable that the very chapter in which our Lord makes this
sweeping declaration also contains the most explicit statement as to
salvation by faith? Read the third chapter of John’s Gospel and do not
dwell alone upon its earlier sentences. It is true that the third verse says:
Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except
a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
But, then, the fourteenth and fifteenth verses speak:
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the
Son of man be lifted up: that whosoever believeth in him should not
perish, but have eternal life.
The eighteenth verse repeats the same doctrine in the broadest terms:
He that believeth on him is not condemned: but he that believeth not is
condemned already, because he hath not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God.
It is clear to every reader that these two statements must agree, since they
came from the same lips, and are recorded on the same inspired page. Why
should we make a difficulty where there can be none? If one statement
assures us of the necessity to salvation of a something, which only God

62

can give, and if another assures us that the Lord will save us upon our
believing in Jesus, then we may safely conclude that the Lord will give to
those who believe all that is declared to be necessary to salvation. The
Lord does, in fact, produce the new birth in all who believe in Jesus; and
their believing is the surest evidence that they are born again.
We trust in Jesus for what we cannot do ourselves: if it were in our own
power, what need of looking to Him? It is ours to believe, it is the Lord’s
to create us anew. He will not believe for us, neither are we to do
regenerating work for Him. It is enough for us to obey the gracious
command; it is for the Lord to work the new birth in us. He who could go
so far as to die on the cross for us, can and will give us all things that are
needful for our eternal safety.
“But a saving change of heart is the work of the Holy Spirit.” This also is
most true, and let it be far from us to question it, or to forget it. But the
work of the Holy Spirit is secret and mysterious, and it can only be
perceived by its results. There are mysteries about our natural birth into
which it would be an unhallowed curiosity to pry: still more is this the
case with the sacred operations of the Spirit of God. “The wind bloweth
where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell
whence it cometh, or whither it goeth; so is every one that is born of the
Spirit.” This much, however, we do know — the mysterious work of the
Holy Spirit cannot be a reason for refusing to believe in Jesus to whom
that same Spirit beareth witness.
If a man were bidden to sow a field, he could not excuse his neglect by
saying that it would be useless to sow unless God caused the seed to grow.
He would not be justified in neglecting tillage because the secret energy of
God alone can create a harvest. No one is hindered in the ordinary pursuits
of life by the fact that unless the Lord build the house they labor in vain
that build it. It is certain that no man who believes in Jesus will ever find
that the Holy Spirit refuses to work in him: in fact, his believing is the
proof that the Spirit is already at work in his heart.
God works in providence, but men do not therefore sit still. They could
not move without the divine power giving them life and strength, and yet
they proceed upon their way without question; the power being bestowed
from day to day by Him in whose hand their breath is, and whose are all

63

their ways. So is it in grace. We repent and believe, though we could do
neither if the Lord did not enable us. We forsake sin and trust in Jesus, and
then we perceive that the Lord has wrought in us to will and to do of His
own good pleasure. It is idle to pretend that there is any real difficulty in
the matter.
Some truths which it is hard to explain in words are simple enough in
actual experience. There is no discrepancy between the truth that the
sinner believes, and that his faith is wrought in him by the Holy Spirit.
Only folly can lead men to puzzle themselves about plain matters while
their souls are in danger. No man would refuse to enter a lifeboat because
he did not know the specific gravity of bodies; neither would a starving
man decline to eat till he understood the whole process of nutrition. If you,
my reader, will not believe till you can understand all mysteries, you will
never be saved at all; and if you allow self-invented difficulties to keep you
from accepting pardon through your Lord and Savior, you will perish in a
condemnation which will be richly deserved. Do not commit spiritual
suicide through a passion for discussing metaphysical subtleties.

64

“MY REDEEMER LIVETH”

C

ONTINUALLY have I spoken to the reader concerning Christ
crucified, who is the great hope of the guilty; but it is our wisdom
to remember that our Lord has risen from the dead and lives
eternally.
You are not asked to trust in a dead Jesus, but in One who, though He died
for our sins, has risen again for our justification. You may go to Jesus at
once as to a living and present friend. He is not a mere memory, but a
continually existent Person who will hear your prayers and answer them.
He lives on purpose to carry on the work for which He once laid down His
life. He is interceding for sinners at the right hand of the Father, and for
this reason He is able to save them to the uttermost who come unto God
by Him. Come and try this living Savior, if you have never done so before.
This living Jesus is also raised to an eminence of glory and power. He does
not now sorrow as “a humble man before his foes,” nor labor as “the
carpenter’s son”; but He is exalted far above principalities and power and
every name that is named. The Father has given Him all power in Heaven
and in earth, and he exercises this high endowment in carrying out His
work of grace. Hear what Peter and the other apostles testified concerning
Him before the high priest and the council:
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a
tree. Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins
(Acts 5:30, 31).
The glory which surrounds the ascended Lord should breathe hope into
every believer’s breast. Jesus is no mean person — He is “a Savior and a
great one.” He is the crowned and enthroned Redeemer of men. The
sovereign prerogative of life and death is vested in Him; the Father has put
all men under the mediatorial government of the Son, so that He can
quicken whom He will. He openeth, and no man shutteth. At His word the
soul which is bound by the cords of sin and condemnation can be unloosed

65

in a moment. He stretches out the silver scepter, and whosoever touches it
lives.
It is well for us that as sin lives, and the flesh lives, and the devil lives, so
Jesus lives; and it is also well that whatever might these may have to ruin
us, Jesus has still greater power to save us.
All His exaltation and ability are on our account. “He is exalted to be,” and
exalted “to give.” He is exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, that He may
give all that is needed to accomplish the salvation of all who come under
His rule. Jesus has nothing which He will not use for a sinner’s salvation,
and He is nothing which He will not display in the aboundings of His
grace. He links His princedom with His Savior-ship, as if He would not
have the one without the other; and He sets forth His exaltation as
designed to bring blessings to men, as if this were the flower and crown of
His glory. Could anything be more calculated to raise the hopes of seeking
sinners who are looking Christward?
Jesus endured great humiliation, and therefore there was room for Him to
be exalted. By that humiliation He accomplished and endured all the
Father’s will, and therefore He was rewarded by being raised to glory. He
uses that exaltation on behalf of His people. Let my reader raise his eyes
to these hills of glory, whence his help must come. Let him contemplate
the high glories of the Prince and Savior. Is it not most hopeful for men
that a Man is now on the throne of the universe? Is it not glorious that the
Lord of all is the Savior of sinners? We have a Friend at court; yea, a
Friend on the throne. He will use all His influence for those who entrust
their affairs in His hands. Well does one of our poets sing:
He ever lives to intercede
Before His Father’s face;
Give Him, my soul, Thy cause to plead,
No doubt the Father’s grace.

Come, friend, and commit your cause and your case to those once pierced
hands, which are now glorified with the signet rings of royal power and
honor. No suit ever failed which was left with this great Advocate.

66

REPENTANCE MUST GO WITH
FORGIVENESS

I

T IS CLEAR from the text which we have lately quoted that
repentance is bound up with the forgiveness of sins. In Acts 5:31 we
read that Jesus is “exalted to give repentance and forgiveness of sins.”
These two blessings come from that sacred hand which once was nailed to
the tree, but is now raised to glory. Repentance and forgiveness are riveted
together by the eternal purpose of God. What God hath joined together let
no man put asunder.
Repentance must go with remission, and you will see that it is so if you
think a little upon the matter. It cannot be that pardon of sin should be
given to an impenitent sinner; this were to confirm him in his evil ways,
and to teach him to think little of evil. If the Lord were to say, “You love
sin, and live in it, and you are going on from bad to worse, but, all the
same, I forgive you,” this were to proclaim a horrible license for iniquity.
The foundations of social order would be removed, and moral anarchy
would follow. I cannot tell what innumerable mischiefs would certainly
occur if you could divide repentance and forgiveness, and pass by the sin
while the sinner remained as fond of it as ever. In the very nature of things,
if we believe in the holiness of God, it must be so, that if we continue in
our sin, and will not repent of it, we cannot be forgiven, but must reap the
consequence of our obstinacy. According to the infinite goodness of God,
we are promised that if we will forsake our sins, confessing them, and will,
by faith, accept the grace which is provided in Christ Jesus, God is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
But, so long as God lives, there can be no promise of mercy to those who
continue in their evil ways, and refuse to acknowledge their wrongdoing.
Surely no rebel can expect the King to pardon his treason while he remains
in open revolt. No one can be so foolish as to imagine that the Judge of all
the earth will put away our sins if we refuse to put them away ourselves.
Moreover, it must be so for the completeness of divine mercy. That mercy
which could forgive the sin and yet let the sinner live in it would be scant
and superficial mercy. It would be unequal and deformed mercy, lame

67

upon one of its feet, and withered as to one of its hands. Which, think you,
is the greater privilege, cleansing from the guilt of sin, or deliverance from
the power of sin? I will not attempt to weigh in the scales two mercies so
surpassing. Neither of them could have come to us apart from the precious
blood of Jesus. But it seems to me that to be delivered from the dominion
of sin, to be made holy, to be made like to God, must be reckoned the
greater of the two, if a comparison has to be drawn. To be forgiven is an
immeasurable favor. We make this one of the first notes of our psalm of
praise: “Who forgiveth all thine iniquities.” But if we could be forgiven,
and then could be permitted to love sin, to riot in iniquity, and to wallow
in lust, what would be the use of such a forgiveness? Might it not turn out
to be a poisoned sweet, which would most effectually destroy us? To be
washed, and yet to lie in the mire; to be pronounced clean, and yet to have
the leprosy white on one’s brow, would be the veriest mockery of mercy.
What is it to bring the man out of his sepulcher if you leave him dead?
Why lead him into the light if he is still blind? We thank God, that He who
forgives our iniquities also heals our diseases. He who washes us from the
stains of the past also uplifts us from the foul ways of the present, and
keeps us from failing in the future. We must joyfully accept both
repentance and remission; they cannot be separated. The covenant heritage
is one and indivisible, and must not be parceled out. To divide the work of
grace would be to cut the living child in halves, and those who would
permit this have no interest in it.
I will ask you who are seeking the Lord, whether you would be satisfied
with one of these mercies alone? Would it content you, my reader, if God
would forgive you your sin and then allow you to be as worldly and
wicked as before? Oh, no! The quickened spirit is more afraid of sin itself
than of the penal results of it. The cry of your heart is not, “Who shall
deliver me from punishment?” but, “O wretched man that I am! Who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? Who shall enable me to live above
temptation, and to become holy, even as God is holy?” Since the unity of
repentance with remission agrees with gracious desire, and since it is
necessary for the completeness of salvation, and for holiness’ sake, rest
you sure that it abides.
Repentance and forgiveness are joined together in the experience of all
believers. There never was a person yet who did unfeignedly repent of sin

68

with believing repentance who was not forgiven; and on the other hand,
there never was a person forgiven who had not repented of his sin. I do not
hesitate to say that beneath the copes of Heaven there never was, there is
not, and there never will be, any case of sin being washed away, unless at
the same time the heart was led to repentance and faith in Christ. Hatred of
sin and a sense of pardon come together into the soul, and abide together
while we live.
These two things act and react upon each other: the man who is forgiven,
therefore repents; and the man who repents is also most assuredly
forgiven. Remember first, that forgiveness leads to repentance. As we sing
in Hart’s words:
Law and terrors do but harden,
All the while they work alone;
But a sense of blood-bought pardon
Soon dissolves a heart of stone.

When we are sure that we are forgiven, then we abhor iniquity; and I
suppose that when faith grows into full assurance, so that we are certain
beyond a doubt that the blood of Jesus has washed us whiter than snow, it
is then that repentance reaches to its greatest height. Repentance grows as
faith grows. Do not make any mistake about it; repentance is not a thing of
days and weeks, a temporary penance to be over as fast as possible! No; it
is the grace of a lifetime, like faith itself. God’s little children repent, and
so do the young men and the fathers. Repentance is the inseparable
companion of faith. All the while that we walk by faith and not by sight,
the tear of repentance glitters in the eye of faith. That is not true
repentance which does not come of faith in Jesus, and that is not true faith
in Jesus which is not tinctured with repentance. Faith and repentance, like
Siamese twins, are vitally joined together. In proportion as we believe in
the forgiving love of Christ, in that proportion we repent; and in
proportion as we repent of sin and hate evil, we rejoice in the fullness of
the absolution which Jesus is exalted to bestow. You will never value
pardon unless you feel repentance; and you will never taste the deepest
draught of repentance until you know that you are pardoned. It may seem
a strange thing, but so it is — the bitterness of repentance and the
sweetness of pardon blend in the flavor of every gracious life, and make up
an incomparable happiness.

69

These two covenant gifts are the mutual assurance of each other. If I know
that I repent, I know that I am forgiven. How am I to know that I am
forgiven except I know also that I am turned from my former sinful
course? To be a believer is to be a penitent. Faith and repentance are but
two spokes in the same wheel, two handles of the same plough.
Repentance has been well described as a heart broken for sin, and from sin;
and it may equally well be spoken of as turning and returning. It is a
change of mind of the most thorough and radical sort, and it is attended
with sorrow for the past, and a resolve of amendment in the future.
Repentance is to leave
The sins we loved before;
And show that we in earnest grieve,
By doing so no more.

Now, when that is the case, we may be certain that we are forgiven; for the
Lord never made a heart to be broken for sin and broken from sin, without
pardoning it. If, on the other hand, we are enjoying pardon, through the
blood of Jesus, and are justified by faith, and have peace with God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, we know that our repentance and faith are
of the right sort.
Do not regard your repentance as the cause of your remission, but as the
companion of it. Do not expect to be able to repent until you see the grace
of our Lord Jesus, and His readiness to blot out your sin. Keep these
blessed things in their places, and view them in their relation to each other.
They are the Jachin and Boaz of a saving experience; I mean that they are
comparable to Solomon’s two great pillars which stood in the forefront of
the house of the Lord, and formed a majestic entrance to the holy place.
No man comes to God aright except he passes between the pillars of
repentance and remission. Upon your heart the rainbow of covenant grace
has been displayed in all its beauty when the tear-drops of repentance
have been shone upon by the light of full forgiveness. Repentance of sin
and faith in divine pardon are the warp and woof of the fabric of real
conversion. By these tokens shall you know an Israelite indeed.
To come back to the Scripture upon which we are meditating: both
forgiveness and repentance flow from the same source, and are given by
the same Savior. The Lord Jesus in His glory bestows both upon the same

70

persons. You are neither to find the remission nor the repentance
elsewhere. Jesus has both ready, and He is prepared to bestow them now,
and to bestow them most freely on all who will accept them at His hands.
Let it never be forgotten that Jesus gives all that is needful for our
salvation. It is highly important that all seekers after mercy should
remember this. Faith is as much the gift of God as is the Savior upon
whom that faith relies. Repentance of sin is as truly the work of grace as
the making of an atonement by which sin is blotted out. Salvation, from
first to last, is of grace alone. You will not misunderstand me. It is not the
Holy Spirit who repents. He has never done anything for which He should
repent. If He could repent, it would not meet the case; we must ourselves
repent of our own sin, or we are not saved from its power. It is not the
Lord Jesus Christ who repents. What should He repent of? We ourselves
repent with the full consent of every faculty of our mind. The will, the
affections, the emotions, all work together most heartily in the blessed act
of repentance for sin; and yet at the back of all that is our personal act,
there is a secret holy influence which melts the heart, gives contrition, and
produces a complete change. The Spirit of God enlightens us to see what
sin is, and thus makes it loathsome in our eyes. The Spirit of God also
turns us toward holiness, makes us heartily to appreciate, love, and desire
it, and thus gives us the impetus by which we are led onward from stage to
stage of sanctification. The Spirit of God works in us to will and to do
according to God’s good pleasure. To that good Spirit let us submit
ourselves at once, that He may lead us to Jesus, who will freely give us the
double benediction of repentance and remission, according to the riches of
His grace.
“ BY GRACE ARE YE SAVED.”

71
