PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 14
The Glory of Christ in His Mediatory Office


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 6. The Glory of Christ in His Mediatory Office.

4. He wrought out this obedience against all difficulties and oppositions. For although he was absolutely free from that disorder which
in us has invaded our whole natures, which internally renders all obedience difficult unto us, and perfect obedience impossible; yet as
unto opposition from without, in temptations, sufferings, reproaches, contradictions, he met with more than we all. Hence is that
glorious word, “although he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered,” Heb.5: 8. See our exposition of that
place. But, – 5. The glory of this obedience ariseth principally from the consideration of the person who thus yielded it unto God. This
was no other but the Son of God made man, – God and man in one person. He who was in heaven, above all, Lord of all, at the same
time lived in the world in a condition of no reputation, and a course of the strictest obedience unto the whole law of God. He unto
whom prayer was made, prayed himself night and day. He whom all the angels of heaven and all creatures worshipped, was
continually conversant in all the duties of the worship of God. He who was over the house, diligently observed the meanest office of
the house. He that made all men, in whose hand they are all as clay in the hand of the potter, observed amongst them the strictest
rules of justice, in giving unto every one his due; and of charity, in giving good things that were not so due. This is that which renders
the obedience of Christ in the discharge of his office both mysterious and glorious.
I I . Again, the glory of Christ is proposed unto us in what he suffered in the discharge of the office which he had undertaken. There
belonged, indeed, unto his office, victory, success, and triumph with great glory, Isa. 63: 1-5; but there were sufferings also required of
him antecedently thereunto: “Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?” But such were these sufferings of
Christ, as that in our thoughts about them our minds quickly recoil in a sense of their insufficiency to conceive aright of them. Never
any one launched into this ocean with his meditations, but he quickly found himself unable to fathom the depths of it; nor shall I here
undertake an inquiry into them. I shall only point at this spring of glory, and leave it under a veil.
We might here look on him as under the weight of the wrath of God, and the curse of the law; taking on himself, and on his whole
soul, the utmost of evil that God had ever threatened to sin or sinners. We might look on him in his agony and bloody sweat, in his
strong cries and supplications, when he was sorrowful unto the death, and began to be amazed, in apprehensions of the things that
were coming on him, – of that dreadful trial which he was entering into. We might look upon him conflicting with all the powers of
darkness, the rage and madness of men, suffering in his soul, his body, his name, his reputation, his goods, his life; some of these
sufferings being immediate from God above, others from devils and wicked men, acting according to the determinate counsel of God.
We might look on him praying, weeping, crying out, bleeding, dying, – in all things making his soul an offering for sin; so was he
“taken from prison, and from judgement: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off from the land of the living: for the
transgression,” says God, “of my people was he smitten,” Isa. 53: 8. But these things I shall not insist on in particular, but leave them
under such a veil as may give us a prospect into them, so far as to fill our souls with holy admiration.
Lord, what is man, that thou art thus mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? Who has known thy mind, or who
has been thy counsellor? O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgements,
and his ways past finding out! What shall we say unto these things? That God spared not his only Son, but gave him up unto death,
and all the evils included therein, for such poor, lost sinners as we were; – that for our sakes the eternal Son of God should submit
himself unto all the evils that our natures are obnoxious unto, and that our sins had deserved, that we might be delivered! How
glorious is the Lord Christ on this account, in the eyes of believers! When Adam had sinned, and thereby eternally, according unto the
sanction of the law, ruined himself and all his posterity, he stood ashamed, afraid, trembling, as one ready to perish for ever, under the
displeasure of God. Death was that which he had deserved, and immediate death was that which he looked for. In this state the Lord
Christ in the promise comes unto him, and says, Poor creature! How woeful is thy condition! how deformed is thy appearance! What
is become of the beauty, of the glory of that image of God wherein thou wast created? How hast thou taken on thee the monstrous
shape and image of Satan? And yet thy present misery, thy entrance into dust and darkness, is no way to be compared with what is to
ensue. Eternal distress lies at the door. But yet look up once more, and behold me, that thou mayest have some glimpse of what is in
the designs of infinite wisdom, love, and grace. Come forth from thy vain shelter, thy hiding-place I will put myself into thy condition.
I will undergo and bear that burden of guilt and punishment which would sink thee eternally into the bottom of hell. I will pay that
which I never took; and be made temporally a curse for thee, that thou mayest attain unto eternal blessedness. To the same purpose
he speaks unto convinced sinners, in the invitation he gives them to come unto him.
Thus is the Lord Christ set forth in the Gospel, “evidently crucified” before our eyes, Gal. 3: 1, – namely, in the representation that is
made of his glory, – in the sufferings he underwent for the discharge of the office he had undertaken. Let us, then, behold him as
poor, despised, persecuted, reproached, reviled, hanged on a tree, – in all, labouring under a sense of the wrath of God due unto our
sins. Unto this end are they recorded in the gospel, – read, preached, and presented unto us. But what can we see herein? – what glory
is in these things? Are not these the things which all the world of Jews and gentiles stumbled and took offence at? – those wherein he
was appointed to be a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence? Was it not esteemed a foolish thing, to look for help and deliverance
by the miseries of another? – to look for life by his death? The apostle declares at large that such it was esteemed, 1 Cor. 1. So was it in
the wisdom of the world. But even on the account of these things is he honourable, glorious, and precious in the sight of them that do
believe, 1 Pet. 2: 6, 7. For even herein he was “the power of God, and the wisdom of God,” 1 Cor. 1: 24. And the apostle declares at
large the grounds and reasons of the different thoughts and apprehensions of men concerning the cross and sufferings of Christ, 2 Cor.
4: 3-6.

The Glory of Christ in his Exaltation after the Accomplishment of the Work of
Mediation in this World.
We may, in the next place, behold the glory of Christ, with respect unto his office, in the actings of God towards him which ensued on
his discharge of it in this world, in his own exaltation.
These are the two heads whereunto all the prophecies and predictions concerning Jesus Christ under the Old Testament are referred, –
namely, his sufferings, and the glory that ensued thereon, 1 Peter 1: 11. All the prophets testified beforehand “of the Sufferings of

Christ, and the glory that should follow.” So when he himself opened the Scriptures unto his disciples, he gave them this as the sum of
the doctrine contained in them, “Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory?” Luke 24: 26. The one is
frequently expressed elsewhere, Rom. 14: 9; Phil. 2: 5-9.
So much as we know of Christ, his sufferings, and his glory, so much do we understand of the Scripture, and no more.
These are the two heads of the mediation of Christ and his kingdom, and this is their order which they communicate unto the church,
first sufferings, and then glory: “If we suffer, we shall also reign with him,” 2 Tim. 2: 12. They do but deceive themselves who design
any other method of these things. Some would reign here in this world; and we may say, with the apostle, “Would you did reign, that
we might reign with you.” But the members of the mystical body must be conformed unto the Head. In him sufferings went before
glory; and so they must in them. The order in the kingdom of Satan and the world is contrary hereunto. First the good things of this
life, and then eternal misery, is the method of that kingdom, Luke 16: 25.
These are the two springs of the salvation of the church, – the two anointed ones that stand before the Lord of the whole earth, from
which all the golden oil, whereby the church is dedicated unto God and sanctified, does flow. This glory of Christ in his exaltation,
which followed on his sufferings, is that which we now inquire into. And we shall state our apprehensions of it in the ensuing
observations: – 1. This is peculiarly that glory which the Lord Christ prays that his disciples may be where he is to behold it. It is not
solely so, as it is considered absolutely; but it is that wherein all the other parts of his glory are made manifest. It is the evidence, the
pledge, the means of the manifestation of them all. As unto all the instances of his glory before insisted on, there was a veil drawn over
them whilst he was in this world. Hence the most saw nothing of it, and the best saw it but obscurely. But in this glory that veil is
taken off, whereby the whole glory of his person in itself and in the work of mediation is most illustriously manifested. When we shall
immediately behold this glory, we shall see him as he is. This is that glory whereof the Father made grant unto him before the
foundation of the world, and wherewith he was actually invested upon his ascension.
2. By this glory of Christ I do not understand the essential glory of his divine nature, or his being absolutely in his own person “over
all, God blessed for ever;” but the manifestation of this glory in particular, after it had been veiled in this world under the “form of a
servant,” belongs hereunto. The divine glory of Christ in his person belongs not unto his exaltation; but the manifestation of it does so.
It was not given him by free donation; but the declaration of it unto the church of angels and men after his humiliation was so. He
left it not whilst he was in this world; but the direct evidence and declaration of it he laid aside, until he was “declared to be the Son of
God with power,” by the resurrection from the dead.
When the sun is under a total eclipse, he loseth nothing of his native beauty, light, and glory. He is still the same that he was from the
beginning, – a “great light to rule the day.” To us he appears as a dark, useless meteor; but when he comes by his course to free
himself from the lunar interposition, unto his proper aspect towards us, he manifests again his native light and glory. So was it with
the divine nature of Christ, as we have before declared. He veiled the glory of it by the interposition of the flesh, or the assumption of
our nature to be his own; with this addition, that therein he took on him the “form of a servant,” of a person of mean and low degree.
But this temporary eclipse being past and over, it now shines forth in its infinite lustre and beauty, which belongs unto the present
exaltation of his person. And when those who beheld him here as a poor, sorrowful, persecuted man, dying on the cross, came to see
him in all the infinite, untreated glories of the divine nature, manifesting themselves in his person, it could not but fill their souls with
transcendent joy and admiration. And this is one reason of his prayer for them whilst he was on the earth, that they might be where
he is to behold his glory; for he knew what ineffable satisfaction it would be unto them for evermore.
3. I do not understand absolutely the glorification of the human nature of Christ, – that very soul and body wherein he lived and died,
suffered and rose again, – though that also be included herein. This also were a subject meet for our contemplation, especially as it is
the exemplar of that glory which he will bring all those unto who believe in him. But because at present we look somewhat farther, I
shall observe only one or two things concerning it.
(1.) That very nature itself which he took on him in this world, is exalted into glory. Some under a pretence of great subtlety and
accuracy, do deny that he has either flesh or blood in heaven; that is, as to the substance of them, however you may suppose that they
are changed, purified, glorified. The great foundation of the church and all gospel faith, is, that he was made Flesh, that he did partake
of flesh and blood, even as did the children. That he has forsaken that flesh and blood which he was made in the womb of the blessed
Virgin, – wherein he lived and died, which he offered unto God in sacrifice, and wherein he rose from the dead, – is a Socinian fiction.
What is the true nature of the glorification of the humanity of Christ, neither those who thus surmise, nor we, can perfectly
comprehend. It does not yet appear what we ourselves shall be; much less is it evident unto us what he is, whom we shall be like. But
that he is still in the same human nature wherein he was on the earth, that he has the same rational soul and the same body, is a
fundamental article of the Christian faith.
(2.) This nature of the man Christ Jesus is filled with all the divine graces and perfections whereof a limited, created nature is capable.
It is not deified, it is not made a god; – it does not in heaven coalesce into one nature with the divine by a composition of them, – it
has not any essential property of the Deity communicated unto it, so as subjectively to reside in it; – it is not made omniscient,
omnipresent, omnipotent; but it is exalted in a fulness of all Divine perfection ineffably above the glory of angels and men. It is
incomprehensibly nearer God than they all, – hath communications from God, in glorious light, love, and power, ineffably above
them all; but it is still a creature.
For the substance of this glory of the human nature of Christ, believers shall be made partakers of it; for when we see him as he is, we
shall be like him; but as unto the degrees and measures of it, his glory is above all that we can be made partakers of. “There is one
glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; and one star differeth from another in glory,” as the
apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15: 41. And if there be a difference in glory among the stars themselves as to some degrees of the same glory,
how much more is there between the glory of the sun and that of any star whatever! Such is the difference that is, and will be unto
eternity, between the human nature of Christ and what glorified believers do attain unto. But yet this is not that properly wherein the
glory of Christ in his exaltation, after his humiliation and death, does consist. The things that belong unto it may be reduced unto the
ensuing heads.
1 . It consisteth in the exaltation of the human nature, as subsisting in the divine person, above the whole creation of God in power,

dignity, authority, and rule, with all things that the wisdom of God has appointed to render the glory of it illustrious. I have so largely
insisted on the explication and confirmation of this part of the present glory of Christ, in the exposition of Heb. 1: 2, 3, that I have
nothing more to add thereunto.
2. It does so in the evidence given of the infinite love of God the Father unto him, and his delight in him, with the eternal approbation
of his discharge of the office committed unto him. Hence he is said “to sit at the right hand of God,” or at “the right hand of the
majesty on high.” That the glory and dignity of Christ in his exaltation is singular, the highest that can be given to a creature,
incomprehensible; – that he is, with respect unto the discharge of his office, under the eternal approbation of God; – that, as so
gloriously exalted, he is proclaimed unto the whole creation, – are all contained in this expression.
3. Hereunto is added the full manifestation of his own divine wisdom, love, and grace, in the work of mediation and redemption of the
church. This glory is absolutely singular and peculiar unto him. Neither angels nor men have the least interest in it. Here, we see it
darkly as in a glass; above, it shines forth in its brightness, to the eternal joy of them who behold him.
This is that glory which our Lord Jesus Christ in an especial manner prayed that his disciples might behold. This is that whereof we
ought to endeavour a prospect by faith; – by faith, I say, and not by imagination. Vain and foolish men, having general notions of this
glory of Christ, knowing nothing of the real nature of it, have endeavoured to represent it in pictures and images, with all that lustre
and beauty which the art of painting, with the ornaments of gold and jewels, can give unto them. This is that representation of the
present glory of Christ, which, being made and proposed unto the imagination and carnal affections of superstitious persons, carrieth
such a show of devotion and veneration in the Papal Church. But they err, not knowing the Scripture, nor the eternal glory of the Son
of God.
This is the sole foundation of all our meditations herein. The glory that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the real actual possession of in
heaven can be no otherwise seen or apprehended in this world, but in the light of faith fixing itself on divine revelation. To behold this
glory of Christ is not an act of fancy or imagination. It does not consist in framing unto ourselves the shape of a glorious person in
heaven. But the steady exercise of faith on the revelation and description made of this glory of Christ in the Scripture, is the ground,
rule, and measure, of all divine meditations thereon.
Hereon our duty it is to call ourselves to an account as unto our endeavour after a gracious view of this glory of Christ: – When did
we steadily behold it? when had we such a view of it as wherein our souls have been satisfied and refreshed? It is declared and
represented unto us as one of the chief props of our faith, as a help of our joy, as an object of our hope, as a ground of our consolation,
– as our greatest encouragement unto obedience and suffering. Are our minds every day conversant with thoughts hereof? or do we
think ourselves not much concerned herein? Do we look upon it as that which is without us and above us, – that which we shall have
time enough to consider when we come to heaven? So is it with many. They care neither where Christ is nor what he is, so that one
way or other they may be saved by him. They hope, as they pretend, that they shall see him and his glory in heaven, – and that they
suppose to be time enough; but in vain do they pretend a desire thereof, – in vain are their expectations of any such thing. They who
endeavour not to behold the glory of Christ in this world, as has been often said, shall never behold him in glory hereafter unto their
satisfaction; nor do they desire so to do, only they suppose it a part of that relief which they would have when they are gone out of this
world. For what should beget such a desire in them? Nothing can do it but some view of it here by faith; which they despise, or totally
neglect. Every pretence of a desire of heaven, and of the presence of Christ therein, that does not arise from, that is not resolved into,
that prospect which we have of the glory of Christ in this world by faith, is mere fancy and imagination.
Our constant exercise in meditation on this glory of artist will fill us with joy on his account; which is an effectual motive unto the
duty itself. We are for the most part selfish, and look no farther than our own concernments. So we may be pardoned and saved by
him, we care not much how it is with himself, but only presume it is well enough. We find not any concernment of our own therein.
But this frame is directly opposite unto the genius of divine faith and love. For their principal actings consist preferring Christ above
ourselves, and our concerns in him above all our own. Let this, then, stir us up unto the contemplation of this glory. Who is it that is
thus exalted over all? Who is thus encompassed with glory, majesty, and power? Who is it that sits down at the right hand of the
Majesty on high, – all his enemies being made his footstool? Is it not he who in this world was poor, despised, persecuted, and slain, –
all for our sakes? Is it not the same Jesus who loved us, and gave himself for us, and washed us in his own blood? So the apostle told
the Jews that the same Jesus whom they slew and hanged on a tree, God had exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and Saviour,
to give repentance unto Israel, and the forgiveness of sins,” Acts 5: 30, 31. If we have any valuation of his love, if we have any
concernment in what he has done and suffered for the church, we cannot but rejoice in his present state and glory.
Let the world rage whilst it pleaseth; let it set itself with all its power and craft against every thing of Christ that is in it, – which,
whatever is by some otherwise pretended, proceeds from a hatred unto his person; let men make themselves drunk with the blood of
his saints; we have this to oppose unto all their attempts, unto our supportment, namely, what he says of himself: “Fear not; I am the
first and the last: I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell and of death,”
Rev. 1: 17, 18.
Blessed Jesus! we can add nothing to thee, nothing to thy glory; but it is a joy of heart unto us that thou art what thou art, – that
thou art so gloriously exalted at the right hand of God; and we do long more fully and clearly to behold that glory, according to thy
prayer and promise.

Representations of the Glory of Christ under the Old Testament.
It is said of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, “beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he declared unto his disciples in all the Scriptures
the things concerning himself,” Luke 24: 27. It is therefore manifest that Moses, and the Prophets, and all the Scriptures, do give

testimony unto him and his glory. This is the line of life and light which runs through the whole Old Testament; without the conduct
whereof we can understand nothing aright therein: and the neglect hereof is that which makes many as blind in reading the books of
it as are the Jews, – the veil being upon their minds. It is faith alone, discovering the glory of Christ, that can remove that veil of
darkness which covers the minds of men in reading the Old Testament, as the apostle declares, 2 Cor. 3: 14-16. I shall, therefore,
consider briefly some of those ways and means whereby the glory of Christ was represented unto believers under the Old Testament.
1. It was so in the institution of the beautiful worship of the law, with all the means of it. Herein have they the advantage above all the
splendid ceremonies that men can invent in the outward worship of God; they were designed and framed in Divine wisdom to
represent the glory of Christ, in his person and his office. This nothing of human invention can do, or once pretend unto. Men cannot
create mysteries, nor can give unto anything natural in itself a mystical signification. But so it was in the old divine institutions. What
were the tabernacle and temple? What was the holy place with the utensil of it? What was the oracle, the ark, the cherubim, the
mercy-seat, placed therein? What was the high priest in all his vestments and administrations? What were the sacrifices and annual
sprinkling of blood in the most holy place? What was the whole system of their religious worship? Were they anything but
representations of Christ in the glory of his person and his office? They were a shadow, and the body represented by that shadow was
Christ. If any would see how the Lord Christ was in particular foresignified and represented in them, he may peruse our exposition on
the 9th chapter of the Epistle unto the Hebrews, where it is handled so at large as that I shall not here again insist upon it. The sum is,
“Moses was faithful in all the house of God, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken afterward,” Heb. 3: 5. All that
Moses did in the erection of the tabernacle, and the institution of all its services, was but to give an antecedent testimony by way of
representation, unto the things of Christ that were afterward to be revealed. And that also was the substance of the ministry of the
prophets, 1 Pet. 1: 11,12. The dark apprehensions of the glory of Christ, which by these means they obtained, were the life of the
church of old.
2 . It was represented in the mystical account which is given us of his communion with his church in love and grace. As this is
intimated in many places of Scripture, so there is one entire book designed unto its declaration. This is the divine Song of Solomon,
who was a type of Christ, and a penman of the Holy Ghost therein A gracious record it is of the divine communications of Christ in
love and grace unto his church, with their returns of love unto him, and delight in him. And then may a man judge himself to have
somewhat profited in the experience of the mystery of a blessed intercourse and communion with Christ, when the expressions of
them in that holy dialogue do give light and life unto his mind, and efficaciously communicate unto him an experience of their power.
But because these things are little understood by many, the book itself is much neglected, if not despised; yea, to such impudence have
some arrived, in foaming out their own shame, as that they have ridiculed the expressions of it. But we are foretold of such mockers in
the last days, that should walk after their own ungodly lusts; they are not of our present consideration.
The former instance of the representations of the glory of Christ in their institutions of outward worship, with this record of the
inward communion they had with Christ in grace, faith, and love, gives us the substance of that view which they had of his glory.
What holy strains of delight and admiration, what raptures of joy, what solemn and divine complacency, what ardency of affection,
and diligence in attendance unto the means of enjoying communion with him, this discovery of the glory of Christ wrought in the
souls of them that did believe, is emphatically expressed in that discourse. A few days, a few hours spent in the frame characterised in
it, is a blessedness excelling all the treasures of the earth; and if we, whose revelations of the same glory do far exceed theirs, should be
found to come short of them in ardency of affection unto Christ, and continual holy admiration of his excellencies, we shall one day
be judged unworthy to have received them.
3. It was so represented and made known under the Old Testament, in his personal appearances on various occasions unto several
eminent persons, leaders of the church in their generations This he did as a praeludium to his incarnation. He was as yet God only;
but appeared in the assumed shape of a man, to signify what he would be. He did not create a human nature, and unite it unto
himself for such a season; only by his divine power he acted the shape of a man composed of what ethereal substance he pleased,
immediately to be dissolved. So he appeared to Abraham, to Jacob, to Moses, to Joshua, and others; as I have at large elsewhere
proved and confirmed. And hereon, also, because he was the divine person who dwelt in and dwelt with the church, under the Old
Testament, from first to last, in so doing he constantly assumes unto himself human affections, to intimate that a season would come
when he would immediately act in that nature. And, indeed, after the fall there is nothing spoken of God in the Old Testament,
nothing of his institutions, nothing of the way and manner of dealing with the church, but what has respect unto the future
incarnation of Christ. And it had been absurd to bring in God under perpetual anthropopathies, as grieving, repenting, being angry,
weal pleased, and the like, were it not but that the divine person intended was to take on him the nature wherein such affections do
dwell.
4. It was represented in prophetical visions. So the apostle affirms that the vision which Isaiah had of him was when he saw his glory,
John 12: 41. And it was a blessed representation thereof; for his divine person being exalted on a throne of glory, “his train filled the
temple.” The whole train of his glorious grace filled the temple of his body. This is the true tabernacle, which God pitched, and not
man; – the temple which was destroyed, and which he raised again in three days, wherein dwelt the fulness of the Godhead, Col. 2: 9.
This glory was now presented unto the view of Isaiah, chap. 6: 1-5; which filled him with dread and astonishment. But from thence
he was relieved, by an act of the ministry of that glorious one, taking away his iniquity by a coal from the altar; which typified the
purifying efficacy of his sacrifice. This was food for the souls of believers: in these and on the like occasions did the whole church lift
up their voice in that holy cry, “Make haste, our Beloved, and be thou like to a roe, or to a young hart, on the mountains of spices.”
Of the same nature was his glorious appearance on mount Sinai at the giving of the law, Exod. 19; – for the description thereof by the
Psalmist, Ps. 68: 17, 18, is applied by the apostle unto the ascension of Christ after his resurrection, Eph. 4: 8. Only, as it was then full
of outward terror, because of the giving of the fiery law, it was referred unto by the Psalmist as full of mercy, with respect unto his
accomplishment of the same law. His giving of it was as death unto them concerned, because of its holiness, and the severity of the
curse wherewith it was attended; his fulfil1ing of it was life, by the pardon and righteousness which issued from thence.
5. The doctrine of his incarnation, whereby he became the subject of all that glory which we inquire after, was revealed, although not
so clearly as by the gospel, after the actual accomplishment of the thing itself. In how many places this is done in the Old Testament I
have elsewhere declared; at least I have explained and vindicated many of them (for no man can presume to know them all), –
“Vindicae Evangelae”. One instance, therefore, shall here suffice; and this is that of the same prophet Isaiah, chap. 9: 6, 7, “Unto us a

child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful,
Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be
no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish it with judgement and with justice from
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.” This one testimony is sufficient to confound all Jews,
Socinians, and other enemies of the glory of Christ. I do acknowledge that, notwithstanding this declaration of the glory of Christ in
his future incarnation and rule, there remained much darkness in the minds of them unto whom it was then made. For although they
might and did acquiesce in the truth of the revelation, yet they could frame to themselves no notions of the way or manner of its
accomplishment. But now, when every word of it is explained, declared, and its mystical sense visibly laid open unto us in the Gospel,
and by the accomplishment exactly answering every expression in it, it is judicial blindness not to receive it. Nothing but the satanical
pride of the hearts of men, which will admit of no effects of infinite wisdom but what they suppose they can comprehend, can shut
their eyes against the light of this truth 6. Promises, prophecies, predictions, concerning his person, his coming, his office, his
kingdom, and his glory in them all, with the wisdom, grace, and love of God to the church in him, are the line of life, as was said,
which runs through all the writings of the Old Testament, and takes up a great portion of them. Those were the things which he
expounded unto his disciples out of Moses and all the Prophets. Concerning these things he appealed to the Scriptures against all his
adversaries: “Search the Scriptures; for they are they which testify of me.” And if we find them not, if we discern them not therein, it is
because a veil of blindness is over our minds. Nor can we read, study, or meditate on the writings of the Old Testament unto any
advantage, unless we design to find out and behold the glory of Christ, declared and represented in them. For want hereof they are a
sealed book to many unto this day.
7. It is usual in the Old Testament to set out the glory of Christ under metaphorical expressions; yea, it aboundeth therein. For such
allusions are exceedingly suited to let in a sense into our minds of those things which we cannot distinctly comprehend. And there is
an infinite condescension of divine wisdom in this way of instruction, representing unto us the power of things spiritual in what we
naturally discern. Instances of this kind, in calling the Lord Christ by the names of those creatures which unto our senses represent
that excellency which is spiritually in him, are innumerable. So he is called the rose, for the sweet savor of his love, grace, and
obedience; – the lily, for his gracious beauty and amiableness; – the pearl of price, for his worth, for to them that believe he is
precious; – the vine, for his fruitfulness; – the lion, for his power; – the Lamb, for his meekness and fitness for sacrifice; with other
things of the like kind almost innumerable.
These things have I mentioned, not with any design to search into the depth of this treasury of those divine truths concerning the
glory of Christ: but only to give a little light unto the words of the evangelist, that he opened unto his disciples out of Moses and all the
Prophets the things which concerned himself; and to stir up our own souls unto a contemplation of them as contained therein.
