PURITAN GOLD -- Female Piety by John Angell James: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 13
Life Away from Home


Female Piety: or, The Young Woman's Guide Through Life to Immortality. By John Angell James.

Chapter 8. Life Away from Home.

LIFE AWAY FROM HOME
"Behold, I am with you, and will keep you in all places where you
go." Genesis 28:15
"In all your ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct your
paths." Proverbs 3:6
"You shall guide me with your counsel, and afterwards receive
me to glory." Psalm 73:24
The hour of separation from parental society, home enjoyments, and
the scenes of early history, is in most cases, and ought to be in all—a
season of pensive grief. No affectionate daughter can leave the house
of her father, and go from beneath the covering wing of maternal
love, without passing over "the bridge of sighs." Even the joys of the
bridal morning, when she leaves the arms of her hitherto nearest
relations, for those of one now still nearer, do not prevent her from
looking round with something of instinctive regret on the scenes she
is leaving, now no longer hers; and amid the smiles of the happy
bride, are seen falling the tears of the loving child, like dewdrops
sparkling in sunbeams. It would augur ill for the husband, if his wife
could part from her parents, even for him, without a momentary
pang. It is one of nature's loveliest sights to see in that scene and
season of delight, filial piety blending its luster with marital
affection, and investing even nuptial charms with new and
captivating beauty.
But I now speak of a different kind and purpose of separation from
home. I contemplate the young woman, not led out by that right

hand, the "cunning" of which is to be employed for her support; nor
going away, leaning upon that arm which is to be continually
stretched over her for protection—but departing solitarily and
mournfully on the journey of life, to meet alone its dangers, cares,
and toils. It is sad enough to see a young man leaving his father's
house, and leaving home to earn his daily bread by the sweat of his
brow; how much more to see a young female thus going forth to seek
her own support. What is she but a lamb venturing out into the
wilderness where wolves abound; or a young dove leaving its nest to
fly abroad amid eagles and vultures! How many in the progress of
life, and amid its changes, some of which are so melancholy, look
back to the hour of separation and exclaim, "O my mother, how sad
and certain presages of what awaited me were those bitter tears I
shed on that morning when I tore myself from your embrace! My
heart then sunk, and the sun of my life then set never to rise. Every
step since then of my dark journey has been one of sorrow—and
every change only of one calamity for another."
In some cases separation from home is rendered necessary by a
change in domestic circumstances, and she who was brought up
tenderly amid the luxuries, and with the prospects, of opulence, is
now compelled to leave scenes where she was a stranger to toil and
care—to earn her own support. It is a sight to be looked upon with
admiration, to behold a young woman in such circumstances, instead
of hanging upon parents no longer able to support her, without
additional privations for themselves, nobly resolving to relieve them
of the burden, and instead of sitting down in despairing grief and
helpless sorrow, bracing her mind to meet the privations of her
altered condition, descending gracefully to a lower level, and going
forth with true magnanimity, inspired by religion, to tread life's
stormy way alone. No morbid sense of degradation; no feeling of
false shame arising from altered circumstances—no haughty sense of

humiliation connected with a situation of subordination and
dependence—benumbs her faculties, paralyzes her energies, or
renders the duties of her new situation irksome and oppressive—but
remembering it is the will of Providence, and thankful for her health,
her abilities, and her opportunities to take care of herself, she goes to
her new sphere without dread, despondency, or reluctance.
Others meet with no such reverse, but are brought up amid
circumstances which have always kept before them the probability
that they must go out into the world to support themselves. In these
cases, the charge comes not upon them by a surprise, and if they are
wise they will endeavor to prepare their hearts and qualify their
minds for it. A judicious mother's energies and vigilance will ever be
employed, not only in helping her daughters, but in teaching them to
help themselves. Wherever there is a probability of their leaving
home, and even when there is not, her concern, considering the
vicissitudes of human life, should be directed to the point of
qualifying them to become self-supporting. And it should be a point
of ambition with every young woman, whose parents can with
difficulty support their family, not to be a burden to them, but to
provide for herself in some honorable and useful occupation.
It is a very beautiful scene to witness a young female, not only
supporting herself, but endeavoring by the produce of her diligence,
and the savings of her frugality, to minister to the comfort of her
aged, infirm, or impoverished parents. Many a heroine has left home,
and endured privations neither few nor small, for this purpose. All
her discomfort and labor were endured with patience, under the idea
that by this means she was rendering the home of her beloved
parents more happy.

Here, however, a caution is necessary against a too great eagerness to
get away from home. A large family, where there is a straitened
income, brings many cares and some privations, not only upon the
mother, but upon the elder daughters. In such a case, for a young
woman who can be of essential service to her mother, and whom her
mother wishes to retain, to determine or even wish to go out into the
world, and leave her mother to struggle and almost faint under the
load—is a deplorable lack of filial piety. It is delightful to hear a
daughter say, "Anywhere, or in any circumstances, abroad or at
home, in single or in wedded life—my beloved and honored parents,
I am ready and eager to serve you."
There is another and melancholy occasion which not infrequently
occurs, for a young woman's leaving home, and that is when home
itself is broken up by the death of both parents. How frequently does
this happen! Ah, how often are families invaded by the 'last enemy',
and scattered here and there by his desolating ravages! The grave
covers both father and mother. The dear domestic hearth is forsaken.
The family gatherings at prayer, at meals, at festive seasons, are over
—and the house of your childhood and youth is deserted. Poor
orphans, I pity you; especially, you orphan girls, my heart bleeds for
you. Your brothers can provide for themselves better than you can.
But even you have no need to despond. Painful I know it is, to have
no parent, no home, no settled place of abode. Often in your forlorn
situation, you must and do say, "Alas for me! I am alone in the world.
David's expression suits my case. I am like a pelican in the
wilderness; or like a sparrow alone upon the house-top. Other young
people, though away from home, have a home to think and talk about
—and parents to write to, and occasionally to visit. I have none. I
have not a house to dwell in except that which I may soon be
required to leave, nor have I any friends, except those whom my own
good conduct may secure. My heart is often more desolate than my

condition; and though I am in the midst of society, I feel as if I were
alone in this great and busy world."
But I remind you there is the orphan's unfailing friend still left. God
lives, and he is the father of the fatherless. Be it yours, and it may be
yours, to say, "When my father and my mother forsake me, the Lord
will take me up." Should you be so wise and happy as to become truly
pious, you will never be without a friend, and in the absence of an
earthly father, will have an omnipotent one in heaven. You may then
set out in life, and go through it, adopting as your motto, the reply of
Abraham to Isaac, who, when the latter said, "Behold the fire and the
wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?" replied, "God will
provide." Be that your motto, "God will provide." Fear God, and you
may without scruple and with confidence adopt this assurance.
Permit me now to suggest some topics which apply alike to all these
different cases, and which it is important you should dwell upon,
either in prospect of leaving home—or after you have left it. Consider
it is in the order of Providence you should be thus situated. Your lot
is fixed in heaven. It is God's will—and not chance. Is there nothing
consolatory in this? Consider his wisdom, power, and goodness. He
does all things well. He knows what is best for you. He may, in ways
which you cannot imagine, be consulting your future and permanent
good. You cannot see the end. When this is revealed, you may be
compelled to exclaim, "He leads the blind by a way that they know
not, and leads them in paths that they have not known. He makes
darkness light before them, and crooked things straight." Submit,
therefore, without envying others, and without murmuring. Would
you contravene his purpose? Say, "It is the Lord, let him do what
seems good in his sight. I am where he would have me be."

But remember, there are not only privations to be endured away
from home, but moral dangers also to be encountered. If these are
not so pressing in your case as in that of your brothers, there are
some perils even in yours. Happily for you, the guards of female
decorum, propriety, and reputation—are stronger and stricter than
those of the other sex. But they have proved too weak for absolute
security in thousands of instances. Multitudes who have stood well at
home—have unhappily fallen, when removed from it. Eve was
tempted when alone, and away from the protection of her husband.
Alas, how many have gone away to sin, and have returned to hide
their shame. A mother's watchful eye is no longer upon you; a
father's arm is no longer stretched over you—and the shelter of home
no longer protects you. Others know this as well as you, and may
take advantage of it.
And even if there were no moral dangers—is there no danger of
imprudence, folly, levity? No danger of bad connections, improper
acquaintance, ill-contracted marriages? None of undue love of
pleasure and vanity? Are not the prevailing faults and defects of
some women to be found in vanity, love of dress, disposition to court
attention and admiration, fickleness, inconsiderateness, love of
novelty, lack of judgment, and curiosity? And are not all these likely
to increase rather than diminish, when they are away from the
checks which home supplies? Are not these weeds likely to grow
faster, and to attain greater strength, when there is no mother's eye
to see them, no mother's hand to pluck them up?
All this danger is greatly heightened in the case of those who have
personal or mental accomplishments. A beautiful young woman,
withdrawn from the fostering care and ceaseless vigilance of a
judicious mother, and exposed abroad to the crude and licentious
gaze of the world, is ever an object of alarm to her family—and it

were well if she were so to herself. It is perhaps a rare case for such a
female to be ignorant of her charms; it is rarer still for her to be more
afraid than vain of them, and to be more anxious that they should
not lead her into danger, than that they should secure for her
admiration.
The great source of consolation and protection to a young woman
from home is true religion. It is very easy for any one, to conceive of
the privations and discomfort of many a young person, on leaving
the comforts of a happy home to sustain the character of a governess,
a shop-woman or a servant. The cold, proud, and perhaps in some
cases cruel, treatment of employers—as contrasted with the
affectionate conduct of parents; the annoying and unfeeling
peculiarities of companions in the house—as contrasted with the
sympathizing and loving behavior of their brothers and sisters; the
disregard of their comfort, in all that concerns their food, lodging,
and general personal convenience—as contrasted with all the
accommodations and enjoyments of their father's house; and the
general inattention and neglect of the strangers among whom they
dwell—as contrasted with the recognition and kind notice of a wide
circle of friends in their own native place. This, all this, is bitter
indeed.
Some hard and unfeeling natures, or mirthful and frivolous ones,
may be insensible to these things; but oh, that poor girl of softer
mold, whose heart was made for home scenes, and whose bliss was
derived from home enjoyments; under all this, her heart is
sometimes ready to burst! What thoughts disturb her peace, like
visions of bliss lighting on her gloomy and sorrowful path, and then
instantly vanishing, only to leave the path still more gloomy, and the
darkness still more oppressive! What letters, wet with her tears, she
writes to her own sweet home, and to her sympathizing parents!

What is to comfort her now? Only the balmy influence of religion—
the consciousness that she is in the way of duty—and the testimony
of her conscience that she is discharging her obligations with
scrupulous fidelity. This can and this will do it. She whose heart is
renewed by Divine grace; who has genuine faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ; who walks with God as her divine, unchangeable, omnipotent
Friend, and communes with him as her Heavenly Father; whose
affections are set on things above; and who considers life as a
probation for eternity—she will find in such a state of mind—a source
of consolation—a means of endurance—an element of happiness—
which will counterbalance all discomfort, disquietude, and distress.
With true dignity she will bow to the will of God, and consider her
situation as his appointment. She will find satisfaction in
submission. Her religion will impart much patience, and something
of cheerfulness—it will control her disposition, and throw an air of
loveliness over her character, which will give her an interest in the
heart of her employer. She will always find companions in her Bible
and other good books—in her closet of devotion and in communion
with God, a sweet retreat from the coldness and unkindness of her
fellow-creatures; and in meditation upon the everlasting rest above,
a blessed substitute for the comforts of the home she has left on
earth. Faith in God, in Christ, in Providence, in heaven—can comfort,
has comforted, and will comfort in the dreariest situations of life, and
in the bitterest agonies of death.
I am anxious all should set out in life with this lofty idea of true piety
—that it can sweeten the bitterest cup of human woe—can soften the
hardest lot—and can be a substitute for all other pleasures. It must
be so; for it made Adam happy in paradise, and makes saints and
angels happy in heaven. It has lighted, as with a lamp kindled in
heaven, the confessor's dungeon, has sustained the Christian fugitive

in his exile, and has enabled the martyrs to endure even the agonies
of the stake.
Adopt religion, then, young women, as your companion, for it will
not only comfort you, but also protect you. Yes, it will be a shield for
your defense, as well as a cup of consolation amid your sorrows.
Expect temptations, for you will certainly have them in one way or
other. You cannot imagine in what shape or from what quarter they
will come. It may be in a form so fascinating, so plausible, so
unsuspected, so insidious, as to contain all the "deceivableness of
unrighteousness." Do not imagine that Satan respects female virtue
too much to assail it. Did he thus respect the holiness of Eve in the
garden of Eden? Does he reverence any character or any virtue; did
he not tempt our Lord? The more spotless the character, and the
more eminent the excellence—the more intense is his hatred—the
more malignant his envy—and the more eager his desire to despoil it!
Has he not tempted to their ruin, multitudes as pure as you are?
Against such a foe, whom all but infinite cunning makes skillful, and
boundless success makes bold—consider you are safe only under the
protection of Omnipotence—and that protection can be obtained
only by faith and prayer. Of those millions of instances of female
immorality, which the history of your sex has presented, not one
would have occurred, if they had trusted their virtue to the keeping of
true godliness. It is religion that will repel the fiercest assault with
the holy and indignant remonstrance, "How shall I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God."
It is not only however from such dangers as these, dangers affecting
moral character in its most important features, that religion will
protect you; but from the lesser ones also, which, if they do not lead
to open vice, are still injurious. True religion will moderate your love

of pleasure by furnishing pleasures of its own. It will check your
vanity and folly, by producing a devout seriousness and sobriety of
mind—without at all destroying your natural and innocent vivacity.
It will remove your thoughtlessness, and make you contemplative
and reflective, without stiffening you into formality, or investing you
with gloom. It will induce habits of precaution, and frugality, and
thus guard you from present imprudence and recklessness, and
future improvidence and extravagance. Do not then venture out into
the world unprotected by this spirit as your guardian angel.
There are one or two other cautions which it may be of importance
you should receive and remember. You should never allow
yourselves for a moment to imagine there is anything dishonorable
or degrading in your being compelled to leave home and to support
yourself, either as governess, shop-woman, or servant. Those who
have been in better circumstances are of course most apt to feel this.
And no doubt it is a descent, a lower status, according to the
conventionalities of human life—but it is no dishonor. It is from
misconduct, and not from misfortune; from loss of character, and
not from loss of rank—that disgrace arises. Nobility of soul is often
associated with financial descent; while vulgarity of character is
sometimes covered with the coronet or the crown. A virtuous, holy,
and intelligent young female has, in the heraldry of heaven, a patent
of nobility, and is one of God's nobility in her own right. 'Honest
industry' is far more honorable than 'wealthy indolence'; and she
who willingly, honestly, and cheerfully earns her own support, when
Providence has deprived her of her patrimony, is far more to be
admired than she would have been, had she throughout life rolled in
her father's equipage, and been surrounded by every luxury.
Akin to this is another state of mind against which you should most
sedulously guard, and that is a conviction that you must be miserable

away from home. It is conceded that you cannot be as happy away
from home, as you would be at home. It is not right you should be.
There can be no perfect substitute for a united and happy family
circle. But when called by Providence to surrender it, give it up with
submission and fortitude, and yield to the privation with true
magnanimity. Let it be said of you on leaving, as is said by Milton of
Eve on her departure from Paradise, "Some natural tears she
dropped, but wiped them soon."
Weep you may, and you ought, at giving up the dear delights you
have enjoyed from childhood in your father's house; and you cannot
but sometimes feel pensive at recollecting the friends from whom
you have been separated. But to allow your love of home to make
absence from it intolerable wretchedness; to render you moody and
melancholy, discontented and ill-tempered; to unfit you for business,
and make you unpleasant to your employer and companions—
exhibits a weak mind, a feeble heart, and a sickly character. Rise
above this! If Providence calls you away from home, bear it with
composure. Go out expecting to meet with privations, and make up
your mind to endure them with fortitude. Make the best of your
situation. Doom not yourself to misery on this account. You may be
happy anywhere—with religion, good disposition, submission to your
lot, and usefulness. If you determine to find out such pleasures as
your present situation affords, instead of always looking back upon
that which you have left; if you resolve, by God's grace, to please and
be pleased; if you give up your mind to piety, industry, and
usefulness—you will find that felicity is a flower that blooms, and a
fruit that grows, away from home as well as at home. A cheerful
spirit, like a lamp lighting any darkness into which it may be carried
—lessens the discomfort of any situation, recommends you to your
employer, and promotes your interest as well as your happiness.

Perhaps it may not be amiss to say a few things on the choice of a
residence, as it appertains to your parents, where they are living—as
well as to yourselves. Let the subject be made the matter of earnest
and believing prayer to God. "In all your ways acknowledge him, and
he will direct your paths." "Commit your way to him, and he shall
bring it to pass." These are precious declarations, and they are
sustained by promises no less precious. "The meek will he guide in
judgment, and the meek will he teach his way." "I will instruct you,
and teach you in the way which you shall go—I will guide you with
my eye." With such exhortations and assurances, what should be
your resolution? "You shall guide me with your counsel." There is
Providence in everything. Even your most minute affairs are under
Divine direction. Your times are in his hand. Do not doubt it. Hold
fast the truth that God hears your prayer, casts your lot, and fixes the
bounds of your habitation. Pray, pray earnestly, believingly, and
expectantly. All situations and all hearts are at his disposal.
In selecting, accepting, and retaining a residence, consult its
religious advantages. In these are included such means of pulpit
religious instruction as are likely to build up a young disciple on her
holy faith, and to quicken into activity the principles of godliness
planted in her soul by the Spirit of God. It is not ordinarily desirable,
where a selection can be made, to choose a residence where even the
minor matters of the sacraments and church government differ from
those to which you have been accustomed. This exposes you, if not to
a change of sentiment, yet to antagonism and perplexity, which are
unfavorable to the quiet enjoyment of your own personal religion,
and may do you injury by producing a spirit of controversy. Where
the differences of opinion are of a more serious kind, affecting even
the fundamental doctrines of the gospel—no pious young person
should expose herself to any hazard of this kind.

I will now address a few special counsels and cautions to two or three
classes of those who are in the circumstances contemplated by this
discourse.
Many are occupied in the very important and responsible duties of a
resident governess. This is a situation of delicacy, difficulty, and
momentous consequence; and requires much wisdom, prudence, and
conscientiousness. There are many parties concerned, all of whose
interests and comfort should and must be consulted. You who are in
this situation owe something to yourself. Those who have hired you,
will be most likely to pay you the respect due to you when they see
you respecting yourself. If they so far confide in you as to entrust you
with the education of their children, they ought to treat you in such a
manner as to teach them also to confide in you and esteem you. But
this will depend much upon your own conduct and bearing. Let them
be duly aware that you expect all that is your due in the way of kind
and respectful conduct, but that you expect no more. Any
apprehension on their part that your demands in this respect are too
high, or are preferred in an obtrusive and exacting spirit, will be sure
to set them on their guard against you as a person of encroaching
disposition, and will dispose them to yield you less than you are
entitled to. A kind, attentive, respectful, and dignified bearing
towards them, as far from servility on the one hand, as it is from
familiarity on the other, as well as a right behavior towards their
children, will in most cases accomplish all you wish. If you have
taken your present situation, after coming down in life, let there be
no such sense of degradation and mortified pride, no such loftiness
as will make you gloomy, dissatisfied, unhappy, and repulsive.
Even should it appear that you have exchanged places with your
employers, that they once were in the situation of inferiority which
you now occupy, give no evidence that you are aware of it, and take

no notice of little ebullitions of vulgarity, or even purse-proud
insolence, not uncommon to those who have risen in life. If
sometimes you cannot be insensible to this, and you feel your spirit
rising within you, and your cheek growing flushed and warm, so that
your mortification cannot be concealed, call in religion to your aid;
comfort yourself in God; and exemplify the Christian in a spirit of
meek forbearance. In such circumstances, many a tearful look will be
thrown back by memory on that home from which you have been
driven by misfortune, or rather by Providence, and you will need to
retire to calm your perturbation and repress your indignation. In
such cases, go and by prayer invite the hand of your Heavenly Father
to wipe your weeping eyes, and compose your ruffled spirit and
agitated heart.
Then there are the CHILDREN entrusted to your care for their
education. Enter upon your task with a deep and solemn sense of
responsibility to them, to their parents, and to God. Abhor the
baseness, injustice, and cruelty, of being satisfied with any manner of
discharging your duty, so that you get your board and salary, and
respectful treatment. The future character and comfort, for both
worlds, of those girls, depend much upon you. They have been placed
in your hands, and look up to you as their instructress and teacher.
As you would give in your account at last to God with joy and not
with grief, do your very uttermost; tax your energies to do them and
their parents justice, in instructing their minds, forming their
characters, and fitting them for the station they are to occupy in life.
Prepare yourself for your task by constant reading and study. Do not
be satisfied with your present qualifications. The education of a
rational and immortal creature, for this world and the next—is a
great work. Improve your own mind, to be better fitted to improve
theirs. Win their confidence by your ability; their affection by your
kindness; their respect by your dignity; and their industry by your

own diligence. Let your aim be, not only to communicate knowledge
—but wisdom; not only to store the memory—but to strengthen the
judgment, to nerve the will, and to make the conscience tender; not
only to teach them to think correctly—but to act with propriety,
discretion, and promptness, in any situation in which they may be
placed.
As regards religion, that of course must depend much upon the views
of the parents. If they are similar to your own, and you have
unrestricted liberty on this point, labor to the uttermost to form the
religious character of your youthful charge. Ever consider the
education of an immortal being incomplete without instruction in
that which alone can fit her for immortality. But never act the part of
a secret zealot, by inculcating principles opposed to those of the
parents. I should say to a Christian young woman—go into no
situation where you are not allowed to teach what you consider to be
the truth as it is in Jesus. Do not conceal your sentiments—and
afterwards teach them secretly and stealthily. You would abhor such
conduct in a Romanist—do not be guilty of it yourself. Of course you
should not, and cannot conscientiously teach what you believe to be
error; therefore do not go where you would be required to do so.
Then come the PARENTS to be considered by you. Of course you will
do everything you can to uphold their authority, even as they ought
to do their uttermost to uphold yours. You should also most
assiduously labor to secure the affections of their children for them,
rather than for yourself. It would be treachery of the basest kind to
steal away the hearts of their children. Your aim should be to secure
the love of the children to you, for their parents' sake, as well as your
own; and then their love to their parents, for your own sake as well as
theirs.

There is another thing to be observed, and one which I shall touch
upon with the delicacy it demands; and that is the fact, that a wife
has sometimes been made uncomfortable by the presence of a
governess. Jealousy, it is true, is sometimes in this case suspicious
without reason. But are there no cases in which such uneasiness is
not entirely the result of an over-sensitive and morbid imagination?
Respect your own character and dignity, the wife's peace and the
husband's honor, too much ever to seek or accept attentions which,
from him, even though playful and innocent, may excite uneasiness
in that one bosom, the tranquility of which is so easily disturbed by
any act of his. Conduct yourself so as to be not without blame—but
without suspicion.
Apart from this, do nothing by becoming the depository of secrets,
hearing tales, or uttering insinuations, to loosen the bonds, or violate
the affection, of the husband and wife, or to disturb the peace of the
family. If unhappily, a difference should exist, keep yourself as much
as possible out of the way of witnessing it, or let your wisest and
kindest offices be exerted to heal the breach. Win for yourselves the
blessing which will come upon the peacemaker, and cause the family
to bless the hour which made you a member of their household.
Recollect you are bound in honor never to make the transactions or
condition of the family, a matter of conversation with others.
Without being actually sworn or even pledged to secrecy, you are
solemnly bound to observe it; you are a traitress to the family which
has received you as an inhabitant, if you make their affairs known to
others. Never intermeddle with the servants, and especially avoid all
unnecessary familiarity with them. Keep to your own sphere, and
diligently discharge your own duties. You will find sufficient scope
there for all your time, your energies, and your anxiety.

To maintain a course of conduct, seek by prayer the grace and
wisdom which come from on high, and under all the trials of your
situation, whether the waywardness of the children, or the
ingratitude, pride, or petulance of the parents—seek the comfort
which comes from the Father of mercies, and the God of all
consolation.
Governesses in a school are a class of young women, who, though
acting under the direction and supervision of another, and therefore
with less responsibility than those who reside in a family—have to
discharge very important duties, for which high qualifications, both
intellectual and moral, are essential.
I next consider the case of those young people who are employed in
retail shops, and they form a very large class. Their situation is often
one of far greater discomfort and moral danger than that of the class
just mentioned. In addition to the oppressive and exhausting labor
which modern competition imposes upon them, in common with all
who are engaged in trade, they have to bear in some cases the
unkindness of their employers, who are not infrequently deplorably
lacking in regard to the comfort of those whom they have received
into their service—as to their food, lodging, and general treatment. A
surly master and his unfeeling wife, intent only upon what they can
get out of the flesh, bone, and muscle of their servants, and caring
little for their welfare—never satisfied with even the most exemplary
diligence and competent ability, and therefore ever urging to greater
labor, and ever uttering the language of complaint—always
suspicious, even where there is no ground for it, of the honesty of
their servants—such are the trials which some of these hapless young
people have to bear.

In such a case, you who have to endure it, need comfort. The
recollections of home, where all was kindness, happiness, and
confidence—embitter, by the power of contrast, the ills you have to
sustain. Bear all with as much patience as you can command. Seek
consolation in true piety. Carry your sorrows to God by prayer. When
the bitter contrast between your position when at home and your
present situation from home forces itself upon your thoughts, and
sends a tear to your eye and a pang to your heart, go to Him whose
gracious presence is ever with you, and whose infinite love is ever
ready for you.
But it is not thus with all shopkeepers. I am not describing the class,
but only some of its members; the exceptions, rather than the rule. I
know heads of retail establishments, employing a large number of
young people, who cherish for them something of the feelings of
parents, and regard them almost in the light of children—nor is it
their temporal comfort exclusively, but also their spiritual welfare,
which is the object of their solicitude. And this is obviously the
incumbent duty of employers.
Whether your employers be generous and kind, or neglectful and
oppressive—do your duty—and seek to possess all the qualifications
which will commend you to their esteem. DILIGENCE is
indispensable. It is the first excellence of one in your situation. Be
anxious to please, and as earnest to serve your employer as if the
business were your own. No one will or can employ an indolent
servant. Be an early riser. Comply with all the rules of the shop. Aim
at excellence. Seek to be bright and alert. Cultivate an attractive,
winning, and even polite address. Be an intelligent shop-woman.
Especially let your HONESTY be above suspicion. Deem it no insult
or reproach that I caution you on this subject. You are exposed to

temptation. Money in small sums is continually passing through
your hands, your salary is low, and through the deceitfulness of the
heart you may dwell on the injustice of your small earnings, until you
imagine it lawful to pay yourself, and make up what you should in
justice receive. Resist every temptation of this kind. Rather starve
and die, than appropriate to your own use an article of clothing or
decoration, or a farthing of money belonging to your employer. As a
guard upon your integrity, and a check to temptation, avoid expense
in dress and ornament. Vanity is insatiable, and has led more people
into dishonesty than any other passion. A taste for finery fostered
and indulged, with a salary too small to yield the means of its
gratification, has in innumerable instances led to acts of pilfering to
supply the deficiency.
In some establishments, young people of both sexes are employed.
Where this is the case it brings new perils, and requires additional
caution. Your honor, your respectability, your safety, require that you
should be most anxiously upon your guard. How earnestly, as well as
sincerely, should you present those beautiful petitions of our Lord's
prayer, "Lead me not into temptation, but deliver me from evil."
Avoid all undue familiarity, all flippant and trifling conduct, all
jocularity, with the young men employed in the same establishment.
Maintain a proper self-respect, a befitting reserve, and a dignified
bearing; they will be a fence round your character, and prevent even
the approach of anything that would insult your purity, or offend the
most fastidious modesty.
You have need to be upon your guard against the influence of
companions even of your own sex. In large and even in moderate
establishments many young women are associated together, without
in some cases, any matronly superintendent being placed over them,
and with almost unrestricted opportunities for free conversation and

general interaction. It is no severe reflection on the sex to suppose
that in such a number of young people, there may be some who have
no personal religion, whose sense of female decorum and propriety is
not the most delicate, and who, without being immoral, are still so
given to levity, vanity, and romance—as to exert an unfavorable
influence over the rest. Be upon your guard against influence of this
kind.
Gain all the good you can, from those who are your associates—but
avoid all the evil. Be good tempered, accommodating, amiable, and
conciliatory—but set yourself against all that is improper. Be an
example of all that is good—and then you may be a reprover of all
that is evil. Let there be no affected superiority; nothing like, "Stand
aside—I am holier than you." But demonstrate all the consistency,
gentleness and sweetness of unaffected goodness, of true piety, and
good conduct—and then you may be a blessing to those around you.
Be especially careful in the selection of a particular friend from the
rest of your companions. Be not led away by specious appearances,
nor induced to commit yourself by professions of friendship on the
part of another, or by the first feelings of preference on your own.
But take time to ascertain the correctness of her principles, the
consistency of her conduct, and the respectability of her family—
otherwise you may be led into snares and dangers which you very
little anticipate.
For your conduct towards your employers, if a master, I refer you to
what I have said to the Governess. Instances have occurred within
my knowledge to prove that cautions on this head are not altogether
unnecessary. An evil eye has sometimes lighted on an unsuspecting
female, and men bound by every tie of honor, and by their solemn
vow to a wife, have been despicable enough to assail, and in some

instances to destroy, the purity, the honor, and the peace, of those
whom they were bound in duty to protect. Spurn then with disdain
and indignation any such attempts, receive no special attentions, and
quit the service of the wretch whom you suspect of a design against
that which ought to be dearer to you a thousand times over, than
even life itself.
Female servants are a most important and a very numerous class of
young women away from home, and often a very destitute and much
exposed one. Their case however is so needful of enlarged counsel
and caution that I inserted in the "Family Monitor" a chapter to meet
it, and reprinted it separately as a tract.
I shall now conclude this chapter by some few general remarks,
which will apply alike to all classes of those who are away from
home.
Again and again I say, commit yourselves by true faith in Christ into
the hands of God for protection and consolation. How many
beautiful passages and examples of holy Scripture, in addition to
those already quoted, could be adduced, which apply with peculiar
force to your case. Look at poor Hagar, who was much to be pitied as
well as much to be blamed, alone in the wilderness, "when the angel
of the Lord found her by the fountain of water, and she called the
name of the Lord that spoke unto her—God, You see me." If, when
God found her there, notwithstanding some past misconduct and
self-reproach, she comforted herself in that desolate place with the
consideration that she was compassed about with the presence of the
Lord; with how much greater confidence and peace may you cheer
your heart with the thought of an ever-present God, you who have
not been driven out as she was by misconduct from your home, but
have been led out from it by Providence.

Yes, God is in every place, he is with you, "he encompasses your path,
he knows your down-sitting and up-rising, and is acquainted with all
your ways." You have left your earthly father, but your heavenly one
is with you. You are far from your earthly home, but if you are a
Christian, you are as near as ever to your heavenly one. The eyes that
lately beamed affection upon you, do not see you now, and you do
not see them; but lifting your voice to God, you can say, "God, You
see me!" His eye is upon you, his heart yearns over you, his arms are
underneath you.
Also, what promises are on record for you. Do you fear the lack of
adequate provision? "Trust in the Lord, and do good—so shall you
dwell in the land, and verily you shall be fed." Do you need
protection? "He who dwells in the secret place of the Most High,
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. He shall cover you
with his feathers, and under his wings shall you trust; his truth shall
be your defense and shield." Do you need direction? "Your ears shall
hear a voice behind you, saying—This is the way, walk in it." Do you
dread the forlorn circumstances that await you away from home?
"None who trust in him shall be desolate." Are you trembling with
apprehension at the absence of all who were dear to you, and the
unknown difficulties of your new situation on earth? "Fear not, for I
am with you; be not dismayed, for I am your God! I will strengthen
you; yes, I will help you! Yes, I will uphold you with the right hand of
my righteousness." "My presence shall go with you and give you
rest." Do you ever dread the idea of being forgotten by the friends
you are leaving? "Can a woman forget her nursing child, that she
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yes she may
forget, yet will I not forget you." "I will never leave you, nor forsake
you." Can anything be more consolatory than such assurances?

Need you be afraid to leave home and go out into the world with such
promises? What, when omnipotence, omnipresence, omniscience,
all-sufficiency, and boundless love, go with you? Why, with such
assurances you may leave, not only your father's home to dwell in
any other part of this land of railways and easy and speedy methods
of conveyance; but may embark on board an emigrant ship, leave
your native country for the opposite ends of the earth—and
exultingly exclaim, "If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in
the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall Your hand lead me,
and Your right hand shall hold me."
But then to apply the truth and feel the comfort of these precious
assurances, you must have that genuine faith which alone gives you a
title to them. Personal religion will, in all probability, procure you
earthly friends wherever you go, for it is the soil in which all those
virtues grow that conciliate affection, ensure respect, and invite
confidence. God will go before you to prepare the way for you, for
when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes "even his enemies to
be at peace with him." Remember how he gave Joseph favor in the
eyes of the governor of the prison—and how he turned the heart of
Esau, brooding over purposes of revenge, into brotherly endearment.
The best way to get the friendship of man is first to secure the
friendship of God.
Connected with this, acquire in an eminent degree the general good
qualities which I have already alluded to. Add to piety—amiability of
disposition—kindliness of disposition—gentle, artless, and attractive
manners. Let there be a substratum of the solid gold of excellence,
bearing at the same time the polish of the pleasant virtues of life.
Those who have to make their way in the world must be attentive to
external, and to what some may call, little things. It is not enough to
be holy and virtuous, or even to be conscious that you are such—but

you must also be attractive. You must aim to please. Real excellence
may sometimes be repulsive on account of eccentricities, acid
disposition, and blunt coarseness, with which it is associated. It is
like grapes amid nettles or thorns, which few will attempt to gather
for fear of the lacerations of the thorns.
There is a word of very difficult definition, but which, without being
defined, is perfectly understood, and very impressive, "She is an
pleasant young woman." This is a very common expression. Perhaps
the best explanation of it is the power of giving pleasure and
engaging affection. This includes, I am aware, more of nature than of
art, and something of personal attraction. A manifest intention to
secure the favor of an individual is almost sure to defeat its own end,
and to inspire disgust. But the general good opinion of those among
whom we live, can in most cases be secured by attention to their
wishes, and consideration for their feelings. And surely it cannot be
improper to ask, "How can I interest others in my behalf?" And those
who depend upon the interest they create for themselves in the
hearts of others, should study how to secure it.
Combine a due and tender recollection of home—with a noble
fortitude in surrendering its comforts. You are not required to forget
your father's house, and your mother's endearing society. You would
be unnatural if you could. Indeed you are in little danger of this.
Forget my honored father! Forget my much loved mother! Forget my
brothers and sisters! Forget the sweet home of my childhood! Oh no!
Memory must perish before I can be guilty of such oblivion. I muse
on you all in my solitary walks. I give up many an hour's sleep to
think of home. I wet my pillow with my tears, as I think of the years
and joys that are gone, never to return. I dream often that I am in the
midst of you all, and wake to the sad reality that I am away from
home."

But these are not the only thoughts you are to cherish as to your
home. Nor is the frequent and affectionate letter, so welcome and so
precious to those who love and think of you, the only way to send
comfort to your parents. Let there be the never-varying excellence of
character and conduct, the uniform good behavior, the growing
usefulness, which on their knowing of them, shall comfort their
hearts. Avoid that fickleness which would make you soon tired of an
employment. Let no unsuitable friendship of a tender nature, which
they would not approve, be formed. Let no conduct, which if they
knew it, would distress them, be carried on by you. They have lost
the comfort of your companionship—add not to the affliction by
causing them to lose the comfort of your character!
Let your situation in a social point of view, remind you of your
circumstances in a religious one. If you are a true Christian, what are
you here upon earth—but a child away from home? Yes—heaven, and
not earth, is the home of the believer. How simply and sublimely
beautiful is the language of our Lord—"In my Father's house are
many mansions—if it were not so, I would have told you. I go to
prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am, there you
may be also." Delightful idea! Heaven is the home of the Christian,
which the Savior has prepared and made ready for him. There, is
God the Judge of all—the Father, of whom the whole family is
named. There, is Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, who calls
himself the First-born, the Elder Brother. There, are the spirits of the
just made perfect, the brothers and sisters. There, is the innumerable
company of the angels, the ministering spirits now sent forth to
minister unto the heirs of salvation. What a glorious household
assembled in the third heavens—the eternal home of the Redeeming
God, the Great Redeemer, and the redeemed family!

There you are going—if you are a true believer! All the dispensations
of Providence and all the means of grace are preparing you for that
state. All things, and among them your present situation, with all its
disquiet and discomfort, are working together for your good. You are
away from home here—that you may be at home there. Let this cheer
and comfort you. When distressed by looking back upon the home
you have left—comfort yourself by looking on to that to which you
are going. Heaven, glory, eternity—are before you! You are educating
for your Father's house; preparing to go in and dwell forever in his
presence. Half a century hence at most, and in perhaps a much
shorter time than that, it will be of no consequence to you whether
you passed through life agreeably or not. The only thing about which
you should be supremely concerned is, not to be shut out from the
heavenly home—not to be excluded by sin, impenitence, and unbelief
—from the mansions which Christ has gone to prepare. In the
blessed hope of reaching that state, you might endure, not only with
fortitude but with comfort—all the trials of a young woman away
from home, though they were ten times greater than they are!
