PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 13 God Is Infinite — God'S Unchangeableness

GOD IS INFINITE 3d. QUEST. WHAT kind of Spirit is God? ANS. He is infinite; so he differs from all created beings, which are finite. Though infinite may be applied to all God's attributes,—he is infinitely merciful, infinitely wise, infinitely holy,—yet, if we take infiniteness properly so, it implies: 1. God's omnipresence. The Greek word for infinite signifies 'without bounds or limits:' God is not confined to any place, he is infinite, and so is present in all places at once. His centre is every where,—Divina essentia musquam inclusa aut exclusa, AUG. 1 Kings 8:27., "Behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee!" This the Turks have a notion of: they build their temples open at the top, to shew that God cannot be confined to their temples, or circumscribed, but is in all places by his presence. God's essence is not limited either to the regions above, or to the terrestrial globe, but his whole essence is every where; this is to be infinite. As philosophers say of the soul, it is, tota in tota, et tota in qualibet parte,—the soul is in every part of the body, in the eye, heart, foot: so we may say of God, he is ubique, —his essence is every where,—his circuit is in heaven, and in earth, and sea, and he is in all places of his circuit at once. 'This is to be infinite.' God, who bounds every thing else, is himself without bounds; he sets bounds to the sea, huc usque,—'Hitherto shalt thou come, and no further.' He sets bounds to the angels; they, like the cherubims, move and stand at his appointment, Ezek. 10:16., but he is infinite, without bounds. He who can span the heavens, and weigh the earth in a pair of scales, must needs be infinite, Isa. 40:22. OBJ. Vorstius, That God is in all places at once but not in regard of his essence, but, virtute et potentia, by his virtue and influence: as

the body of the sun is in heaven, it only sends forth its beams and influences to the earth,—or as a king, who is in all places of his kingdom authoritatively, by his power and authority, but he is personally on his throne. A. But to answer: God, who is infinite, is in all places at once, not only by his influence, but by his essence; for, if his essence fills all places, then he must needs be there in person. But, Ergo, minor in, Jer. 23:24., "Do not I fill heaven and earth?" OBJ. But doth not God say, heaven is his throne? Isa. 66:1. A. It is also said, that an humble heart is his throne, Isa. 57:15. The humble heart is his throne, in regard of his gracious presence; and heaven is his throne, in regard of his glorious presence; and yet neither of these thrones will hold him, for the heaven of heavens cannot contain him. OBJ. But if God be infinite in all places, then he is in places impure, and mingles with that impurity? A. Though God be in all places,—in the heart of a sinner by his inspection,—and in hell by his justice,—yet he doth not mingle with that impurity, or receive the least tincture of evil. Divina natura non est immista rebus aut sordibus inquinata, AUG. No more than the sun shining on a dunghill is defiled, or its beauty spotted, or than Christ going among sinners was defiled; his Godhead was a sufficient antidote against infection.—Reason why God must needs be infinite in all places at once, not only in regard of the simplicity and purity of his nature, but in regard of his power, which being so glorious, who can set him bounds, or prescribe him a circuit to walk in? It is as if the drop should go to limit the ocean, or the star to set the sun its bounds.

Use 1. It condemns the papists, who would make more things infinite than the Godhead. They hold that Christ's body is in many places at once,—that it is in heaven, and in the bread and wine in the sacrament. Though Christ, as he is God, is infinite and in all places at once, yet, as man, he is not. Christ when he was on earth, his manhood was not in heaven, though his Godhead was; and now he is in heaven, his manhood is not on earth though his Godhead be. Heb. 10:5., it is spoken of Christ, "A body thou hast prepared me." This body cannot be in all places at once; for then it is no more a body, but a spirit; Christ's body in heaven, though it be glorified, it is not deified; it is not infinite, for so it must be, if it be both in heaven, and in the bread and wine by transubstantiation. If God be infinite, present in all places at once, then it is certain he governs all things in his own person; he needs no proxies or deputies to help him to carry on his government. He is in all places at an instant, and manageth all affairs both in the earth and heaven. A king cannot be in all places of his kingdom in his own person, therefore he is fain to govern by deputies, and vicegerents, and they often pervert justice; but God, being infinite, needs no deputies, he is present in all places, he sees all with his own eyes, and hears all with his own ears; he is every where in his own person, therefore is fit to be the judge of the world; he will do every one right. If God be infinite by his omnipresence, then see the greatness and immenseness of the divine majesty. What a great God do we serve! 1 Chron. 29:11., "Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the glory, and the majesty, and thou art exalted as head above all." Well may the scripture display the greatness of his glory who is infinite in all places. He transcends our weak conceptions; how can our finite understanding comprehend him who is infinite? He is infinitely above all our praises, Neh. 9:5., "Blessed be thy glorious name, which

is exalted above all blessing and praise." O what a poor nothing is man, when we think of God's infiniteness! As the stars disappear at the rising of the sun, O how doth a man shrink into nothing when Infinite Majesty shines forth in his glory! Isa. 40:15., "The nations are as a drop of the bucket, or the small dust of the balance." O what a little of that drop are we! The heathens thought they had sufficiently praised Jupiter, when they called him Great Jupiter. Of what immense majesty is God, who fills all places at once! "His excellent greatness," Ps. 150:2. If God be infinite, filling heaven and earth, see what a full portion the saints have; they have him for their portion who is infinite. His fulness is an infinite fulness; and he is infinitely sweet, as well as infinitely full; if a conduit be filled with wine here is a sweet fulness, but still it is finite; but God is a sweet fulness, and it is also infinite. He is infinitely full of beauty,—of love; his riches are called 'unsearchable,' Eph. 3:8., because they are infinite. Stretch your thoughts as much as you can, there's that in God exceeds; it is an infinite fulness. He is said "to do abundantly for us, above all that we can ask," Eph. 3:20. What can an ambitious spirit ask? He can ask crowns and kingdoms,—millions of worlds; but God can give more than we can ask, nay, or think, because he is infinite.—We can think, what if all the dust were turned to silver, if every flower were a ruby, every sand in the sea a diamond: yet God can give more than we can think, because he is infinite! O how rich are they who have the infinite God for their portion! Well might David say, "The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance," "the lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, and I have a goodly heritage!" Ps. 16:5, 6. We may go with the bee from flower to flower, but we shall never have full satisfaction till we come to the infinite God. Jacob said, "I have enough"—in the Hebrew, "I have all," Gen. 33:11. —because he had the infinite God for his portion. God being an infinite fulness, there is no fear of want for any of the heirs of heaven; though there be millions of saints and angels which hath a

share in God's riches, yet he hath enough for them all, because he is infinite. Though a thousand men behold the sun, there is light enough in the sun for them all; put ever so many buckets into the sea, there is water enough in the sea to fill them. Though an innumerable company of saints and angels are to be filled out of God's fulness, yet God, being infinite, he hath abundantly enough to satisfy them. God hath land enough to give to all his heirs, there can be no want in that which is infinite. If God be infinite, he fills all places, is every where present: this is sad to the wicked, God is their enemy, and they cannot escape him, nor flee from him, for he is every where present: they are never out of his eye, nor out of his reach: Ps. 21:8., "Thy hand shall find out all thy enemies." What caves or thickets can men hide in, that God cannot find them? Go where they will, he is present, Ps. 139:7., "Whither shall I flee from thy presence?" If a man owes a debt to another he may make his escape, and flee into another land, where the creditor cannot find him. "But whither shall I flee from thy presence?" God is infinite? he is in all places: so that he will find out his enemies, and punish them. OBJ. But is it not said, 'Cain went out from the presence of the Lord?' Gen. 4:16. A. The meaning is, he went out from the church of God, where were the visible signs of God's presence, and where God did in a special manner manifest his sweet presence to his people: but Cain could not go out of God's sight, for God being infinite, is every where present. Sinners can neither go from an accusing conscience, nor a revenging God. If God be every where present, then for a Christian to walk with God is not impossible. God is not only in heaven, but he is in earth too,

Isa. 66:1. Heaven is his throne, there he sits; the earth is his footstool, there he stands. He is every where present, therefore we may come to walk with God: "Enoch walked with God," Gen. 5:22. If God was confined to heaven, a trembling soul might think, "How can I converse with God,—how can I walk with him who lives in excelsis, above the upper region?" but God is not confined to heaven, he is omnipresent; he is above us, yet he is about us, he is near to us, Acts 17:27. Though he be not far from the assembly of the saints. He stands in the congregation of the mighty, Ps. 82:1. He is present with us, God is in every one of us; so that here on earth we may walk with God. In heaven the saints rest with him,—on earth they walk with him. To walk with God, is to walk by faith; we are said 'to draw nigh' to God, Heb. 10:22.; and to see him, Heb. 11:27., "As seeing him who is invisible;" and to have fellowship with him, 1 John 1:3., "Our fellowship is with the Father." Thus we may take a turn with him every day by faith. It is a slighting of God not to walk with him: is a king be in presence, it is a slighting him, to neglect him and walk with the page. There is no walk in the world so sweet as to walk with God: Ps. 89:15., "They shall walk in the light of thy countenance;" Ps. 138:5., "Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord;" it is like walking among beds of spices, which send forth a fragrant perfume. Use 2. If God be infinite in his glorious essence, learn to admire where you cannot fathom. The angels wear a vail; they cover their faces, as adoring this infinite majesty, Isa. 6:3. Elias wrapped himself in a mantle when God's glory passed by. Admire where you cannot fathom, Job. 11:7., "Canst thou by searching find out God?" Here we see some beams of his glory,—we see him in the glass of the creation, —we see him in his picture, his image shines in the saints,—but who can search out all his essential glory? What angel can measure these pyramids? "Canst thou by searching find out God?" He is infinite. We can no more search out his infinite perfections, than a man upon the

top of the highest mountain can reach the firmament, or take a star in his hand. O have God-admiring thoughts! Adore where you cannot fathom; there are many mysteries in nature which we cannot fathom, —why the sea should be higher than the earth, yet not drown it,—why the Nile should overflow in summer, when, by the course of nature, the waters are lowest,—how the bones grow in the womb, Eccl. 11:5. If these things pose us, how may the infinite mystery of the Deity transcend our most raised intellectuals! Ask the geometrician, if he can, with a pair of compasses, measure the breadth of the earth: so unable are we to measure the infinite perfections of God. In heaven we shall see God clearly, but not fully, for he is infinite; he will communicate himself to us, according to the bigness of our vessel, but not the immenseness of his nature. Adore then where you cannot fathom. If God be infinite in all places, then let us not go to limit God, Ps. 78:41., "They limited the Holy One of Israel." It is a limiting God to confine him within the narrow compass of our reason. Reason thinks God must go such a way to work, or the business will never be effected. This is to limit God to our reason; whereas he is infinite, "and his ways are past finding out," Rom. 11:33. In the deliverance of the church, it is a limiting God, either to set him a time, or prescribe him a method for deliverance. God will deliver Sion, but he will be left to his own liberty; he will not he tied to a place, to a time, to an instrument, this were to limit him, and then he should not be infinite. God will go his own way,—he will pose and nonplus reason, —he will work by improbabilities,—he will save in such a way as we think he will destroy; now he acts like himself, like an infinite, wonder-working God.

OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD "For the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed," 1 Sam. 2:3. Glorious things are spoken of God; he transcends our thoughts, and the angels' praises. God's glory lies chiefly in his attributes, which are the several beams by which the divine nature shines forth. Among other of his orient excellencies, this is not the least, "The Lord is a God of knowledge;" or, as the Hebrew word is, 'A God of knowledges.' Through the bright mirror of his own essence, he hath a full idea and cognizance of all things. The world is to him a transparent body. He makes an heart anatomy; Rev. 2:23., "I am he which searcheth the reins and the heart." The clouds are no canopy, the night is no curtain to draw between us and his sight, Ps. 139:12., "The darkness hideth not from thee." There is not a word we whisper, but God hears it, Ps. 139:4., "There is not a word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether!" There is not the most subtle thought comes into our mind, but God perceives it, Isa. 66:18., "I know their thoughts." Thoughts speak as loud in God's ears, as words do in ours. All our actions, though ever so subtilely contrived, and secretly conveyed, are visible to the eye of omnisciency, Isa. 66:18., "I know their works." Achan hid the Babylonish garment in the earth, but God brought it to light, Josh. 7:21. Minerva was drawn in such curious colours, and so lively penciled, that which way soever one turned, Minerva's eyes were upon him: so, which way soever we turn ourselves, still God's eye is upon us, Job 37:16., "Dost thou know the balancing of the clouds! the wondrous works of him that is perfect in knowledge?" God knows whatever is knowable; he knows future contingencies. He foretold Israel's coming out of Babylon, and the virgin's conceiving. By this the Lord proves the truth of his Godhead against idol gods: Isa. 41:23., "Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may

know ye are gods." The perfection of God's knowledge is primary. He is the original, the pattern, and prototype of all knowledge; others borrow their knowledge of him; the angels light their lamps at this glorious sun. 2. God's knowledge is pure. It is not contaminated with the object. Divina natura non est immista rebus aut sordibus inquinata, AUG. Though God knows sin, yet it is to hate and punish it. No evil can mix or incorporate with his knowledge, no more than the sun can be defiled with the vapours which arise from the earth. 3. God's knowledge is facile; it is without any difficulty. We study and search for knowledge: Prov. 2:4, "If thou seekest for her as for silver." But the lamp of God's knowledge is so infinitely bright, that all things are intelligible to him. 4. God's knowledge is infallible; there is no mistake in his knowledge. Human knowledge is subject to error and misprision. A physician may mistake the cause of a disease; but God's knowledge is unerring; he can neither deceive, nor be deceived; he cannot deceive, because he is truth; nor be deceived, because he is wisdom. 5. God's knowledge is instantaneous; our knowledge is successive, one thing after another. We argue from the effect to the cause; God knows things past, present, and to come, uno intuito, at once: they are all before him in one entire prospect. (1.) God's knowledge is retentive; he never loseth any of his knowledge; he hath reminiscentia, as well as intelligentia,—he remembers as well as understands. Many things elapse out of our minds, but God's knowledge is eternized. Things transacted a thousand years ago, are as fresh to him, as they were done but the last minute. Thus he is perfect in knowledge.

OBJ. But is it not said, Gen. 18:21., 'I will go down and see whether they have done according to the cry which is come up unto me, and I will know?' A. It could not be a nesciency, or that God was ignorant; because there is mention made of a cry; but the Lord speaks there after the manner of a judge, who will first examine the cause before he passeth the sentence. God, when he is upon a work of justice, is not in a riot, as if he did not care where he hits; but he goes in a way of circuit against offenders. He "lays judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet," Isa. 28:17. OBJ. HOS. 13:12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up, their sin is hid? A. Not that his sin was hid from God, but his sin is hid, that is, it is recorded, it is laid up against a day of reckoning. That this is the meaning, is clear by the foregoing words, his iniquity is bound up: as the clerk of the assizes binds up the indictments of malefactors in a bundle, and at the assizes, brings out the indictments and reads them in court, so God binds up men's sins in a bundle, and, at the day of judgment, this bundle shall be opened, and all their sins brought to light before men and angels. That God is thus infinite in his knowledge. 1. It cannot but be so; for he, who is the original cause, and gives a being to things, must needs have a clear inspection into them, Ps. 94:9., "He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see?" He who makes a watch or engine, knows all the workmanship in it. God, that made the heart, knows all the motions and fallacies of it: He is like Ezekiel's wheels, full of eyes, and, as Austin saith, "totus oculus,"—'All eye.' 2. It ought to be so; for he is to be "Judge of all the world," Gen. 18:25. There are so many causes to be brought before

him, and so many persons to be tried, that he must have a most exquisite perfect knowledge, or he could not do justice. An ordinary judge cannot proceed without a jury,—the jury must search the cause, and give in the verdict,—but God can judge without a jury. He knows all things in and of himself, and needs no witnesses to inform him. A judge judgeth only matters of fact, but God judgeth the heart. He not only judgeth wicked actions, but wicked designs. He sees the treason of the heart, and punisheth it. Use 1st. Is God infinite in knowledge, 1 John 1:5. "He is light, and in him is no darkness;" then how unlike are they to God, who are darkness, and in whom is no light,—who are destitute of knowledge, such as the Indians who never heard of God? And are there not many among us who are no better than baptized heathens? Who are to seek in the first principles of the oracles of God? It is sad that after the sun of the gospel hath shined so long in our horizon, yet to this day the veil should be upon their heart. Such as are enveloped with ignorance cannot give God a "reasonable service," Rom. 12:1. Ignorance is the nurse of impiety; the schoolmen say, "Omne peccatur fundatur in ignorantia." Jer. 9:3., " 'They proceed from evil to evil; and they know not me,' saith the Lord." Where ignorance reigns in the understanding, lust rageth in the affections: Prov. 19:2., "That the mind be without knowledge, it is not good;" such have neither faith nor fear. No faith, for Knowledge carries the torch before Faith: Ps. 9:10., "They that know thy name shall put their trust in thee." A man can no more believe without knowledge, than the eye can see without light. Nor fear of God. How can they fear him whom they do not know? The covering of Haman's face was a sad presage of death. When people's minds are covered with ignorance, this covering of the face is a fatal forerunner of destruction.

2. If God be a God of knowledge, then see the folly of hypocrisy. Hypocrites do not "virtutum facere," but fingere, MELANCT. They carry it fair with men, but care not how bad their hearts are; they live in secret sin: Ps. 73:11., "They say how doth God know?" Ps. 10:11., "God hath forgotten, he hideth his face, he will never see it." But, Ps. 147:5., "His understanding is infinite." He hath a grate [crates] that looks into men's breasts; he hath a key for the heart; he beholds all the sinful workings of men's spirits, as in a glass-hive we can see the bees working in their combs. Matt. 6:4., "He sees in secret;" in impious habet, RIVET. As a merchant enters down debts in his book, so God hath his diary or day-book, and he enters down every sin into the book; he makes a critical descant upon men's actions. Jeroboam's wife disguised herself that the prophet should not know her, but he discerned her: 1 Kings 14:6., "Why feignest thou thyself to be another?" The hypocrite thinks to prevaricate and juggle with God, but God will unmask him: Ecc. 12:14., "God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing;" Jer. 29:23., "They have committed villany in Israel," "even I know, and am a witness, saith the Lord." Ay, but the hypocrite hopes he shall colour over his sin, and make it look very specious! Absalom masks over his treason with the pretence of a religious vow; Judas dissembles his envy at Christ, and covetousness, with the pretence of charity to the poor, John 12:5.; Jehu makes religion a stirrup to his ambitious design, 2 Kings 10:16.; but God sees through these fig-leaves. You may see a jade under his gilt trappings: Jer. 16:17., "Their iniquities are not hid from mine eyes." And he that hath an eye to see will find an hand to punish. Use 2d. Of Exhortation. Is God so infinite in his knowledge? Then we should always set ourselves as under his omniscient eye. "Sic vivendum est tanquam in conspectu," SENECA. Let us set David's prospect before our eye, Ps. 16:8., "I have set the Lord always before

me." Seneca counselled Lucillius that whatever he was doing he should imagine some of the Roman worthies stood before him, and then he would do nothing dishonourable. The consideration of God's omnisciency would, 1. Be preventive of much sin. The eye of man will restrain from sin; and will not God's eyes much more? Est. 7:8., "Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me?" Will we sin when our judge looks on? Would men speak so vainly, if they considered God overheard them? Latimer took heed to every word in his examination, when he heard the pen go behind the hangings: so, what care would persons have of their words, if they remembered God heard, and the pen is going in heaven? Would men go after strange flesh, if they believed God was a spectator of their wickedness, and would make them do penance in hell for it? Would they defraud in their dealings, and use false weights, if they thought God saw them, and for making their weights lighter would make their damnation heavier? 2. The setting ourselves as under the eye of God's omnisciency, would cause reverence in the worship of God. God sees the frame and carriage of our hearts when we come before him! How would this call in our straggling thoughts? how would this animate and spirit duty? It would make us put fire to the incense, Acts 26:7., "The tribes instantly served God day and night,"— omnibus venibus,—with the utmost zeal and intenseness of spirit. To think God is in this place, he beholds us, would add wings to prayer, and oil to the flame of our devotion. 2. Is God's knowledge infinite? Study sincerity, be what you seem, 1 Sam. 16:7., 'The Lord looketh upon the heart.' Men judge of the heart by the actions, God judgeth of the actions by the heart; if the heart be sincere, God will see the faith and wink at the failing. Asa had his blemishes, but his heart was right with God, 2 Chron. 15:17. God saw his sincerity, and pardoned his infirmity. Sincerity in a Christian, is like chastity in a wife, which doth excuse many failings. Sincerity

makes our duties acceptable, like musk among linen, that perfumes it. As Jehu said to Jehonadab, 2 Kings 10:15., "Is thine heart right?"—And he said "it is."—"If it be," said he, "give me thy hand;" and he took him up into the chariot. So, if God see our heart is right, —that we love him, and design his glory,—"now," saith he, "give me your prayers and tears; now you shall come up with me into the triumphant chariot of glory." Sincerity makes our services to be golden, and God will not cast away this gold though it may want some weight. Is God omniscient, and his eye chiefly upon the heart? wear this girdle of truth about you and never leave it off. Use 3d. Of Comfort. Is God a God of infinite knowledge? Then there is comfort, 1. To the saints in particular, 2. To the church in general, in three respects: 1. In case of private devotion. Christian, thou settest hours apart for God, thy thoughts run upon him as thy treasure: God takes notice of every good thought, Mal. 3:16., "He had a book of remembrance written for them that thought upon his name." Thou enterest into thy closet, and prayest to thy Father in secret: he hears every sigh and groan, Ps. 38:9., "My groaning is not hid from thee." Thou waterest the seed of thy prayer with tears: God bottles every tear, Ps. 56:8., "Put thou my tears into thy bottle." When the secrets of all hearts shall be opened, God will make an honourable mention of the zeal and devotion of his people, and he himself will be the herald of their praises: 1 Cor. 4:5., "Then shall every man have praise of God." 2. The infiniteness of God's knowledge is a comfort, in case the saints have not so clear a knowledge of themselves. They find so much corruption, that they judge they have no grace, Gen. 25:22., "If it be so, why am I thus?" If I have grace, why is my heart in so dead and earthly a frame? O remember, God is of infinite knowledge, be can

spy grace where thou canst not; he can see grace hid under corruption, as the stars may be hid under a cloud. God can see that holiness in thee which thou canst not discern in thyself; he can spy the flower of grace in thee, though overtopped with weeds, 1 Kings 14:13., "Because there is in him some good thing." God sees some good thing in his people when they can see no good in themselves; and though they judge themselves, he will give them an absolution. 3. It is comfort in respect of personal injuries. It is the saint's lot to suffer; the head being crowned with thorns, the feet must not tread upon roses. If saints find a real purgatory, it is in this life; but this is their comfort, God sees what wrong is done to them; the apple of his eye is touched, and is not he sensible? St. Paul was scourged by cruel hands, 1 Cor. 11:25., "Thrice was I beaten with rods;" as if you should see a scullion whip the king's son. God beholds it, Exod. 3:9., "I know their sorrows." The wicked make wounds in the backs of the saints, and then pour in vinegar; but God writes down their cruelty. Believers are part of Christ's mystical body; and for every drop of a saint's blood spilt, God puts a drop of wrath in his vial. 4. Comfort to the church of God in general. If God be a God of knowledge, he sees all the plots of the enemies against Zion, and can make them prove abortive. The wicked are subtile, having borrowed their skill of the old serpent; they dig deep to hide their counsels from God, but he sees them, and can easily counterwork them. The dragon is described with seven heads, Rev. 12:3., to show how he plots against the church: but God is described with seven eyes, Zech. 2:9., to shew that he sees all the blots and stratagems of the enemies; and when they deal proudly, he can be above them. Come, saith Pharaoh, "let us deal wisely," Exod. 1:10.; and he never played the fool more than when he thought to deal wisely, Exod. 14:23., "In the morning-watch the Lord looked to the host of the Egyptians, by the

pillar of fire, and troubled the host." How may this be as sap in the vine, and may comfort the church of God in her militant state! The Lord hath an eye in all the councils and combinations of the enemy; he sees them in their train, and can blow them up in their own mine.

OF THE ETERNITY OF GOD The next attribute is, "God is eternal:" Ps. 90:2., "From everlasting to everlasting thou art God." The schoolmen distinguish between ævum et eternum, to explain the notion of eternity. There is a threefold being: 1st, Such a being as had a beginning, and shall have an end: so all sensitive creatures, the beasts, fowls, fishes,—these at death are destroyed and return to dust,—their being ends with their life. 2d, Such a being as had a beginning, but shall have no end, as the angels and souls of men; they are eternal a parte post,—they abide for ever. 3d, Such a being as is without beginning, and without ending, and that is proper only to God. He is semper existens, viz. from everlasting to everlasting; it is God's title, a jewel of his crown: (1.) He is called "the king eternal," 1 Tim. 1:17. (2.) Jehovah,—a word that properly sets out God's eternity,—a word so dreadful, that the Jews trembled to name or read it, therefore used another word, Adonai, "Lord." Jehovah contains in it time past, present, and to come, Rev. 1:8., "Which is, and which was, and which is to come;" it interprets the word Jehovah,—which is, He subsists of himself, having a pure and independent being,—which was, God only was before time, there is no searching into the records of eternity,—which is to come, his kingdom hath no end, his crown hath no successors, Heb. 1:8., "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever." The doubling of the word ratifies the certainty of it, as the doubling of Pharaoh's dream did. I shall

prove that God only could be eternal, without beginning. Angels could not; they are but creatures, though spirits; they were made, and therefore their beginning may be known, their antiquity may be searched into. If you ask, when they were created? Some think before the world was; but not so, for what was before time was eternal,—the angels' first rise and original reacheth no higher than the beginning of the world. It is thought by the learned that the angels were made that day on which the heavens were made, Job 38:7., "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." St. Hierom, Gregory, and venerable Bede. understand it of the angels, when God laid the foundation-stone of the world, the angels being then created, did sing the anthems of joy and praise; the angels could not be before time, for what was before time was eternal. It is only proper to God to be eternal,—without beginning. He is Alpha and Omega,—the first and the last, Rev. 1:8. No creature can write itself Alpha, that is only a flower of the crown of heaven, Exod. 3:14., "I am that I am," viz. He who exists from and to eternity. Use 1st. Here is thunder and lightning to the wicked. God is eternal, therefore the torments of the wicked are eternal. God lives for ever; and as long as God lives he will be punishing the damned. This, methinks, should be as the handwriting upon the wall, Dan. 5:6., it should make their joints to be loosed, &c. The sinner takes liberty to sin; he breaks God's laws, like a wild beast that breaks over the hedge, and leaps into forbidden pasture; he sins with greediness, Eph. 4:19., as if he thought he could not sin fast enough. But remember, this is one of God's names, Eternal; and as long as God is eternal, he hath time enough to reckon with all his enemies. To make sinners tremble, let them think of these three things: the torments of the damned are without intermission,—without mixture,—and eternal.

1. Without intermission. Their pains shall be acute and sharp, and no relaxation; the fire shall not be slackened or abated, Rev. 14:11., "They have no rest day nor night;" like one that hath his joints stretched continually on the rack, and hath no ease; therefore the wrath of God is compared to a stream of brimstone, Isa. 30:33. Why to a stream? Because a stream runs without intermission; it runs, and doth not stop; so God's wrath runs like a stream, and pours out without any intermission. In the pains of this life, there is some abatement and intermission; the fever abates,—after a fit of the stone, the patient hath some ease,—but the pains of hell are intense and violent, in summo gradu; the damned soul never saith, "I am now more at ease." 2. Without mixture. Hell is a place of pure justice. In this life, God in anger remembers mercy; he mixeth compassion with suffering, Deut. 33:25. Asher's shoe was of iron, but his foot was dipt in oil. Affliction is the iron-shoe, but mercy is mixed with it; here is the foot dipt in oil. But the torments of the damned have no mixture: Rev. 14:10., "The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture." No mixture of mercy. How is the cup of wrath said to be full of mixture, Ps. 75:8., "For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is full of mixture, and he poureth out of the same; but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out and drink them." Yet in the Revelation it is said to be without mixture. It is full of mixture, that is, it is full of all the ingredients that may make it bitter; the worm,—the fire,—the curse of God,—all these are bitter ingredients. It is a cup mixed, yet it is without mixture, viz. there shall be nothing to afford the least comfort,—no mixture of mercy; so it is a cup without mixture. In the sacrifice of jealousy, Numb. 5:15., there was no oil put to it; so, in the torments of the damned, there is no oil of mercy to abate their sufferings.

3. Without cessation, eternal. The pleasures of sin are but for a season, but the torments of the wicked are for ever. Sinners have a short feast, but a long reckoning. Origen erroneously thought that after a thousand years the damned should be released out of their misery: but the worm,—the fire,—the prison,—are all eternal, Rev. 14:11., "The smoke of their torment ascendeth for ever and ever." Pœnæ: gehennales punint, non finunt, PROSPER. Eternity is a sea without bottom and banks. After millions of years, there is not one minute in eternity wasted; and the damned must be ever burning, but never consuming,—always dying, but never dead: Rev. 9:6., "They shall seek death, but shall not find it." The fire of hell is such as multitudes of tears will not quench it,—length of time will not finish it,—the vial of God's wrath will be always dropping upon a sinner. As long as God is eternal, he lives for ever to be avenged upon the wicked. O ETERNITY! ETERNITY! who can fathom it? Mariners have their plummets to measure the depths of the sea; but what line or plummet shall we use to fathom the depth of eternity? The breath of the Lord kindles the infernal lake, Isa. 30:33.; and where shall we have engines or buckets to quench that fire? O ETERNITY! If all the body of the earth and sea were turned to sand, and all the air up to the starry heaven were nothing but sand, and a little bird should come every thousand years and fetch away in her bill but the tenth part of a grain of all that heap of sand, what a numberless number of years would be spent before that vast heap of sand would be fetched away? Yet, if at the end of all that time, the sinner might come out of hell, (though long) yet there would be some hope: but this word EVER, breaks the heart! "The smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever." What a terror is this to the wicked, enough to put them into a cold sweat, to think, as long as God is eternal, he lives for ever to be avenged upon sinners!

Quest. Here a question may be moved, Why sin that is committed in a short time should be punished eternally? Ans. We must hold with St. Augustine, "that God's judgments on the wicked,—occultu esse possunt, injusta esse non possunt,—may be secret, but never unjust." The reason why sin committed in a short time is eternally punished, is, because every sin is committed against an infinite essence, and no less than eternity of punishment can satisfy. Why is treason punished with confiscation and death, but because it is against the king's person, which is sacred: much more that offence which is against God's crown and dignity is of an heinous and infinite nature, and cannot be satisfied with less than eternal punishment. Use 2d. Of comfort to the godly. God is eternal, therefore lives for ever to reward the godly, Rom. 2:7., "To them who seek for glory and honour, eternal life." The people of God here are in a suffering condition: Acts 20:23., "Bonds and afflictions abide me." The head being crowned with thorns, the feet must not tread upon roses. The wicked are clad in purple and fare deliciously, while the godly suffer. Goats climb upon high mountains, while Christ's sheep are in the valley of slaughter. But here is the comfort: God is eternal, and he hath appointed eternal recompenses for the saints,—in heaven are fresh delights, sweetness without surfeit, and that which is the crown and zenith of heaven's happiness, is, it is 'eternal,' 1 John 2:25. Were there but the least suspicion that this glory must cease, it would much eclipse, yea embitter it; but it is eternal. What angel can span eternity? 2 Cor. 4:17., "An eternal weight of glory." The saints shall bathe themselves in the rivers of divine pleasure; and these rivers can never be dried up, Ps. 16:11., "At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore." This is the Elah, the highest strain in the apostle's rhetoric, 1 Thess. 4:17., "Ever with the Lord." There is peace without

trouble,—ease without pain,—glory without end,—"ever with the Lord." Let this comfort the saints in all their troubles; their sufferings are but short, but their reward is eternal. Eternity makes heaven to be heaven: 'tis the diamond in the ring. O blessed day that shall have no night! The sun-light of glory shall rise upon the soul, and never set! O blessed spring, that shall have no autumn, or fall of the leaf! The Roman emperors have three crowns set upon their heads, the first of iron, the second of silver, the third of gold: so the Lord sets three crowns on his children,—grace,—comfort,—and glory. And this crown is eternal, 1 Pet. 5:4., "Ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away." The wicked have a never-dying worm, and the godly a never-fading crown. O how should this be a spur to virtue! How willing should we be to work for God! Though we had nothing here, God hath time enough to reward his people; the crown of eternity shall be set upon their head. Use 3d. Of exhortation. 1. In general, study eternity. Our thoughts should chiefly run upon eternity. We all wish for the present, something that may delight the senses. If we could have lived, as Augustine saith, a cunabuli mundi,—from the infancy of the world to the world's old age,—what were this? What is time measured with eternity? As the earth is but a small point to the heaven, so time is but, nay scarce a minute to eternity! And then, what is this poor life which crumbles away so fast? O think of eternity! Annos æternos in mente habe! Brethren, we are every day travelling to eternity; and whether we wake or sleep, we are going our journey; some of us are upon the borders of eternity, O study the shortness of life and length of eternity! 2. More particularly; think of God's eternity, and the soul's eternity. (1.) Think of God's eternity. He is "the Ancient of days," who was before all time. There is a figurative description of God, Dan. 7:9.,

"The Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool." His white garment, wherewith he was clothed, signified his majesty; his hair, like the pure wool, his holiness; and 'the ancient of days,' his eternity. The thought of God's eternity should make us have high adoring thoughst of God. We are apt to have mean, irreverent thoughts of him: Ps. 50:21., "Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thyself;" weak and mortal, but if we would think of God's eternity,—when all power ceaseth, he is King eternal,—his his crown flourisheth for ever, —who can make us happy or miserable for ever,—this would make us have adoring thoughts of God. Rev. 4:10., "The four and twenty elders fall down before him that sat upon the throne, and worship him that liveth for ever and ever; and cast their crowns before the throne." The saints fall down, to signify by that humble posture, that they are not worthy to sit in God's presence. They fall down and they worship him that liveth for ever and ever; they do as it were kiss his feet. And they cast their crowns before the throne; they lay all their honour at his feet; thus they shew humble adoration to the eternal essence. Study God's eternity, it will make us adore where we cannot fathom. (2.) Think of the soul's eternity. As God is eternal, so he hath made us eternal. We are never-dying creatures; we are shortly entering upon an eternal state, either of happiness or misery. Have serious thoughts of this: say, O my soul, which of these two eternities is like to be thy portion? I must shortly depart hence, and whither then shall I go,—to which of these eternities, either of glory or misery? The serious meditation of the eternal state we are to pass into, would work strongly with us.—1. Thoughts of eternal torments are a good antidote against sin; sin tempts with its pleasure; but, when we think of eternity, it may cool the intemperate heat of lust. Shall I, for the pleasure of sin for a season, endure eternal pain? Sin, like those locusts, Rev. 9:7., seems to have on its head a crown like gold, but it hath in it a tail like a scorpion, v. 10., and a sting in its

tail, and this sting can never be plucked out. Shall I venture eternal wrath? Is sin committed so sweet, as lying in hell for ever is bitter? This would make us flee from sin, as Moses from the serpent.—2. The serious thoughts of eternal happiness would very much take us off from these worldly things; we should not esteem much of them. What are these sublunary things to eternity? they are quickly gone, they salute us, and take their farewell. But I am to enter upon an everlasting estate;—I hope to live with him who is eternal,—what is the world to me? They who stand upon the top of the Alps, the great cities of Campania seem as small things in their eyes; so he who hath his thoughts fixed on his eternal state after this life, all these things seem as nothing in his eye. What is the glory of this world? How poor and contemptible, compared with an eternal weight of glory.—3. To conclude: The serious thoughts of an eternal state, either of happiness or misery, should have a powerful influence upon whatsoever we take in hand; every work we do, promotes either a blessed or cursed eternity; every good action sets us a step nearer to an eternity of happiness; every bad action sets us a step nearer to an eternity of misery. O what influence would the thoughts of eternity have upon our religious duties! It would make us do them with all our might: a duty well performed, lifts a Christian higher towards heaven, and sets a Christian a step nearer to a blessed eternity.

GOD'S UNCHANGEABLENESS The next attribute is God's unchangeableness: Mal. 3:6., "I am Jehovah, I change not." 1. God is unchangeable in his nature. 2. In his decree.

I. Unchangeable in his nature: 1. There is no eclipse of his brightness. 2. No period put to his being. 1. No eclipse of his brightness: his essence shines with a fixed lustre, James 1:17., "With whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning;" Ps. 102:27., "Thou art the same." All created things are full of vicissitudes: 1. Princes and emperors are subject to mutation. Sesostris, an Egyptian prince, having subdued divers kings in war, made them draw like horses in his chariot, as if he intended to turn them to eat grass, as God did king Nebuchadnezzar. The crown hath many successors.—2. Kingdoms have their eclipses and convulsions: What is become of the glory of Athens? The pomp of Troy? Jam seges est ubi Troja fuit! Kingdoms, though they have a head of gold, yet feet of clay.—3. The heavens change, Ps. 102:26., "As a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be changed." The matter of the elements, as it is more pure, so more firm and solid; the heavens are the most ancient records, where God hath written his glory with a sunbeam, yet these shall change; though I do not think they shall be destroyed as to their substance, yet they shall be changed as to their qualities; they shall melt with fervent heat, 2 Pet. 3:12., and so be more refined and purified. Thus the heavens shall be changed, but not he who dwells in heaven. "With him there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning."—4. The best saints have their eclipses and changes. Look upon a Christian in his spiritual estate, and he is full of variation. Though the seed of grace doth not die, yet the beauty and activity of it doth often wither. A Christian hath his aguish fits in religion; sometimes his faith is at an high tide, sometimes low ebb; sometimes his love flames, and at another time like fire in the embers, and he hath lost his first love. How strong was David's grace at one time, 2 Sam. 22:3., "The God of my rock, in him will I trust!" And at another time, "I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul." What Christian can say he doth not find a change in his graces; that

the bow of his faith doth never unbend, the strings of his viol do never slacken? Sure we shall never meet with such Christians till we meet with them in heaven! But God is without any shadow of turning.—5. The angels were subject to change; they were created holy, but mutable, Jude 6., "The angels which kept not their first estate." These morning-stars of heaven were falling stars. But God's glory shines with a fixed brightness. In God there is nothing looks like a change,—no better or worse; no better in him, because then he were not perfect; nor worse in him, for then he should cease to be perfect. He is immutably holy, immutably good, there is no shadow of change in him. OBJ. Christ, who is God, assumed the human nature, here was a change. Ans. If indeed the divine nature had been converted into the human, —or the human into the divine,—here had been a change, but not so. The human nature was distinct from the divine, therefore there was no change. As suppose a cloud over the sun, this makes no change in the body of the sun; so, though the divine nature be covered with the human, this makes no change in the divine nature. II. There is no period put to his being: 1 Tim. 6:16., "Who only hath immortality." The Godhead cannot die: 1. An infinite essence cannot be changed into finite; but God is infinite. 2. He is eternal, ergo he is not mortal; to be eternal, and mortal, is a contradiction. Use 1st. See here the excellency of the divine nature in its immutability: this is the glory of the Godhead. Mutableness denotes weakness; it is not so in God, he is "the same, yesterday, and to-day, and for ever," Heb. 13:8. Men are fickle and mutable, like Reuben, "unstable as water," Gen. 49:4. They go in changeable colours.

1. They are changeable in their principles,—sometimes protestant, sometimes papist; if their faces altered as fast as their opinions, we should not know them. 2. Changeable in their resolutions; as the wind that blows in the east, presently turns about to the west. They resolve to be virtuous, but quickly repent of their resolutions; their minds are like a sick man's pulse, alter every half-hour; these the apostle compares to 'waves of the sea,' and 'wandering stars,' Jude 13.; they are not pillars in God's temple, but reeds. 3. Others are changeable in their friendship,—quickly love, and quickly hate; sometimes will put you in their bosom, then excommunicate you out of their favour; thus they change as the cameleon into several colours. But God is immutable. Use 2d. See the vanity of the creature; there are changes in every thing but in God; Ps. 62:9., "Men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie." We look for more from the creature than God hath put into it. The world brings changes; the creature hath two evils in it,—it promiseth more than we find,—and it fails us when we most need it; there is a failure in omni. A man desires to have his, corn grinded, the water fails, and then his mill cannot go; the mariner is for a voyage, the wind either doth not blow, or it is contrary, and he cannot sail; one depends upon another for the payment of a promise, and he fails, and is like a foot out of joint. Who would look for a fixed stability in the vain creature! As if one should build houses on the sand, where the sea comes in and overflows. The creature is true to nothing but deceit, and is constant only in its disappointments. It is no more wonder to see changes fall out here below, than to see the moon dressing itself in a new shape and figure; look to meet with changes in every thing but God.

Use 3d. Comfort to the godly: 1. In case of losses; if an estate be almost boiled away to nothing,—if you lose dear friends by death,— here is a double eclipse; but this is the comfort, God is unchangeable; I may lose these things, but I cannot lose my God, he never dies. When the fig-tree, and olive-tree failed, yet God did not fail, Hab. 3:18., "I will joy in the God of my salvation." The flowers in the garden die, but a man's portion remains; so outward things die and change, but, Ps. 73:26., "God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever."—2. In case of sadness of spirit, when God seems to cast off the soul in desertion, Cant. 5:6., "My Beloved had withdrawn himself;" yet God is unchangeable. He is immutable in his love; he may change his countenance, but not his heart, Jer. 31:3., "I have loved thee with an everlasting love,"—in Hebrew, gnolam, 'a love of eternity.' If once God's electing love riseth upon the soul, it never sets: Isa. 54:10., "The mountains shall be removed, but my lovingkindness shall not depart from thee, neither the covenant of my peace be removed." God's love stands faster than the mountains; God's love to Christ is unchangeable, and he will no more cease loving believers, than he will cease loving Christ. Use 4th. Of exhortation. Get an interest in this unchangeable God, then thou art as a rock in the sea, immoveable in midst of all changes. QUEST. How shall I get a part in this unchangeable God? Ans. By having a change wrought in thee: 1 Cor. 6:11., "But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified." Whence we are changed, a tenebris ad lucem,—so changed, as if another soul did live in the same body; by this change we are interested in the unchangeable God.—Trust to this God only, who is unchangeable, Isa. 2:22., "Cease ye from men;" leave trusting to the reed, but trust to 'the Rock of ages.' He that is by

faith engarrisoned in God, is safe in all changes; he is like a boat that is tied to an immoveable rock. He that trusts in God, trusts in that which cannot fail him; he is unchangeable, Heb. 13:5., "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." Health may leave us,—riches, friends may leave us,—but, saith God, 'I'll not leave thee; my power shall support thee; my Spirit shall sanctify thee; my mercy shall save thee: I will never leave thee.' O trust in this unchangeable God! God is jealous of two things, of our love, and of our trust: He is jealous of our love, lest we love the creature more than him, therefore he makes it prove bitter; and of our trust, lest we should place more confidence in it than in him, therefore he makes it prove unfaithful. Outward comforts are given us as baits by the way to refresh us, but not as crutches to lean on; if we make the creature an idol, what we make our trust God makes our shame. O trust in the immortal God! We, like Noah's dove, have no footing for our souls, till we get into the ark of God's unchangeableness, Ps. 125:1., "They that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed."—God is unchangeable is his decree; what he hath decreed from eternity is unalterable, Isa. 46:10., "My counsel shall stand." Argument, That God's eternal counsel or decree is immutable: if God changed his decree, it must be from some defect of wisdom or foresight in God, for that is the reason why men do change their purposes; through a want of foresight, they see something after, which they did not see before; but this cannot be the cause why God should alter his decree, because his knowledge is perfect, he sees all things in one entire prospect before him. OBJ. But is not God said to repent? There seems to be a change in his decree, Jonah 3:10., "The Lord repented of the evil that he said he would do unto them.

Ans. Repentance is attributed to God figuratively and improperly: Num. 23:19., He is not "a man that he should repent." There may be a change in God's work, but not in his will; God may will a change, but not change his will; "God may change his sentence, but not his decree." As suppose a king shall cause a sentence to be passed upon a malefactor whom he intends to save: notwithstanding this sentence, the king doth not alter his decree, so God threatened destruction to Nineveh, Jonah 3:4., but the people of Nineveh repenting, God spared them. Here God changed his sentence, but not his decree; it was what had lain in the womb of his purpose from eternity. OBJ. But if God's decree be unchangeable, and cannot be reversed, then to what purpose should we use the means? Our endeavours towards salvation cannot alter his decree. Ans. This decree of God doth not take off my endeavour; for he that hath decreed my salvation, hath decreed it in the use of means: and if I neglect the means, I go about to reprobate myself. No man argues thus: "God hath decreed how long I shall live, therefore I will not use means to preserve my life, not eat and drink." God hath decreed the time of my life in the use of means; so God hath decreed my salvation in the use of word, prayer, sacraments; and as a man that refuseth his food murders himself, so he that refuseth to work out his salvation doth destroy himself. The vessels of mercy are said to be 'prepared unto glory,' Rom. 9:23. How are they prepared but by being sanctified? And that cannot be but in the use of means; therefore let not God's decree take thee off from holy endeavours. A good saying of Dr. Preston, "Hast thou an heart to pray to God? it is a sign no decree of wrath hath passed against thee." Use 1st. If God's decree be eternal and unchangeable, then God doth not elect our faith foreseen, as the Arminians, Rom. 9:11–13., "The

children being not yet born, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, it was said, Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated." We are not elected for holiness, but to holiness, Eph. 1:4. If we are not justified for our faith, much less elected for our faith; but we are not justified for it; we are said to be justified through faith as an instrument, Eph. 2:8., but not for faith as a cause; and, if not justified for faith, then much less elected. God's decree of election is eternal and unchangeable, therefore depends not upon faith foreseen, Acts 13:48., "As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed." They were not elected because they believed, but they believed because they were elected. Use 2d. If God's decree be unchangeable, it is comfort in two cases: 1. Concerning God's providence towards his church. We are ready to quarrel with providence if every thing doth not jump with our desire: remember God's work goes on, and nothing falls out but what he hath decreed from eternity.—2. God hath decreed troubles for the church's good; the troubling of God's church is like the angel's troubling the water, John 5:4., which made way for healing his people. He hath decreed troubles in the church: "whose fire is in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem," Isa. 31:9. The wheels in a watch move cross one to another, but they all carry on the motion of the watch: so the wheels of providence often move cross to our desires, but still they carry on God's unchangeable decree, Dan. 12:10., "Many shall be made white." God lets the waters of affliction be poured on his people, he doth but lay them a whitening. Therefore murmur not at God's dealings; his work goes on, nothing falls out but what he hath wisely decreed from eternity; every thing shall promote God's design, and fulfil his decree.—2. Comfort to the godly in regard of their salvation, 2 Tim. 2:19., "The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his." God's counsel of election is unchangeable: once elected, and for ever elected, Rev.

3:5., "I will not blot his name out of the book of life." The book of God's decree hath no errata in it,—no blottings out,—once justified never unjustified, Hos. 13:14., "Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes." God never repents of his electing love, John 13:1., "He loved them to the end." Therefore, if thou art a believer, comfort thyself with this, the immutability of God's decree. Use 3d. To conclude: a word to the wicked, who march furiously against God and his people—Let them know, God's decree is unchangeable; God will not alter it, nor can they break it; and while they resist God's will, they fulfil it. There is a twofold will of God, voluntas præcepti et decreti,—the will of God's precept, and of his decree. While the wicked resist the will of God's precept, they fulfil the will of his permissive decree. Judas betrays Christ,—Pilate condemns him,—the soldiers crucify him,—while they resisted the will of God's precepts, they fulfilled the will of his permissive decree, Acts 4:28. Such as are wicked, God commands one thing, they do the quite contrary; to keep the sabbath, they profane it: while they disobey his command, they fulfil his permissive decree. If a man sets up two nets, one of silk, the other of iron, the silken net may be broken, not the iron: God's commands are the silken net. While men break the silken net of God's command, they are taken in the iron net of his decree; while they sit backward to God's precepts, they row forward to his decree; his decree to permit their sin, and to punish them for their sin permitted.
