PURITAN GOLD -- The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 14
Vanity Fair and the Martyrdom of Faithful


{219} Now these pilgrims, as I said, must needs go through this
fair. Well, so they did: but, behold, even as they entered into
the fair, all the people in the fair were moved, and the town
itself as it were in a hubbub about them; and that for several
reasons: for--

{220} First, The pilgrims were clothed with such kind of raiment
as was diverse from the raiment of any that traded in that fair.
The people, therefore, of the fair, made a great gazing upon them:
some said they were fools, some they were bedlams, and some they
are outlandish men. [1 Cor. 2:7-8]

{221} Secondly, And as they wondered at their apparel, so they did
likewise at their speech; for few could understand what they said;
they naturally spoke the language of Canaan, but they that kept
the fair were the men of this world; so that, from one end of the
fair to the other, they seemed barbarians each to the other.

{222} Thirdly, But that which did not a little amuse the merchandisers
was, that these pilgrims set very light by all their wares; they
cared not so much as to look upon them; and if they called upon them
to buy, they would put their fingers in their ears, and cry, Turn
away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and look upwards, signifying
that their trade and traffic was in heaven. [Ps. 119:37, Phil.
3:19-20]

{223} One chanced mockingly, beholding the carriage of the men, to
say unto them, What will ye buy? But they, looking gravely upon
him, answered, "We buy the truth." [Prov. 23:23] At that there
was an occasion taken to despise the men the more; some mocking,
some taunting, some speaking reproachfully, and some calling upon
others to smite them. At last things came to a hubbub and great
stir in the fair, insomuch that all order was confounded. Now was
word presently brought to the great one of the fair, who quickly
came down, and deputed some of his most trusty friends to take these
men into examination, about whom the fair was almost overturned. So
the men were brought to examination; and they that sat upon them,
asked them whence they came, whither they went, and what they did
there, in such an unusual garb? The men told them that they were
pilgrims and strangers in the world, and that they were going to
their own country, which was the heavenly Jerusalem, [Heb. 11:13-16]
and that they had given no occasion to the men of the town, nor
yet to the merchandisers, thus to abuse them, and to let them in
their journey, except it was for that, when one asked them what
they would buy, they said they would buy the truth. But they that
were appointed to examine them did not believe them to be any other
than bedlams and mad, or else such as came to put all things into
a confusion in the fair. Therefore they took them and beat them,
and besmeared them with dirt, and then put them into the cage, that
they might be made a spectacle to all the men of the fair.


 Behold Vanity Fair! the Pilgrims there
 Are chain'd and stand beside:
 Even so it was our Lord pass'd here,
 And on Mount Calvary died.


{224} There, therefore, they lay for some time, and were made the
objects of any man's sport, or malice, or revenge, the great one of
the fair laughing still at all that befell them. But the men being
patient, and not rendering railing for railing, but contrariwise,
blessing, and good words for bad, and kindness for injuries done,
some men in the fair that were more observing, and less prejudiced
than the rest, began to check and blame the baser sort for their
continual abuses done by them to the men; they, therefore, in
angry manner, let fly at them again, counting them as bad as the
men in the cage, and telling them that they seemed confederates, and
should be made partakers of their misfortunes. The other replied
that, for aught they could see, the men were quiet, and sober, and
intended nobody any harm; and that there were many that traded in
their fair that were more worthy to be put into the cage, yea, and
pillory too, than were the men they had abused. Thus, after divers
words had passed on both sides, the men behaving themselves all
the while very wisely and soberly before them, they fell to some
blows among themselves, and did harm one to another. Then were
these two poor men brought before their examiners again, and there
charged as being guilty of the late hubbub that had been in the
fair. So they beat them pitifully, and hanged irons upon them,
and led them in chains up and down the fair, for an example and a
terror to others, lest any should speak in their behalf, or join
themselves unto them. But Christian and Faithful behaved themselves
yet more wisely, and received the ignominy and shame that was
cast upon them, with so much meekness and patience, that it won to
their side, though but few in comparison of the rest, several of
the men in the fair. This put the other party yet into greater
rage, insomuch that they concluded the death of these two men.
Wherefore they threatened, that the cage nor irons should serve
their turn, but that they should die, for the abuse they had done,
and for deluding the men of the fair.

Then were they remanded to the cage again, until further order
should be taken with them. So they put them in, and made their
feet fast in the stocks.

{225} Here, therefore, they called again to mind what they had heard
from their faithful friend Evangelist, and were the more confirmed
in their way and sufferings by what he told them would happen to
them. They also now comforted each other, that whose lot it was
to suffer, even he should have the best of it; therefore each man
secretly wished that he might have that preferment: but committing
themselves to the all-wise disposal of Him that ruleth all things,
with much content, they abode in the condition in which they were,
until they should be otherwise disposed of.

{226} Then a convenient time being appointed, they brought them
forth to their trial, in order to their condemnation. When the
time was come, they were brought before their enemies and arraigned.
The judge's name was Lord Hate-good. Their indictment was one and
the same in substance, though somewhat varying in form, the contents
whereof were this:--

{227} "That they were enemies to and disturbers of their trade;
that they had made commotions and divisions in the town, and had
won a party to their own most dangerous opinions, in contempt of
the law of their prince."


 Now, FAITHFUL, play the man, speak for thy God:
 Fear not the wicked's malice; nor their rod:
 Speak boldly, man, the truth is on thy side:
 Die for it, and to life in triumph ride.


{228} Faithful's answer for himself

Then Faithful began to answer, that he had only set himself against
that which hath set itself against Him that is higher than the
highest. And, said he, as for disturbance, I make none, being
myself a man of peace; the parties that were won to us, were won
by beholding our truth and innocence, and they are only turned from
the worse to the better. And as to the king you talk of, since he
is Beelzebub, the enemy of our Lord, I defy him and all his angels.

{229} Then proclamation was made, that they that had aught to say
for their lord the king against the prisoner at the bar, should
forthwith appear and give in their evidence. So there came in
three witnesses, to wit, Envy, Superstition, and Pickthank. They
were then asked if they knew the prisoner at the bar; and what they
had to say for their lord the king against him.

{230} Then stood forth Envy, and said to this effect: My Lord, I
have known this man a long time, and will attest upon my oath before
this honourable bench, that he is--

JUDGE. Hold! Give him his oath. (So they sware him.) Then he said--

ENVY. My Lord, this man, notwithstanding his plausible name, is
one of the vilest men in our country. He neither regardeth prince
nor people, law nor custom; but doth all that he can to possess all
men with certain of his disloyal notions, which he in the general
calls principles of faith and holiness. And, in particular, I
heard him once myself affirm that Christianity and the customs of
our town of Vanity were diametrically opposite, and could not be
reconciled. By which saying, my Lord, he doth at once not only
condemn all our laudable doings, but us in the doing of them.

JUDGE. Then did the Judge say to him, Hast thou any more to say?

ENVY. My Lord, I could say much more, only I would not be tedious
to the court. Yet, if need be, when the other gentlemen have given
in their evidence, rather than anything shall be wanting that will
despatch him, I will enlarge my testimony against him. So he was
bid to stand by. Then they called Superstition, and bid him look
upon the prisoner. They also asked, what he could say for their
lord the king against him. Then they sware him; so he began.

{231} SUPER. My Lord, I have no great acquaintance with this man,
nor do I desire to have further knowledge of him; however, this I
know, that he is a very pestilent fellow, from some discourse that,
the other day, I had with him in this town; for then, talking with
him, I heard him say, that our religion was naught, and such by
which a man could by no means please God. Which sayings of his, my
Lord, your Lordship very well knows, what necessarily thence will
follow, to wit, that we do still worship in vain, are yet in our
sins, and finally shall be damned; and this is that which I have
to say.

{232} Then was Pickthank sworn, and bid say what he knew, in behalf
of their lord the king, against the prisoner at the bar.

Pickthank's testimony

PICK. My Lord, and you gentlemen all, This fellow I have known of a
long time, and have heard him speak things that ought not to be spoke;
for he hath railed on our noble prince Beelzebub, and hath spoken
contemptibly of his honourable friends, whose names are the Lord Old
Man, the Lord Carnal Delight, the Lord Luxurious, the Lord Desire
of Vain Glory, my old Lord Lechery, Sir Having Greedy, with all
the rest of our nobility; and he hath said, moreover, That if all
men were of his mind, if possible, there is not one of these noblemen
should have any longer a being in this town. Besides, he hath not
been afraid to rail on you, my Lord, who are now appointed to be
his judge, calling you an ungodly villain, with many other such
like vilifying terms, with which he hath bespattered most of the
gentry of our town.

{233} When this Pickthank had told his tale, the Judge directed his
speech to the prisoner at the bar, saying, Thou runagate, heretic,
and traitor, hast thou heard what these honest gentlemen have
witnessed against thee?

FAITH. May I speak a few words in my own defence?

JUDGE. Sirrah! sirrah! thou deservest to live no longer, but to
be slain immediately upon the place; yet, that all men may see our
gentleness towards thee, let us hear what thou, vile runagate, hast
to say.

{234} Faithful's defence of himself

FAITH. 1. I say, then, in answer to what Mr. Envy hath spoken,
I never said aught but this, That what rule, or laws, or customs,
or people, were flat against the Word of God, are diametrically
opposite to Christianity. If I have said amiss in this, convince
me of my error, and I am ready here before you to make my recantation.

{235} 2. As to the second, to wit, Mr. Superstition, and his charge
against me, I said only this, That in the worship of God there is
required a Divine faith; but there can be no Divine faith without
a Divine revelation of the will of God. Therefore, whatever
is thrust into the worship of God that is not agreeable to Divine
revelation, cannot be done but by a human faith, which faith will
not be profitable to eternal life.

{236} 3. As to what Mr. Pickthank hath said, I say (avoiding terms,
as that I am said to rail, and the like) that the prince of this
town, with all the rabblement, his attendants, by this gentleman
named, are more fit for a being in hell, than in this town and
country: and so, the Lord have mercy upon me!

{237} Then the Judge called to the jury (who all this while stood
by, to hear and observe): Gentlemen of the jury, you see this man
about whom so great an uproar hath been made in this town. You
have also heard what these worthy gentlemen have witnessed against
him. Also you have heard his reply and confession. It lieth now
in your breasts to hang him or save his life; but yet I think meet
to instruct you into our law.

{238} There was an Act made in the days of Pharaoh the Great,
servant to our prince, that lest those of a contrary religion should
multiply and grow too strong for him, their males should be thrown
into the river. [Exo. 1:22] There was also an Act made in the
days of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, another of his servants, that
whosoever would not fall down and worship his golden image, should
be thrown into a fiery furnace. [Dan. 3:6] There was also an Act
made in the days of Darius, that whoso, for some time, called upon
any god but him, should be cast into the lions' den. [Dan. 6]
Now the substance of these laws this rebel has broken, not only
in thought, (which is not to be borne), but also in word and deed;
which must therefore needs be intolerable.

{239} For that of Pharaoh, his law was made upon a supposition, to
prevent mischief, no crime being yet apparent; but here is a crime
apparent. For the second and third, you see he disputeth against
our religion; and for the treason he hath confessed, he deserveth
to die the death.

{240} Then went the jury out, whose names were, Mr. Blind-man, Mr.
No-good, Mr. Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr.
High-mind, Mr. Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, and
Mr. Implacable; who every one gave in his private verdict against
him among themselves, and afterwards unanimously concluded to bring
him in guilty before the Judge. And first, among themselves, Mr.
Blind-man, the foreman, said, I see clearly that this man is a
heretic. Then said Mr. No-good, Away with such a fellow from the
earth. Ay, said Mr. Malice, for I hate the very looks of him.
Then said Mr. Love-lust, I could never endure him. Nor I, said Mr.
Live-loose, for he would always be condemning my way. Hang him,
hang him, said Mr. Heady. A sorry scrub, said Mr. High-mind. My
heart riseth against him, said Mr. Enmity. He is a rogue, said
Mr. Liar. Hanging is too good for him, said Mr. Cruelty. Let us
despatch him out of the way, said Mr. Hate-light. Then said Mr.
Implacable, Might I have all the world given me, I could not be
reconciled to him; therefore, let us forthwith bring him in guilty
of death. And so they did; therefore he was presently condemned
to be had from the place where he was, to the place from whence
he came, and there to be put to the most cruel death that could be
invented.

{241} They therefore brought him out, to do with him according to
their law; and, first, they scourged him, then they buffeted him,
then they lanced his flesh with knives; after that, they stoned
him with stones, then pricked him with their swords; and, last of
all, they burned him to ashes at the stake. Thus came Faithful to
his end.

{242} Now I saw that there stood behind the multitude a chariot
and a couple of horses, waiting for Faithful, who (so soon as his
adversaries had despatched him) was taken up into it, and straightway
was carried up through the clouds, with sound of trumpet, the
nearest way to the Celestial Gate.


 Brave FAITHFUL, bravely done in word and deed;
 Judge, witnesses, and jury have, instead
 Of overcoming thee, but shown their rage:
 When they are dead, thou'lt live from age to age*.

*In the New Heaven and New Earth. {footnote from one edition}


{243} But as for Christian, he had some respite, and was remanded
back to prison. So he there remained for a space; but He that
overrules all things, having the power of their rage in his own
hand, so wrought it about, that Christian for that time escaped
them, and went his way. And as he went, he sang, saying--

 Well, Faithful, thou hast faithfully profest
 Unto thy Lord; with whom thou shalt be blest,
 When faithless ones, with all their vain delights,
 Are crying out under their hellish plights:
 Sing, Faithful, sing, and let thy name survive;
 For though they kill'd thee, thou art yet alive!


{244} Now I saw in my dream, that Christian went not forth alone,
for there was one whose name was Hopeful (being made so by the
beholding of Christian and Faithful in their words and behaviour,
in their sufferings at the fair), who joined himself unto him, and,
entering into a brotherly covenant, told him that he would be his
companion. Thus, one died to bear testimony to the truth, and
another rises out of his ashes, to be a companion with Christian
in his pilgrimage. This Hopeful also told Christian, that there
were many more of the men in the fair, that would take their time
and follow after.

{245} So I saw that quickly after they were got out of the fair,
they overtook one that was going before them, whose name was By-ends:
so they said to him, What countryman, Sir? and how far go you this
way? He told them that he came from the town of Fair-speech, and
he was going to the Celestial City (but told them not his name).

From Fair-speech! said Christian. Is there any good that lives
there? [Prov. 26:25]

BY-ENDS. Yes, said By-ends, I hope.

CHR. Pray, Sir, what may I call you? said Christian.

BY-ENDS. I am a stranger to you, and you to me: if you be going
this way, I shall be glad of your company; if not, I must be content.

CHR. This town of Fair-speech, said Christian, I have heard of;
and, as I remember, they say it is a wealthy place.

BY-ENDS. Yes, I will assure you that it is; and I have very many
rich kindred there.

{246} CHR. Pray, who are your kindred there? if a man may be so
bold.

BY-ENDS. Almost the whole town; and in particular, my Lord
Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my Lord Fair-speech, (from whose
ancestors that town first took its name), also Mr. Smooth-man, Mr.
Facing-both-ways, Mr. Any-thing; and the parson of our parish, Mr.
Two-tongues, was my mother's own brother by father's side; and to
tell you the truth, I am become a gentleman of good quality, yet
my great-grandfather was but a waterman, looking one way and rowing
another, and I got most of my estate by the same occupation.

CHR. Are you a married man?

BY-ENDS. Yes, and my wife is a very virtuous woman, the daughter
of a virtuous woman; she was my Lady Feigning's daughter, therefore
she came of a very honourable family, and is arrived to such a
pitch of breeding, that she knows how to carry it to all, even to
prince and peasant. It is true we somewhat differ in religion from
those of the stricter sort, yet but in two small points: first,
we never strive against wind and tide; secondly, we are always most
zealous when religion goes in his silver slippers; we love much
to walk with him in the street, if the sun shines, and the people
applaud him.

{247} Then Christian stepped a little aside to his fellow, Hopeful,
saying, It runs in my mind that this is one By-ends of Fair-speech;
and if it be he, we have as very a knave in our company as dwelleth
in all these parts. Then said Hopeful, Ask him; methinks he should
not be ashamed of his name. So Christian came up with him again,
and said, Sir, you talk as if you knew something more than all the
world doth; and if I take not my mark amiss, I deem I have half a
guess of you: Is not your name Mr. By-ends, of Fair-speech?

BY-ENDS. This is not my name, but indeed it is a nick-name that is
given me by some that cannot abide me: and I must be content to
bear it as a reproach, as other good men have borne theirs before
me.

{247} CHR. But did you never give an occasion to men to call you
by this name?

BY-ENDS. Never, never! The worst that ever I did to give them an
occasion to give me this name was, that I had always the luck to
jump in my judgment with the present way of the times, whatever it
was, and my chance was to get thereby; but if things are thus cast
upon me, let me count them a blessing; but let not the malicious
load me therefore with reproach.

{248} CHR. I thought, indeed, that you were the man that I heard
of; and to tell you what I think, I fear this name belongs to you
more properly than you are willing we should think it doth.

BY-ENDS. Well, if you will thus imagine, I cannot help it; you
shall find me a fair company-keeper, if you will still admit me
your associate.

CHR. If you will go with us, you must go against wind and tide;
the which, I perceive, is against your opinion; you must also own
religion in his rags, as well as when in his silver slippers; and
stand by him, too, when bound in irons, as well as when he walketh
the streets with applause.

BY-ENDS. You must not impose, nor lord it over my faith; leave me
to my liberty, and let me go with you.

CHR. Not a step further, unless you will do in what I propound as
we.

Then said By-ends, I shall never desert my old principles, since
they are harmless and profitable. If I may not go with you, I must
do as I did before you overtook me, even go by myself, until some
overtake me that will be glad of my company.

{249} Now I saw in my dream that Christian and Hopeful forsook him,
and kept their distance before him; but one of them looking back,
saw three men following Mr. By-ends, and behold, as they came up
with him, he made them a very low conge {conge'}; and they also
gave him a compliment. The men's names were Mr. Hold-the-world,
Mr. Money-love, and Mr. Save-all; men that Mr. By-ends had formerly
been acquainted with; for in their minority they were schoolfellows,
and were taught by one Mr. Gripe-man, a schoolmaster in Love-gain,
which is a market town in the county of Coveting, in the north. This
schoolmaster taught them the art of getting, either by violence,
cozenage, flattery, lying, or by putting on the guise of religion;
and these four gentlemen had attained much of the art of their
master, so that they could each of them have kept such a school
themselves.

{250} Well, when they had, as I said, thus saluted each other, Mr.
Money-love said to Mr. By-ends, Who are they upon the road before
us? (for Christian and Hopeful were yet within view).

By-ends' character of the pilgrims

BY-ENDS. They are a couple of far countrymen, that, after their
mode, are going on pilgrimage.

MONEY-LOVE. Alas! Why did they not stay, that we might have had
their good company? for they, and we, and you, Sir, I hope, are
all going on pilgrimage.

BY-ENDS. We are so, indeed; but the men before us are so rigid,
and love so much their own notions, and do also so lightly esteem
the opinions of others, that let a man be never so godly, yet if
he jumps not with them in all things, they thrust him quite out of
their company.

{251} SAVE-ALL. That is bad, but we read of some that are righteous
overmuch; and such men's rigidness prevails with them to judge and
condemn all but themselves. But, I pray, what, and how many, were
the things wherein you differed?

BY-ENDS. Why, they, after their headstrong manner, conclude that
it is duty to rush on their journey all weathers; and I am for
waiting for wind and tide. They are for hazarding all for God at
a clap; and I am for taking all advantages to secure my life and
estate. They are for holding their notions, though all other men
are against them; but I am for religion in what, and so far as the
times, and my safety, will bear it. They are for religion when
in rags and contempt; but I am for him when he walks in his golden
slippers, in the sunshine, and with applause.

{252} HOLD-THE-WORLD. Ay, and hold you there still, good Mr.
By-ends; for, for my part, I can count him but a fool, that, having
the liberty to keep what he has, shall be so unwise as to lose it.
Let us be wise as serpents; it is best to make hay when the sun
shines; you see how the bee lieth still all winter, and bestirs her
only when she can have profit with pleasure. God sends sometimes
rain, and sometimes sunshine; if they be such fools to go through
the first, yet let us be content to take fair weather along with
us. For my part, I like that religion best that will stand with
the security of God's good blessings unto us; for who can imagine,
that is ruled by his reason, since God has bestowed upon us the
good things of this life, but that he would have us keep them for
his sake? Abraham and Solomon grew rich in religion. And Job
says, that a good man shall lay up gold as dust. But he must not
be such as the men before us, if they be as you have described
them.

SAVE-ALL. I think that we are all agreed in this matter, and
therefore there needs no more words about it.

MONEY-LOVE. No, there needs no more words about this matter, indeed;
for he that believes neither Scripture nor reason (and you see we
have both on our side) neither knows his own liberty, nor seeks
his own safety.

{253} BY-ENDS. My brethren, we are, as you see, going all on
pilgrimage; and, for our better diversion from things that are bad,
give me leave to propound unto you this question:--

Suppose a man, a minister, or a tradesman, &c., should have an
advantage lie before him, to get the good blessings of this life,
yet so as that he can by no means come by them except, in appearance
at least, he becomes extraordinarily zealous in some points
of religion that he meddled not with before, may he not use these
means to attain his end, and yet be a right honest man?

{254} MONEY-LOVE. I see the bottom of your question; and, with these
gentlemen's good leave, I will endeavour to shape you an answer.
And first, to speak to your question as it concerns a minister
himself: Suppose a minister, a worthy man, possessed but of a very
small benefice, and has in his eye a greater, more fat, and plump
by far; he has also now an opportunity of getting of it, yet so as
by being more studious, by preaching more frequently and zealously,
and, because the temper of the people requires it, by altering
of some of his principles; for my part, I see no reason but a man
may do this, (provided he has a call), ay, and more a great deal
besides, and yet be an honest man. For why--

{255} 1. His desire of a greater benefice is lawful, (this cannot
be contradicted), since it is set before him by Providence; so then,
he may get it, if he can, making no question for conscience' sake.

{256} 2. Besides, his desire after that benefice makes him more
studious, a more zealous preacher, &c., and so makes him a better
man; yea, makes him better improve his parts, which is according
to the mind of God.

{257} 3. Now, as for his complying with the temper of his people,
by dissenting, to serve them, some of his principles, this argueth,
(1) That he is of a self-denying, temper; (2) Of a sweet and winning
deportment; and so (3) more fit for the ministerial function.

{258} 4. I conclude, then, that a minister that changes a small
for a great, should not, for so doing, be judged as covetous; but
rather, since he has improved in his parts and industry thereby,
be counted as one that pursues his call, and the opportunity put
into his hands to do good.
