PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 13
Effectual Calling — Of Sanctification

---

EFFECTUAL CALLING
ROM. 8:30. Them he also called.
QUEST. XXXI. WHAT is effectual calling?
ANS. It is a gracious work of the Spirit, whereby he causeth us to
embrace Christ, freely offered to us in the gospel.
In this verse is a golden chain of salvation, made up of four links; this
is one, vocation,—"Them he also called." Calling is nova creatio,—a
new creation, the first resurrection. There is a two-fold call: 1. An
extrinsic or outward call; 2. An intrinsic or inward effectual call.
1. An extrinsic or outward call, which is God's offer of grace to
sinners, inviting them to come in and accept of Christ and salvation,
Mat. 20:16., "Many are called, but few chosen." This outward call
shews men what they ought to do in order to salvation, and renders
them inexcusable in case of disobedience.
2. There is an intrinsic or effectual call, when God with the offer of
grace works grace; by this call the heart is renewed, and the will
effectually drawn to embrace Christ. The outward call brings men to
a profession of Christ, the inward to a possession of Christ.
QUEST. What are the means of this effectual call?
Ans. Every creature hath a voice to call us. The heavens call to us to
behold God's glory, Ps. 19:1.; conscience calls to us; God's judgments
call to us, repent, Mic. 6:9., "Hear ye the rod." But every voice doth
not convert. There are two means of our effectual call:

1. The preaching of the word, which is the sounding God's silver
trumpet in men's ears; God doth not speak by an oracle, he calls by
his ministers. Samuel thought it had been only the voice of Eli that
called to him; but it was God's voice, 1 Sam. 3:6. So perhaps you
think it is only the minister speaks to you in the word, but it is God
himself speaks. Therefore Christ is said (now) to speak to us from
heaven, Heb. 12:25. How doth he speak but by his ministers as a king
speaks by his ambassadors. Know, that in every sermon preached,
God calls to you; and to refuse the message we bring, is to refuse God
himself.
2. The other means of our effectual call, is the Holy Spirit. The
ministry of the word is the pipe or organ; the Spirit of God blowing in
it doth effectually change men's hearts, Acts 10:44., "While Peter
spake, the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word of God."
Ministers knock at the door of men's hearts, the Spirit comes with a
key and opens the door, Acts 16:6., "A certain woman named Lydia,
whose heart the Lord opened."
QUEST. From what doth God call men?
Ans. 1. From sin; he calls them from their ignorance and unbelief, 1
Pet. 1:14. By nature the understanding is enveloped with darkness.
God calls men "from darkness to light," Acts 26:18. as if one should
be called out of a dungeon to behold the light of the sun.
A. 2. From danger. As the angels called Lot out of Sodom when it was
ready to rain fire, so God calls his people from the fire and brimstone
of hell, and from all those curses they were exposed to.
A. 3. He calls them out of the world, as Christ called Matthew from
the receipt of custom: John 17:16., "They are not of the world." Such
as are divinely called are not natives here, but pilgrims; they do not

conform to the world, or follow its sinful fashions; they are not of the
world; though they live here, yet they trade in the heavenly country;
the world is a place where Satan's throne is, Rev. 2:13. A stage on
which sin every day acts its part. Now such as are called, are in, but
not of the world.
QUEST. To what God calls men?
Ans. 1. He calls them to holiness, 1 Thess. 4:7., "God hath not called
us to uncleanness, but unto holiness." Holiness is the livery, or silver
star, the godly wear, Isa. 63:18., Knam kodsheca,—'The people of thy
holiness.' The called of God are anointed with the consecrating oil of
the Spirit, 1 John 2:20., "Ye have an unction from the Holy One."
A. 2. God calls them to glory, as if a man were called out of a prison
to sit upon a throne, 1 Thess. 2:12., "Who hath called you to his
kingdom and glory." Whom God calls, he crowns; it is a 'weight of
glory,' 2 Cor. 4:17. The Hebrew word for glory, Kauod signifies
pondus, a weight; the weight of glory adds to the worth, the weightier
gold is, the more it is worth. And this glory is not transient, but
permanent,—an eternal weight; it is better felt than expressed.
QUEST. What is the cause of the effectual call?
Ans. God's electing love, Rom. 8:30., "Whom he predestinated, them
he also called." Election is the fountain-cause of our vocation; it is
not because some are more worthy to partake of the heavenly calling
than others (as the Arminians), we were all in our blood, Ezek. 16:6.
And what worthiness is in us? What worthiness was there in Mary
Magdalene, out of whom seven devils were cast? What worthiness in
the Corinthians, when God began to call them by his gospel? They
were fornicators, effeminate, idolaters, 1 Cor. 6:11., "Such were some
of you, but ye are washed," &c. Before effectual calling, we are not

only "without strength," Rom. 5:6., but 'enemies,' Col. 1:21. So that
the foundation of vocation is election.
QUEST. What are the epithets or qualifications of this call?
Ans. 1. It is a powerful call; verba Dei sunt opera, LUTHER. God puts
forth infinite power in calling home a sinner to himself; he doth not
only put forth his voice but his arm. The apostle speaks of the
exceeding greatness of his power, he exerciseth towards them that
believe, Eph. 1:19. God rides forth conquering in the chariot of his
gospel; he conquers the pride of the heart, and makes the will, which
stood out as a fort-royal, to yield and stoop to his grace; he makes the
stony heart bleed; it is a mighty powerful call. Why then do the
Arminians seem to talk of a moral persuasion,—that God in the
conversion of a sinner, doth only morally persuade, and no more? He
sets his promises before them to allure them to good, and his
threatenings to deter them from evil; and here is all he doth. But sure
moral persuasions alone are insufficient to the effectual call: how can
the bare proposal of promises and threatenings convert a soul? This
amounts not to a new creation, or that power which raised Christ
from the dead; God doth not only persuade, but enable, Ezek. 37:27.
If God, in conversion, should only morally persuade, that is, set good
and evil before men, then God doth not put forth so much power in
saving men, as the devil doth in destroying them. Satan doth not only
propound tempting objects to men, but doth concur with his
temptations: therefore he is said to "work in the children of
disobedience," Eph. 2:2. The Greek word, to work, signifies imperii
vim, CAMER., the power Satan hath in carrying men to sin. And shall
not God's power in converting, be greater than Satan's power in
seducing? The effectual call is mighty and powerful; God puts forth a
divine energy, nay a kind of omnipotency; it is such a powerful call
that the will of man hath no power effectually to resist.

A. 2. It is an high calling, Phil. 3:14., "I press toward the mark of the
prize of the high calling of God." It is an high calling, 1st, Because we
are called to high exercises of religion; to be crucified to the world, to
live by faith, to do angels' work, to love God, to be living organs of his
praise, to hold communion with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1:3.—
2dly, It is an high calling, because we are called to high privileges; to
justification and adoption, to be kings and priests unto God; we are
called to the fellowship of angels, to be coheirs with Christ, Rom.
8:17. They who are effectually called, are candidates of heaven; they
are princes in all lands, Ps. 45:16., though princes in disguise.—3dly,
It is an immutable call, Rom. 11:9., "The gifts and calling of God are
without repentance;" that is, those gifts that flow from election, (as
vocation and justification) these are without repentance. God
repented he called Saul to be a king; but he never repents that he
calls a sinner to be a saint.
Use 1st. See the necessity of the effectual call, a man cannot go to
heaven without it. First, We must be called before glorified, Rom.
8:30. A man uncalled can lay claim to nothing in the Bible but
threatenings; a man in the state of nature is not fit for heaven, no
more than a man in his filth and his rags is fit to come into a king's
presence; a man in his pure naturals, is a God-hater, Rom. 1:30.; and
is he fit for heaven? Will God lay his enemy in his bosom?
Use 2d. Of trial. Whether we are effectually called? we may know it
by the antecedent and consequent of it.
1. By the antecedent. Before this effectual call, an humbling work
passeth upon the soul: a man is convinced of sin, he sees he is a
sinner and nothing but a sinner; the fallow-ground of his heart is
broken up, Jer. 4:3. As the husbandman breaks the clods, then casts
in the seed, so God, by the convincing work of the law breaks a

sinner's heart, and makes it fit to receive the seeds of grace. Such as
were never convinced, are never called, John 16:8., "He shall
convince the world of sin." Conviction is the first step in conversion.
2. By the consequents, two, (1.) He who is savingly called, answers to
God's call. When God called Samuel, he answered, "Speak, Lord, thy
servant heareth," 1 Sam. 3:10. When God calls thee to an act of
religion, thou dost run at God's call, Acts 26:19., "I was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision." If God calls to duties contrary to
flesh and blood, we obey his voice in every thing; true obedience is
like the needle which points that way which the loadstone draws.
Such as are deaf to God's call, shew they are not called by grace.—(2.)
He who is effectually called, doth stop his ears to all other calls which
would call him off from God. As God hath his call, so there are other
contrary calls: Satan calls by a temptation,—lust calls,—evil company
calls,—but, as the adder stops its ear against the voice of the charmer,
so he who is effectually called, stops his ear against all the charms of
the flesh and the Devil.
Use 3d. Of comfort to them who are the called of God. This call
evidenceth election, Rom. 8:30., "Whom he predestinated, them he
also called." Election is the cause of our vocation, and vocation is the
sign of our election. Election is the first link of the golden chain of
salvation, vocation is the second; he who hath the second link of the
chain is sure of the first link; as by the stream we are led to the
fountain, so by vocation we ascend to election. Calling is an earnest
and pledge of glory, 2 Thess. 2:13., "God hath chosen you to
salvation, through sanctification." We may read God's predestinating
love in the work of grace in our heart.
To such as are called, to be thankful to God for this unspeakable
blessing; be thankful to all the persons in the Trinity, to the Father's

mercy,—to the Son's merit,—to the Spirit's efficacy. To make you
thankful, consider, when you had offended God that he should call
you; that, when God needed you not, he had millions of glorified
saints and angels to praise him, yet he called you. Again, consider
what you were before God called you; you were in your sins; when
God called Paul, he found him persecuting; when he called Matthew,
he found him at the receipt of custom; when he called Zaccheus, he
found him using extortion. When God calls a man by his grace, he
finds him seeking after his lusts; as when Saul was called to the
kingdom, he was seeking the asses; that God should call thee when
thou wast in the hot pursuit of sin, admire God's love, exalt his
praise. Again, that God should call you, and pass by others, what
mercy is this! Mat. 11:26., "Even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight." That God should pass by the wise and noble persons, of
sweeter disposition, acuter parts, guilty of less vice, and that the lot
of free grace should fall upon you. O astonishing love of God! It was a
great favour of God to Samuel, that God called to him, and revealed
his mind to him, and passed by Eli, though a priest and a judge in
Israel, 1 Sam. 3:6., so, that God should call to thee, a flagitious
sinner, and pass by others of higher birth and better morals, here is
that which calls aloud for praise. As God so governs the clouds, that
he makes them rain upon one place, and not upon another: so two at
a sermon,—one his heart the Lord opens,—the other is no more
affected with it, than a deaf man with the sound of music. Here is the
banner of free grace displayed, and here should the trophies of praise
he erected. Elijah and Elisha were walking together; on a sudden
there came a chariot of fire, and carried Elijah up to heaven, but left
Elisha behind; so, when two are walking together, husband and wife,
father and child, that God should call one by his grace, but leave the
other, carry up one in a triumphant chariot to heaven, but let the
other perish eternally; O infinite rich grace! How should they that are
called be affected with God's discriminating love? How should the

vessels of mercy run over with thankfulness? How should they stand
upon mount Gerizim, blessing and praising God? O begin the work of
heaven here! Such as are patterns of mercy should be trumpeters of
praise. Thus St. Paul being called of God, and seeing what a debtor
he was to free grace, breaks forth into admiration and gratulation, 1
Tim. 1:13.
Use 4th. To the called. Walk worthy of your high calling, Eph. 4:1, "I
beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called;" in two things.
1. Walk compassionately. Pity such as are yet uncalled; hast thou a
child that God hath not yet called, a wife, a servant? weep over their
dying souls; they are in their blood, "under the power of Satan." O
pity them! Let their sins more trouble you than your own sufferings;
if you pity an ox or ass going astray, will you not pity a soul going
astray? Shew your piety by your pity.
2. Walk holily. Your's is an holy calling, 2 Tim. 1:9. You are called to
be saints, Rom. 1:7. Show your vocation by a Bible conversation.
Shall not flowers smell sweeter than weeds? Shall not they who are
ennobled with grace have more fragrancy in their lives than sinners?
1 Pet. 1:15., "As he who hath called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation." O dishonour not your high calling, by any
sordid carriage! When Antigonus was going to defile himself with
women; one told him, "he was a king's son." O remember your
dignity: 'called of God!' of the blood-royal of heaven: do nothing
unworthy of your honourable calling! Scipio refused the embraces of
an harlot because he was general of an army: abhor all motions to
sin, because of your high calling. It is not fit for them who are the
called of God, to do as others; though others of the Jews did drink
wine, it was not fit for the Nazarite, because he had a vow of

separation upon him, and had promised abstinence. Though Pagans
and nominal Christians take liberty to sin, yet it is not fit for them
who are called out of the world, and have the mark of election upon
them, to do so; ye are consecrated persons, your bodies are the
temples of the Holy Ghost, and your bodies must be a sacristy or holy
of holies.

OF JUSTIFICATION
ROM. 3:24. Being justified freely by his Grace.
QUEST. XXXIII. WHAT is justification?
ANS. It is an act of God's free grace, whereby he pardoneth all our
sins, and accepts us as righteous in his sight, only for the
righteousness of CHRIST, imputed to us, and received by faith alone.
JUSTIFICATION is the very hinge and pilar of CHRISTIANITY: and
an error about justification is dangerous, like a crack in the
foundation, or an error in the first concoction. Justification by Christ
is a spring of the water of life; and to have the poison of corrupt
doctrine cast into this spring, is damnable. It was a saying of Luther,
"that after his death the doctrine of justification would be
corrupted;" as it hath been in these latter times: the Arminians and
Socinians have cast a dead fly into this box of precious ointment.
I shall endeavour to follow the star of scripture to light me through
this mysterious point
QUEST. What is meant by justification?

Ans. It is verbum forense,—a word borrowed from law-courts,
wherein a person arraigned is pronounced righteous, and is openly
absolved in the court. Thus God, in justifying a person, pronounceth
him to be righteous, and looks upon him as if he had not sinned.
QUEST. What is the ground of justification?
Ans. The causa,—the inward impellent motive or ground of
justification,—is the free grace of God: so in the text, justified freely
by his grace; which Ambrose expounds, "not of the grace wrought
within us, but the free grace of God." The first wheel that sets all the
rest a-running is the love and favour of God: "being justified by his
grace;" as a king freely pardons a delinquent. Justification is a mercy
spun out of the bowels of free grace. God doth not justify us because
we are worthy, but by justifying us makes us worthy.
QUEST. What is the material cause, or that by which a sinner is
justified?
Ans. The matter of our justification, is Christ's satisfaction made to
his Father. If it be asked, how can it stand with God's justice and
holiness to pronounce us innocent when we are guilty? This answers
it, Christ having made satisfaction for our fault, now God may, in
equity and justice, pronounce us righteous. It is a just thing for a
creditor to discharge a debtor of the debt, when a satisfaction is
made by the surety.
QUEST. But how was Christ's satisfaction meritorious, and so
sufficient to justify?
Ans. In respect of the divine nature: as he was man he suffered, as
God he satisfied; by Christ's death and merits, God's justice is more

abundantly satisfied, than if we had suffered the pains of hell for
ever.
QUEST. Wherein lies the formality or essence of our justification?
Ans. In the imputation of Christ's righteousness to us, Jer. 23:6.,
"This is the name whereby he shall be called, Jehovah Tzidkennu,"
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. 1 Cor. 1:30., "He is made to us
righteousness." This righteousness of Christ which doth justify us, is
a better righteousness than the angels'; theirs is the righteousness of
creatures, this of God.
QUEST. What is the means or instrument of our justification?
Ans. Faith, Rom. 5:1., "Being justified by faith." The dignity is not in
faith as a grace, but relatively, as it lays hold on Christ's merits.
QUEST. What is the efficient cause of our justification?
Ans. The whole Trinity; all the persons in the blessed Trinity have an
hand in the justification of a sinner,—opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt
indivisa. God the Father is said to justify, Rom. 8:33., "It is God that
justifieth." God the Son is said to justify, Acts 13:39., "By him all that
believe are justified." God the Holy Ghost is said to justify, 1 Cor.
6:11., "But ye are justified by the Spirit of our God." God the Father
justifies, as he pronounceth us righteous; God the Son justifies, as he
imputes his righteousness to us; and God the Holy Ghost justifies, as
he clears up our justification, and seals us up to the day of
redemption.
QUEST. What is the end of our justification?
Ans. The end is, 1. That God may inherit praise, Eph. 1:6., "To the
praise of the glory of his grace." Hereby God raiseth the everlasting

trophies of his own honour; how will the justified sinner proclaim the
love of God, and make heaven ring with his praises!—2. That the
justified person may inherit glory, Rom. 8:30., "Whom he justified,
them he also glorified." God, in justifying, doth not only absolve a
soul from guilt, but advance him to dignity: as Joseph was not only
loosed from prison, but made lord of the kingdom. Justification is
crowned with glorification.
QUEST. Whether are we justified from eternity?
Ans. No: for, 1. By nature we are under a sentence of condemnation,
John 3:18. But we could not be at all condemned, if we were justified
from eternity.—2. The scripture confines justification to those who
believe and repent, Acts 3:19., "Repent, that your sins may be blotted
out." Therefore their sins were uncancelled, and their persons
unjustified, till they did repent. Though God doth not justify us for
our repentance, yet not without it. The Antinomians erroneously
hold, that we are justified from eternity; this doctrine is a key which
opens the door to all licentiousness; what sins do they care they
commit, so long as they hold they are ab æterno justified whether
they repent or not?
Before I come to the uses, I shall lay down four maxims or positions
about justification.
Position 1. That justification confers a real benefit upon the person
justified. The acquitting and discharging of the debtor, by virtue of
the satisfaction made by the surety, is a real benefit to the debtor; a
robe of righteousness, and a crown of righteousness, are real
benefits.
Position 2. All believers are alike justified; justificatio non recipit
magis et minus,—though there are degrees in grace, yet not in

justification; one is not justified more than another, the weakest
believer is as perfectly justified as the strongest. Mary Magdalene is
as much justified as the Virgin Mary. This may be cordial-water to a
weak believer: though thou hast but a drachm of faith, thou art as
truly justified as he who is of the highest stature in Christ.
Position 3. Whosoever God justifies, he sanctifies, 1 Cor. 6:11., "But
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified." The papists calumniate the
protestants; they report, we hold that men continuing in sin are
justified; whereas all our protestant writers affirm, that
righteousness imputed, viz. Justification,—and righteousness
inherent, viz. Sanctification,—must be inseparably united. Holiness
indeed is not the cause of our justification, but it is the concomitant;
the heat in the sun is not the cause of its light, but it is the
concomitant. It is absurd to imagine that God should justify a people,
and they go on in sin. If God should justify a people and not sanctify
them, he should justify a people whom he could not glorify. God, as
he is an holy God, cannot lay a sinner in his bosom. The metal is first
refined, before the king's stamp is put upon it; first the soul is refined
with holiness, before God puts the royal stamp of justification upon
it.
Position 4. Justification is inamissibilis,—it is a fixed permanent
thing, it can never be lost. The Arminians hold an apostacy from
justification: to-day justified, to-morrow unjustified; to-day a Peter,
to-morrow a Judas; to-day a member of Christ, to-morrow a limb of
Satan; a most uncomfortable doctrine. Indeed justified persons may
fall from degrees of grace,—they may leave their first love,—they may
lose God's favour for a time,—but not lose their justification. If they
are justified then they are elected; they can no more fall from their
justification than from their election. If they are justified, then they
have union with Christ: and can a member of Christ be broken off? If

one justified person may fall away from Christ, they all may, and so
Christ should be an head without a body.
Use 1st. See from hence that there is nothing within us could justify
us but something without us; not any righteousness inherent, but
imputed; we may as well look for a star in the earth as for
justification in our own righteousness. The papists say we are
justified by works. But the apostle confutes it, "not of works, lest any
man should boast," Eph. 2:9. But the papists say "the works done by
an unregenerate man indeed cannot justify him, but works done by a
regenerate man may justify." This is most false, as may be proved
both by example and reason.
1. By example. Abraham was a regenerate man, but Abraham was not
justified by works, but by faith, Rom. 4:3., Abraham "believed God,
and it was counted to him for righteousness."
2 By reason. How can those works justify us, which defile us? Isa.
64:6., "Our righteousnesses are as filthy rags." Bona opera non
præcedunt justificationem, sed sequuntur justificatum,—good works
are not an usher to go before justification, but an handmaid to follow
it.
OBJ. But doth not the apostle James say Abraham was justified by
works?
A. The answer is easy: works declare us to be righteous before men,
but they do not make us righteous before God. Works are evidences
of our justification, not causes. This name only must be graven upon
the golden plate of our high priest Christ, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

Use 2d. Of exhortation. Branch 1. Adore the infinite wisdom and
goodness of God, to find out such a way to justify us by "rich grace
and precious blood." We were all involved in guilt: none of us could
plead, not guilty, and being guilty, we lay under a sentence of death;
now that the judge himself should find out a way to justify us, and
the creditor himself contrive a way to have the debt paid and not
distress the debtor, this may fill us with wonder and love. The angels
admire the mystery of free grace in this new way of justifying and
saving lost man, 1 Pet. 1:12., and should not we, who are nearly
concerned in it, and on whom the benefit is devolved, cry out with
the apostle, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God!" &c.
Branch 2. Labour for this high privilege of justification. There is balm
in Gilead; Christ hath laid down the price of our justification, viz. his
blood; and he offers himself and all his merits to us, to justify; he
invites us to come to him; he hath promised to give his Spirit, to
enable us to do what is required. Why then, sinners, will ye not look
after this great privilege of justification? Do not starve in the midst of
plenty; do not perish when there is remedy to save you. Would not he
be thought to be distracted, who having a pardon offered him, only
upon the acknowledgment of his fault, and promising amendment,
should bid the prince keep his pardon to himself; for his part, he was
in love with his chains and fetters, and would die? Thou who
neglectest justification offered thee freely by Christ in the gospel, art
this distracted person. Is the love of Christ to be slighted? Is thy soul
and heaven worth nothing? O then look after justification through
Christ's blood!
Consider, 1. The necessity of being justified. If we are not justified,
we cannot be glorified, Rom. 8:30., "Whom he justified, them he also
glorified." He who is outlawed, and all his goods confiscated, must be

brought into favour with his prince, before he can be restored to his
former rights and liberties: so, we must first have our sins forgiven,
and be brought into God's favour by justification, before we can be
restored to the liberty of the sons of God, and have right to that
happiness we forfeited in Adam.
2. The utility and benefit: by justification we enjoy peace in our
conscience,—a richer jewel than any prince wears in his crown: Rom.
5:1., "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God." Peace can
sweeten all our afflictions, it turns our water into wine. How happy is
a justified person who hath the power of God to guard him, and the
peace of God to comfort him! Peace flowing from justification, is an
antidote against the fear of death and hell, Rom. 8:33., "It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemneth?" Therefore labour for this
justification by Christ. This privilege is obtained by believing in
Christ, Acts 13:39., "By him all that believe are justified." And Rom.
3:25., "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood." Faith unites us to Christ; and having union with his
person, we partake of his merits, and the glorious salvation which
comes by him.
Use 3d. Comfort to the justified. 1. It is comfort in case of failings.
Alas! how defective are the godly. They come short in every duty; but
though believers should be humbled under their defects, yet not
despond; they are not to be justified by their duties or graces, but the
righteousness of Christ. Their duties are mixed with sin, but that
righteousness which justifies them is a perfect righteousness.—2.
Comfort in case of hard censures; the world censures the people of
God as proud and hypocritical, and the troublers of Israel; but
though men censure and condemn the godly, yet God hath justified
them; and as he hath now justified them, so at the day of judgment
he will openly justify them, and pronounce them righteous before

men and angels. And God is so just and holy a judge, that having
once justified his people, he will never condemn them. Pilate
justified Christ, "I find no fault in him," yet after this he condemned
him; but God having publicly justified his saints, he will never
condemn them: "whom he justified them he also glorified."

OF ADOPTION
JOHN 1:12. To them he gave power to become the sons of God.
Having spoken of the great points of faith and justification, the next
is adoption.
1. The qualification of the persons: "as many as received him."
Receiving is put for believing, as is clear by the last words, "to them
that believe in his name."
2. The specification of the privileges: "to them he gave power to
become the sons of God." The Greek word for power, exusia, signifies
dignity and prerogative; he dignified them to become the sons of
God.
Our sonship differs from Christ's sonship; Christ was the Son of God
by eternal generation,—a Son before time,—but our sonship is, 1. By
creation, Acts 17:28., "We are his offspring." This is no privilege; men
may have God for their Father by creation, yet have the devil for their
father.—2. Our sonship is by adoption; so in the text, "He gave them
power to become the sons of God." Adoption is twofold.
1. External and federal: so those who live in a visible, church, and
make a profession of God, are sons, Mat. 8:12., "The children of the

kingdom shall be cast out."
2. Real and gracious: so they are sons, who are God's favourites, and
are heirs of glory. Before I proceed to the questions, I shall lay down
three positions.
Position 1. Adoption takes in all nations: at first adoption was
confined to the people of the Jews, they only were grafted into the
true olive, and were dignified with glorious privileges, Rom. 9:4.,
"Who are Israelites, to whom pertaineth the adoption and the glory."
But now, in the time of the gospel, the charter is enlarged, and the
believing Gentiles are within the line of communication and have a
right to the privileges of adoption as well as the Jews, Acts 10:35., "In
every nation he that feareth God, and worketh righteousness, is
accepted with him."
Position 2. Adoption takes in both sexes, females as well as males, 2
Cor. 6:18., "I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters." I have read that in some countries, females are excluded
from the supreme dignity,—as by the Salique law in France no
woman can inherit a crown: but if we speak of spiritual privileges,
females are as capable as males. Every gracious soul, of whatever sex,
lays claim to adoption, and hath an interest in God as a father; "ye
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty."
Position 3. Adoption is an act of pure grace, Eph. 1:5., "Having
predestinated us unto the adoption of children, according to the good
pleasure of his will." Adoption is a mercy spun out of the bowels of
free grace; all by nature are strangers, therefore have no right to
sonship, only God is pleased to adopt one, and not another, to make
one a vessel of glory, another a vessel of wrath. The adopted heir may
cry out, "Lord, how is it, that thou wilt show thyself to me, and not
unto the world?"

QUEST. What this filiation or adoption is?
Ans. Adoption is the taking a stranger into the relation of a son and
heir: so Moses was the adopted son of king Pharaoh's daughter,
Exod. 2:10.; and Esther was the adopted child of her uncle Mordecai,
Esth. 2:7. Thus God adopts us into the family of heaven; and God, in
adopting us, doth two things:
1. He ennobles us with his name: he who is adopted, bears his name
who adopts him, Rev. 3:12., "I will write on him the name of my
God."
2. God consecrates us with his Spirit; whom he adopts, he anoints;
whom he makes sons, he makes saints. When a man adopts another
for his son and heir, he may put his name upon him, but he cannot
put his disposition into him; if he be of a morose rugged nature, he
cannot alter it, but whom God adopts he sanctifies; he doth not only
give them a new name but a new nature, 2 Pet. 1:4. God turns the
wolf into a lamb; he makes the heart humble and gracious; he works
such a change as if another soul did dwell in the same body.
QUEST. From what state doth God take us when he adopts us?
Ans. From a state of sin and misery. King Pharaoh's daughter took
Moses out of the ark of bulrushes in the water, and adopted him for
her son. God did not take us out of the water, but out of our blood,
and adopted us, Ezek. 16 God adopted us from slavery; it is a mercy
to redeem a slave, but it is more to adopt him.
QUEST. To what God adopts us?
Ans. He adopts us to a state of excellency. It were much for God to
take a clod of dust and make it a star; it is more for God to take a

piece of clay and sin and adopt it for his heir.
1st. God adopts us to a state of liberty. Adoption is a state of freedom;
a slave being adopted, is made a free man, Gal. 4:7., "Thou art no
more a servant, but a son."
QUEST. How is an adopted son free?
Ans. 1. Not to do what he lists: he is free from the dominion of sin,
the tyranny of Satan, the curse of the law.
A. 2. He is free in the manner of worship; he hath God's free Spirit,
which makes him free and cheerful in the service of God; he is "joyful
in the house of prayer," Isa. 56:7.
2d. God adopts us to a state of dignity. God makes us heirs of
promise; God installs us into honour, Isa. 43:4., "Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable." The adopted are
God's treasure, Exod. 19:5.; his jewels, Mal. 3:17.; his first-born, Heb.
12:23.; they have angels for their life-guard, Heb. 1:14.; they are of
the blood royal of heaven, 1 John 3:9. The scripture hath set forth
their spiritual heraldly; they have their escutcheon or coat-armour;
sometimes they give the lion for their courage, Prov. 28:1.;
sometimes the dove for their meekness, Cant. 2:14.; sometimes the
eagle for their sublimeness, Isa. 40:31. Thus you see their coat of
arms displayed: but what is honour without inheritance? God adopts
all his sons to an inheritance, Luke 12:32., "It is your Father's good
pleasure to give you the kingdom." It is no disparagement to be the
sons of God. To reproach the saints, is as if Shimei had reproached
David when he was going to be made king; adoption ends in
coronation. The kingdom God gives his adopted sons and heirs,
excels all earthly monarchies.

1. In riches, Rev. 21:21. The gates are of pearl, and the streets of pure
gold, and as it were transparent glass.
2. In tranquillity. It is peaceable; the white lily of peace is the best
flower in a prince's crown,—Pax una triumphis innumeris melior. No
divisions at home, or invasions abroad; no more the noise of the
drum or cannon, but the voice of harpers harping, the hieroglyphic of
peace, Rev. 14:2.
3. In stability. Other kingdoms are corruptible; though they have
heads of gold, yet feet of clay; but this kingdom, into which the saints
are adopted, runs parallel with eternity; it is "a kingdom that cannot
be moved," Heb. 12:28. The heirs of heaven reign for ever and ever,
Rev. 22:5.
QUEST. What is the organical or instrumental cause of adoption?
Ans. Faith interests us in the privilege of adoption, Gal. 3:26., "Ye are
all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus." Before faith be
wrought, we are spiritually illegitimate, we have no relation to God as
a father; an unbeliever may call God judge, but not father; faith is the
filiating grace, it confers upon us the title of sonship, and gives us
right to inherit.
QUEST. Why is faith the instrument of adoption more than any
other grace!
Ans. 1. Faith is a quickening grace, it is the vital artery of the soul,
Heb. 2:4., "The just shall live by his faith." Life makes us capable of
adoption, dead children are never adopted.
A. 2. Faith makes us Christ's brethren, and so God comes to be our
father.

Use 1st. Branch 1. See the amazing love of God in making us his sons.
Plato gave God thanks that he had made him a man, and not only a
man but a philosopher: but it is infinitely more that he should invest
us with the prerogative of sons. It is love in God to feed us, but more
to adopt us, 1 John 3:1., "Behold what manner of love the Father hath
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God!" It is an
ecce admirantis,—a behold of wonder. The wonder of God's love in
adopting us, will appear the more if we consider these six things.
1. That God should adopt us when he had a Son of his own. Men
adopt because they want children, and desire to have some to bear
their name: but that God should adopt us when he had a Son of his
own, the Lord Jesus,—here is the wonder of love. Christ is called
"God's dear Son," Col. 1:13.; a Son more worthy than the angels, Heb.
1:4., "Being made so much better than the angels." Now, when God
had a Son of his own,—such a Son,—here is the wonder of God's love
in adopting us. We needed a Father, but he did not need sons.
2. Consider what we were before God did adopt us; we were very
deformed; a man will scarce adopt him for his heir that is crooked
and ill-favoured, but that hath some beauty. Mordecai adopted
Esther, because she was fair. But we were in our blood, and then God
adopted us, Ezek. 16:6., "When I saw thee polluted in thy blood, it
was the time of love." God did not adopt us when we were
bespangled with the jewels of holiness, and had the angels' glory
upon us; but when we were black as Ethiopians, diseased as lepers,
then it was the time of love.
3. That God should be at so great expense in adopting us: when men
adopt, they have only some deed sealed, and the tiling is effected; but
when God adopts, it puts him to a far greater expense, it sets his
wisdom a-work to find out a way to adopt us; it was no easy thing to

make the heirs of wrath, heirs of the promise. And when God had
found out a way to adopt, it was no easy way; our adoption was
purchased at a dear rate; when God was about to make us sons and
heirs, he could not seal the deed but by the blood of his own Son
Here is the wonder of God's love in adopting us, that he should be at
all this expense to bring this work about.
4. That God should adopt his enemies; if a man adopts another for
his heir, he will not adopt his mortal enemy, but that. God should
adopt us, when we were not only strangers, but enemies,—here is the
wonder of love; for God to have pardoned his enemies, had been
much, but to adopt them for his heirs, this sets the angels in heaven a
wondering.
5. That God should take great numbers out of the devil's family, and
adopt them into the family of heaven. Christ is said to bring many
sons to glory, Heb. 2:10 Men adopt usually but one heir, but God is
resolved to increase his family, he brings many sons to glory. God's
adopting millions, is the wonder of love. Had but one been adopted,
all of us might have despaired; but he brings many sons to glory, this
opens a door of hope to us.
6. That God should confer so great honour upon us in adopting us.
David thought it no small honour that he should be a king's son-inlaw, 1 Sam. 18:18. But what honour to be the sons of the high God!
And the more honour God hath put upon us in adopting us, the more
he hath magnified his love towards us. What honour that God hath
made us so near in alliance to him,—sons of God the Father,—
members of God the Son,—temples of God the Holy Ghost! That he
hath made us as the angels, Mat. 22:30.; nay, in some sense, superior
to the angels; all this proclaims the wonder of Gods love in adopting
us.

Branch 2. See the sad condition of such as live and die in unbelief.
They are not the sons of God: "To as many as received him, he gave
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe in his
name." No faith, no sonship; unbelievers have no sign of sonship,
they know not God; all God's children know their Father, but the
wicked do not know him, Jer. 9:3., "They proceed from evil to evil,
and know not me, saith the Lord." Unbelievers are "dead in
trespasses," Eph. 2:1. God hath no dead children; and not being
children, they have no right to inherit.
Use 2d. Of trial. Try whether we are adopted. All the world is divided
into these two ranks, either the sons of God, or the heirs of hell: John
1:12., "To them he gave power to become the sons of God." Let us put
ourselves on a trial. It is no sign we are adopted sons, because we are
sons of godly parents. The Jews boasted that they were of Abraham's
seed, John 8:33., they thought they must needs be good, because
they came of such an holy line. But adoption doth not come by blood;
we see many godly parents have wicked sons; Abraham had an
Ishmael,—Isaac an Esau. The corn that is sown pure yet brings forth
grain with an husk; he who himself is holy, yet the child that springs
from his loins is unholy. So that, as Hierom, non nascimur filii,—we
are not God's sons as we are born of godly parents, but by adoption
and grace. Well, then, let us try if we are the adopted sons and
daughters of God.
1st. First sign of adoption, obedience. A son obeys his Father, Jer.
35:5., "I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites, pots full
of wine, and cups, and said unto them, drink ye wine. But they said,
we will drink no wine: for Jonadab, the son of Rechab our father
commanded us, saying, ye shall drink no wine." So, when God saith,
"drink not in sin's enchanted cup;" an adopted child saith, "my
heavenly Father hath commanded me, I dare not drink." A gracious

soul doth not only believe God's promise, but obey his command.
And true child-like obedience must be regular, which implies three
things:
1. It must be done by a right rule. Obedience must have the word for
its rule,—Lydius lapis, Isa. 8:20., "To the law and to the testimony."
If our obedience be not according to the word, it is offering up
strange fire; it is will-worship, and God will say, who hath required
this at your hand? The apostle condemns worshipping of angels
which had a shew of humility, Col. 2:18. The Jews might say that
they were loath to be so bold as to go to God in their own persons;
they would be more humble, and prostrate themselves before the
angels, desiring them to be their mediators to God. Here was a show
of humility in their angel-worship; but it was abominable, because
they had no word of God to warrant it: it was not obedience, but
idolatry. Childlike obedience is that which is consonant to our
Father's revealed will.
2. It must be done from a right principle, i.e. the noble principle of
faith, Rom. 16:26., 'The obedience of faith.' Quicquid decorum est ex
fide proficiscitur, AUG. A crab-tree may bear fruit fair to the eye, but
it is sour because it doth not come from a good root. A moral person
may give God outward obedience, and to the eyes of others it seems
glorious, but his obedience is sour because it comes not from that
sweet and pleasant root of faith. A child of God gives him the
obedience of faith, and that meliorates and sweetens his services,
and makes them come off with a better relish, Heb. 11:4., "By faith
Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain."
3. It must be done to a right end: Finis specificat actionem,—the end
of obedience is glorifying God. That which hath spoiled many
glorious services, is, when the end hath been wrong, Mat. 6:2.,

"When thou dost thine alms, do not sound a trumpet, as the
hypocrites do, that they may have glory of men." Good works should
shine, but not blaze. "If I give my body to be burnt, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing," 1 Cor. 13:3. The same I may say of a
sincere aim; if I obey never so much, and have not a sincere aim, it
profits me nothing. True obedience looks at God in all, Phil. 1:20.,
"Christ shall be magnified." Though a child of God shoots short, yet
he takes a right aim.
True childlike obedience is uniform. A child of God makes conscience
of one command as well as another. Quicquid propter Deum fit,
æqualiter fit. All God's commands have the same stamp of divine
authority upon them; and if I obey one precept because my heavenly
Father commands me, then by the same rule I must obey all; as the
blood runs through all the veins of the body, and the sun in the
firmament runs through all the signs of the zodiac, so true childlike
obedience runs through the first and second table, Ps. 119:6., "When
I have respect unto all thy commandments." To obey God in some
things of religion, and not in others, shows an unsound heart; like
Esau, who obeyed his father in bringing him venison, but not in a
greater matter, viz. the choice of his wife. Childlike obedience moves
towards every command of God, as the needle points that way which
the loadstone draws. If God call to duties which are cross to flesh and
blood, if we are children, we obey our Father.
QUEST. But who can obey God in all things?
Ans. An adopted heir of heaven, though he cannot obey every precept
perfectly, yet he doth evangelically: 1. He approves of every
command, Rom. 7:16., "I consent to the law, that it is good."—2. A
child of God delights in every command, Ps. 119:97., "O how love I
thy law!"—3. His desire is to obey every command, Ps. 119:5., "O that

my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!"—4. Wherein he comes
short, he looks up to Christ's blood to make supply for his defects.
This is evangelical obedience; which, though it be not to satisfaction,
it is to acceptation.
True childlike obedience is constant, Ps. 106:3. Blessed is he that
doth righteousness at all times. Childlike obedience is not like an
high colour in a fit which is soon over; but like a right sanguine
complexion, it abides; it is like the fire on the altar, which was kept
always burning, Lev. 6:13.
Second sign of adoption, to love to be in our Father's presence. The
child who loves his father, is never so well as when he is near his
father. Are we children? we love the presence of God in his
ordinances. In prayer we speak to God, in the preaching of his word
he speaks to us; and how doth every child of God delight to hear his
Father's voice! Ps. 63:1, 2., "My soul thirsteth for thee, to see thy
power and glory so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary." Such as
disregard ordinances, are not God's children, because they care not
to be in God's presence: Gen. 4:16., "Cain went out from the presence
of the Lord." Not that he could go out of God's sight, but the meaning
is, "Cain went out from the church and people of God, where the
Lord gave visible tokens of his presence."
Third sign of adoption, to have the conduct of God's Spirit, Rom.
8:14., "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God."
It is not enough that the child have life, but it must be led every step
by the nurse: so the adopted child must not only be born of God, but
have the manuduction of the Spirit to lead him in a course of
holiness, Hos. 11:3., "I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by
their arms." As Israel was led by the pillar of fire, so God's children
are led by the conduct of his Spirit: the adopted ones need God's

Spirit to lead them, they are apt to go wrong. The fleshly part inclines
to sin; the understanding and conscience are to guide the will, but
the will is imperious and rebels; therefore God's children need the
Spirit to check corruption, and lead them in the right way. As wicked
men are led by the evil spirit; the spirit of Satan led Herod to incest,
Ahab to murder, Judas to treason: so the good Spirit leads God's
children into virtuous actions.
OBJ. But enthusiasts pretend to be led by the Spirit, when it is an
ignis fatuus,—a delusion.
A. The Spirit's conduct is agreeable to the word; enthusiasts leave the
word, "The word is truth," John 16:13.; and, "The Spirit guides into
all truth," John 16:13. The word's teaching and the Spirit's leading
agree together.
Fourth sign, if we are adopted, we have an entire love to all God's
children, 1 Pet. 2:17., "Love the brotherhood." We hear affection to
God's children, though they have some infirmities, there are the
spots of God's children, Deut. 32:5. But we must love the beautiful
face of holiness, though it hath a scar in it. If we are adopted, we love
the good we see in God's children, we admire their graces, we pass by
their imprudencies; if we cannot love them because they have some
failings, how do we think God can love us? Can we plead exemption?
By these signs we know our adoption.
QUEST. What are the benefits which accrue to God's children?
Ans. They have great immunities. Kings' children have great
privileges and freedoms; they do not pay custom, Mat. 18:6. God's
children are privileged persons, they are privileged from the hurt of
every thing, Luke 10:19., "Nothing shall by any means hurt you." Hit
you it may, not hurt you, Ps. 91:10., "There shall no evil befall thee."

God saith not, No affliction shall befall his children, but, No evil; the
hurt and poison of it is taken away. Affliction to a wicked man hath
evil in it, it makes him worse; it makes him curse and blaspheme,
Rev. 16:9., "Men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the
name of God." But no evil befalls a child of God, he is bettered by
affliction, Heb. 12:10. The furnace makes gold purer. Again, no evil
befalls the adopted, because no condemnation, Rom. 8:33., "It is God
that justifieth, who is he that condemneth?" What a blessed privilege
is this to be freed from the sting of affliction, and the curse of the
law! To be in such a condition, that nothing can hurt one! When the
dragon hath poisoned the water, the unicorn with his horn doth
extract and draw out the poison: so Jesus Christ hath drawn out the
poison of every affliction, that it cannot prejudice the saints.
Second benefit, if we are adopted, then we have an interest in all the
promises: the promises are children's bread, "Believers are heirs of
the promises," Heb. 6:17. The promises are sure: God's truth, which
is the brightest pearl in his crown, is laid to pawn in a promise. The
promises are suitable like a physic-garden, there is no disease but
there is some herb in the physic-garden to cure it. In the dark night
of desertion, God hath promised to be a sun; in temptation, to tread
down Satan, Rom. 16:20. Doth sin prevail? he hath promised to take
away its kingly power, Rom. 6:14. O the heavenly comforts which are
distilled from the limbeck of the promises! But who hath a right to
these? Believers only are heirs of the promise. There is never a
promise in the Bible, but a believer may say, this is mine.
Use ult. Extol and magnify God's mercy, who hath adopted you into
his family; who, of slaves, hath made you sons; of heirs of hell, heirs
of the promise. Adoption is a free gift. He gave them power, or
dignity, to become the sons of God. As a thread of silver runs through
the whole piece of work, so free grace runs through this whole

privilege of adoption. Adoption is a greater mercy than Adam had in
paradise; he was a son by creation, but here is a further sonship by
adoption. To make us thankful, consider, in civil adoption there is
some worth and excellency in the person to be adopted; but there
was no worth in us, neither beauty, nor parentage, nor virtue;
nothing in us to move God to bestow the prerogative of sonship upon
us. We have enough in us to move God to correct us, but nothing to
move him to adopt us, therefore exalt free grace, begin the work of
angels here; bless him with your praises who hath blessed you in
making you his sons and daughters!

OF SANCTIFICATION
1 THESS. 4:3. For this is the will of God, even your sanctification.
The notion of the word sanctification signifies to consecrate and set
apart to an holy use: thus they are sanctified persons, who are
separated from the world, and set apart for God's service.
Sanctification hath a privative and a positive part.
1. A privative part, mortification, which lies in the purging out of sin.
Sin is compared to leaven which sours; and to leprosy which defiles;
sanctification doth purge out "the old leaven," 1 Cor. 5:7. Though it
takes not away the life, yet it takes away the love of sin.
2. A positive part, vivification, which is the spiritual refining of the
soul, which in scripture is called a "renewing of your mind," Rom.
12:2., and a "partaking of the divine nature," 2 Pet. 1:4. The priests in
the law not only were washed in the great laver, but adorned with

glorious apparel, Exod. 28:2., so sanctification not only washes from
sin, but adorns with purity.
QUEST. What is sanctification?
Ans. It is a principle of grace savingly wrought, whereby the heart
becomes holy, and is made after God's own heart. A sanctified person
bears not only God's name, but image. For the opening the nature of
sanctification, I shall lay down these seven positions.
1. Sanctification is a supernatural thing: it is divinely infused. We are
naturally polluted; and to cleanse, God takes to be his prerogative;
Lev. 21:8., "I the Lord which sanctifieth you." Weeds grow of
themselves. Flowers are planted. Sanctification is a flower of the
Spirit's planting, therefore it is called, "The sanctification of the
Spirit," 1 Pet. 1:2.
2. Sanctification is an intrinsical thing; 'it lies chiefly in the heart.' It
is called the adorning "the hidden man of the heart," 1 Pet. 3:4. The
dew wets the leaf, the sap is hid in the root: the religion of some
consists only in externals, but sanctification is deeply rooted in the
soul, Ps. 51:6., "In the hidden part thou shalt make me to know
wisdom."
3. Sanctification is an extensive thing: it spreads into the whole man,
1 Thess. 5:23., "The very God of peace sanctify you wholly." As
original corruption hath depraved all the faculties, 'the whole head is
sick, the whole heart faint,' no part sound, as if the whole mass of
blood were corrupted, so sanctification goes over the whole soul.
After the fall, there was ignorance in the mind; now in sanctification,
we are 'light in the Lord,' Eph. 5:8. After the fall, the will was
depraved; there was not only impotency to good, but obstinacy; now,
in sanctification, there is a blessed pliableness in the will, it doth

symbolize and comport with the will of God. After the fall, the
affections were misplaced on wrong objects; in sanctification, they
are turned into a sweet order and harmony,—the grief placed on sin,
—the love on God,—the joy on heaven. Thus sanctification spreads
itself as far as original corruption it goes over the whole soul, "the
God of peace sanctify you wholly." He is not a sanctified person who
is good only in some part, but who is all over sanctified, therefore in
scripture grace is called "a new man," Col. 3:10., not a new eye or a
new tongue, but a "new man." A good Christian, though he be
sanctified but in part, yet in every part.
4. Sanctification is an intense ardent thing, Qualitates sunt in
subjecto intensive, Rom. 12:11., "Fervent in spirit." Sanctification is
not a dead form, but it is inflamed into zeal. We call water hot, when
it is so in the third or fourth degree: he is holy, whose religion is
heated to some degree, and his heart boils over in love to God.
5. Sanctification is a beautiful thing; it makes God and angels fall in
love with us, Ps. 110:3., "The beauties of holiness." As the sun is to
the world, so is sanctification to the soul, beautifying and
bespangling it in God's eyes. That which makes God glorious, must
needs make us so. Holiness is the most sparkling jewel in the
Godhead, Exod. 15:11., "Glorious in holiness." Sanctification is the
first fruit of the Spirit; it is heaven begun in the soul; sanctification
and glory differ only in degree,—sanctification is glory in the seed,
and glory is sanctification in the flower. Holiness is the quintessence
of happiness.
6. Sanctification is an abiding thing, 1 John 3:9., "His seed remaineth
in him." He who is truly sanctified, cannot fall from that state.
Indeed seeming holiness may be lost, colours may wash off,
sanctification may suffer an eclipse, Rev. 2:4., "Thou hast left thy

first love:" but true sanctification is a blossom of eternity, 1 John
2:27., "The anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you."
He who is truly sanctified, can no more fall away, than the angels
which are fixed in their heavenly orbs.
7. Sanctification is a progressive thing, it is growing; it is compared
to seed which grows,—first the blade springs up,—then the ear,—then
the ripe corn in the ear; such as are already sanctified, may be more
sanctified. 2 Cor. 7:1. Justification doth not admit of degrees: a
believer cannot be more elected or justified than he is, but he may be
more sanctified than he is; sanctification is still increasing, like the
morning sun, which grows brighter to the full meridian. Knowledge
is said to increase, Col. 1:10., and faith to increase, 2 Cor. 10:15. A
Christian is continually adding a cubit to his spiritual stature. It is
not with us as it was with Christ, who received the Spirit without
measure; Christ could not be more holy than he was. But we have the
Spirit only in measure, and may be still augmenting our grace; as
Apelles, when he had drawn a picture, he would be still mending it
with his pencil. The image of God is drawn but imperfectly in us,
therefore we must be still mending it, and drawing it in more lively
colours; sanctification is progressive; if it doth not grow, it is because
it doth not live. Thus you see the nature of sanctification.
QUEST. What are the counterfeits of sanctification?
Ans. There is something looks like sanctification, which is not.
1. The first counterfeit of sanctification is moral virtue. To be just,
temperate, to be of a fair deportment, not having one's scutcheon
blotted with ignominious scandal, this is good, but not enough: this
is not sanctification. A field-flower differs from a garden-flower. 1.
Heathens have attained to morality; Cato, Socrates, Aristides. Civility
is but nature refined; there is nothing of Christ there; the heart may

be foul and impure, under these fair leaves of civility, the worm of
unbelief may be hid. 2. A moral person hath a secret antipathy
against grace; he hates vice, and he hates grace as much as vice. The
snake hath a fine colour, but a sting. A person adorned and
cultivated with moral virtue hath a secret spleen against sanctity:
those Stoics, which were the chief of the moralized heathens, were
the bitterest enemies St. Paul had, Acts 17:18.
2. The second counterfeit of sanctification is superstitious devotion:
this abounds in popery; adorations, images, altars, vestments, holy
water, which I look upon as a religious frenzy: this is far from
sanctification. 1. It doth not put any intrinsical goodness into a man,
it doth not make a man better. If the legal purifications and
washings, which were of God's own appointing, did not make them
that used them more holy, (the priests, who wore holy garments, and
had holy oil poured on them, were never the more holy, without the
anointing of the Spirit,) then surely those superstitious innovations
in religion which God never appointed, cannot contribute any
holiness to men. 2. A superstitious holiness costs no great labour;
there is nothing of the heart in it; if to tell over a few beads, or bow to
an image, or sprinkle themselves with holy water, if this were
sanctification, and were all that were required of them that should be
saved, then hell would be empty, none would come there.
3. The third counterfeit of sanctification is hypocrisy; when men
make a pretence of that holiness which they have not. A comet may
shine like a star; such a lustre shines from their profession, as
dazzleth the eyes of the beholders, 2 Tim. 3:5., "Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power." These are lamps without oil;
whited sepulchres, like the Egyptian temples, which had fair
outsides, but within spiders and apes. The apostle speaks of true
holiness, Eph. 4:24., Implying that there is holiness which is

spurious and feigned, Rev. 3:1., "Thou hast a name that thou livest
but art dead:" like pictures and statues which are destitute of a vital
principle, Jude 12., "Clouds without water." They pretend to be full of
the Spirit, but are empty clouds. This shew of sanctification (when it
is nothing else) is self-delusion. He who takes copper instead of gold,
wrongs himself; the most counterfeit saint deceives others while he
lives, but deceives himself when he dies. To pretend holiness, when
there is none, is a vain thing. What were the foolish virgins better for
their blazing lamps, when they wanted oil? What is the lamp of
profession without the oil of saving grace? What comfort will a shew
of holiness yield at last? Will painted gold enrich,—painted wine
refresh him that is thirsty? Will painted holiness be a cordial at the
hour of death? A pretence of sanctification is not to be rested in.
Many ships, that have had the name of the Hope, the Safeguard, the
Triumph, yet have been cast away upon the rocks; so, many who
have had the name of saintship, have been cast into hell.
4. The fourth counterfeit of sanctification is restraining grace. When
men forbear vice, though they do not hate it, this may be the sinner's
motto, 'Fain I would, but I dare not.' The dog hath a mind to the
bone but is afraid of the cudgel; men have a mind to lust, but
conscience stands as the angel, with a flaming sword, and affrights;
they have a mind to revenge, but the fear of hell is a curb-bit to check
them. Here is no change of heart; sin is curbed, but not cured; a lion
may be in chains, but is a lion still.
5. The fifth counterfeit of sanctification, is common grace, which is a
slight, transient work of the Spirit, but doth not amount to
conversion. There is some light in the judgment, but it is not
humbling,—some checks in the conscience but they are not
awakening: this looks like sanctification, but is not. Men have
convictions wrought in them, but they break loose from them again,

like the deer, which, being shot, shakes out the arrow; after
conviction, men go into the house of mirth, take the harp to drive
away the spirit of sadness, and so all dies and comes to nothing.
QUEST. Wherein appears the necessity of sanctification?
Ans. In six things, 1. God hath called us to it, 2 Pet. 1:3., "Who hath
called us to glory and virtue;" to virtue, as well as glory. "God hath
not called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness," 1 Thess. 4:7. We
have no call to sin, we may have a temptation, but no call; no call to
be proud, or unclean; but we have a call to be holy.
2. The necessity appears in this: without sanctification there is no
evidencing our justification; justification and sanctification go
together, 1 Cor. 6:11., "But ye are sanctified, but ye are justified;" Mic.
7:18., "Pardoneth iniquity," there is justification; v. 19., "He will
subdue our iniquities," there is sanctification. Out of Christ's side
came blood and water, 1 John 5:6. Blood, viz. justification; water viz.
sanctification. Such as have not the water out of Christ's side to
cleanse them, shall never have the blood out of his side to save them.
3. Without sanctification we have no title to the new covenant. The
covenant of grace is our charter for heaven; the tenure of the
covenant, is, That God will be our God (the crowning blessing). But
who are interested in the covenant, and may plead the benefit of it?
Only sanctified persons; Ezek. 36:26., "A new heart also will I give
you, and I will put my Spirit within you," and I will be your God. If a
man make a will, and settles his estate upon such persons as he
names in the will, none else but they can lay claim to the will: so God
makes a will and testament, but it is restrained and limited to such as
are sanctified; and it is high presumption for any else to lay claim to
the will.

4. There is no going to heaven without sanctification, Heb. 12:14.,
"Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." God is an holy God,
and he will suffer no unholy creature to come near him; a king will
not suffer a man with plague-sores to approach into his presence.
Heaven is not like Noah's ark, where the clean beasts and the
unclean entered, no unclean beasts come into the heavenly ark;
though God suffer the wicked to live a while on the earth, he will
never suffer heaven to be postered with such vermin. Are they fit to
see God, who wallow in wickedness? Will God ever lay such vipers in
his bosom? "Without holiness no man shall see the Lord." It must be
a clear eye that sees a bright object; only an holy heart can see God in
his glory. Sinners may see God as an enemy, but not as a friend; may
have an affrighting vision of God, but not a beatifical vision: they
may see the flaming sword, but not the mercy-seat. O then what need
is there of sanctification?
5. Without sanctification all our holy things are defiled, Tit. 1:15.,
"Unto them that are defiled, is nothing pure." Under the law, if a
man who was unclean by a dead body, had carried a piece of holy
flesh in his skirt, the holy flesh had not cleansed him, but he had
polluted that, Hag. 1:12, 13. An emblem of a sinner's polluting his
holy offering. A foul stomach turns the best food into ill humours; an
unsanctified heart pollutes prayers, alms, sacraments. This evinceth
the necessity of sanctification: sanctification makes our holy things
accepted; an holy heart is the altar which sanctifies the offering; his
duties, though they are not to satisfaction, yet to acceptation.
6. Without sanctification we can shew no sign of our election, 2
Thess. 2:13. Election is the cause of our salvation, sanctification is
our evidence; sanctification is the ear-mark of Christ's elect sheep.
QUEST. What are the signs of sanctification?

Ans. 1. Such as are sanctified, can remember a time when they were
unsanctified, Tit. 3:3. We were in our blood, and then God washed us
with water, and anointed us with oil, Ezek. 16:9. Those trees of
righteousness that blossom and bear almonds can remember when
they were like Aaron's dry rod, not one blossom of holiness growing;
a sanctified soul can remember when he was estranged from God
through ignorance and vanity, and when free grace planted this
flower of holiness in him.
Second sign of sanctification is the indwelling of the Spirit, 2 Tim.
1:14., "The Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us." As the unclean spirit
dwells in the wicked and carries them to pride, lust, revenge; the
devil hath entered into these swine, Acts 5:3.; so the Spirit of God
dwells in the elect, as their guide and comforter. The Spirit
possesseth the saints. God's Spirit sanctifies the fancy, causing it to
mint holy thoughts; it sanctifies the will, putting a new bias upon it,
whereby it is inclined to good. He who is sanctified, hath the
influence of the Spirit, though not the essence.
Third sign of sanctification is an antipathy against sin, Ps. 119:104.,
an hypocrite may leave sin, yet love it, as a serpent casts its coat, but
keeps its sting: but a sanctified person can say, he not only leaves sin,
but loathes it. As there are antipathies in nature, between the vine
and laurel, so in a sanctified soul there is an holy antipathy against
sin; and antipathies can never be reconciled. Because he hath an
antipathy against sin, he cannot but oppose it, and seek the
destruction of it.
Fourth sign of sanctification is, the spiritual performance of duties,
viz. with the heart, and from a principle of love. The sanctified soul
prays out of a love to prayer, he "calls the sabbath a delight," Isa.
58:13. A man may have gifts to admiration, he may speak as an angel

dropped out of heaven, yet may be carnal in spiritual things; his
services do not come from a renewed principle, nor is he carried
upon the wings of delight in duty. A sanctified soul worships God in
the spirit, 1 Pet. 2:5. God doth not judge of our duties by the length,
but by the love.
Fifth sign, a well-ordered life, 1 Pet. 1:15., "Be ye holy in all manner of
conversation:" Where the heart is sanctified, the life will be so too:
the temple had gold without as well as within. As in a piece of coin,
there is not only the king's image within the ring, but his
superscription too without; so where there is sanctification, there is
not only God's image in the heart, but a superscription of holiness
written in the life. Some say they have good hearts, but their lives are
vicious, Prov. 30:12., "There is a generation that are pure in their
own eyes, yet is not washed from their filthiness." If the water be foul
in the bucket, it cannot be clean in the well, Ps. 45:13., "The king's
daughter is all glorious within,"—there is holiness of heart: "Her
clothing is of wrought gold,"—holiness of life. Grace is most beautiful
when its light doth so shine, that others may see it; this adorns
religion, and makes proselytes to the faith.
Sixth sign, steadfast resolution. He is resolved never to part with his
holiness; let others reproach it, he loves it the more; let water be
sprinkled on the fire, it burns the more. He saith, as David, when
Michal reproached him for dancing before the ark, 2 Sam. 6:22., If
this be to the vile, "I will yet be more vile." Let others persecute him
for his holiness, he saith as Paul, Acts 20:24., "None of those things
move me:" he prefers sanctity before safety; and had rather keep his
conscience pure than his skin whole. He saith as Job, "my
righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go," ch. 27:6. He will
rather part with his life than his conscience.

Use 1st. See what is the main thing a Christian should look after, viz.
sanctification; this is the unum necessarium,—the one thing needful.
Sanctification is our purest complexion,—it makes us as the heaven,
bespangled with stars,—it is our nobility, by it we are born of God,
and partake of the divine nature,—it is our riches, therefore
compared to rows of jewels, and chains of gold, Cant. 1:10. It is our
best certificate for heaven: what evidence have we else to show?
Have we knowledge? so hath the devil. Do we profess religion? Satan
often appears in Samuel's mantle, and transforms himself into an
angel of light. But here is our certificate to show for heaven,
sanctification. Sanctification is the first fruits of the Spirit,—the only
coin that will pass current in the other world. Sanctification is the
evidence of God's love; we cannot guess of God's love by giving us
health, riches, success, but by drawing his image of sanctification on
us by the pencil of the Holy Ghost.
Branch 2. It shows the misery of such as are destitute of a principle
of sanctification; they are spiritually dead, Eph. 2:1. Though they
breathe, yet they do not live. The greatest part of the world remain
unsanctified, 1 John 5:19., "The world lies in wickedness," that is, the
major part of the world. Many call themselves Christians, yet blot out
the word saints; you may as well call him a man who wants reason,
as him a Christian who wants grace; nay, which is worse, some are
buoyed up to such a height of wickedness, that they hate and deride
sanctification: 1. They hate it; it is bad to want it, it is worse to hate
it: they embrace the form of religion, but hate the power. The vulture
hates sweet smells, so do they the perfumes of holiness. 2. Deride it:
'These are your holy ones!' To deride sanctification, argues an high
degree of atheism, and is a black brand of reprobation: scoffing
Ishmael was east out of Abraham's family, Gen. 21:9., such as scoff at
holiness shall be cast out of heaven.

Use 2d. Of exhortation. Above all things pursue after sanctification;
seek grace more than gold, Prov. 4:13., "Keep her, for she is thy life."
QUEST. What are the chief inducements to sanctification?
Ans. 1st, It is the will of God that we should be holy: in the text, "This
is the will of God, your sanctification." As God's word must be the
rule, so his will, the reason of our actions: this is the will of God, our
sanctification. Perhaps it is not the will of God we should be rich, but
it is his will that we should be holy. God's will is our warrant.
2dly, Jesus Christ hath died for our sanctification. Christ shed his
blood to wash off our impurity. The cross was both an altar and a
laver, Tit. 2:14., "Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us
from all iniquity." If we could be saved without holiness, Christ
needed not have died. Christ died, not only to save us from wrath,
but from sin.
3dly, Sanctification makes us resemble God. It was Adam's sin that
he aspired to be like God in omnisciency, but we must endeavour to
be like him in sanctity. It is only a clear glass in which we can see a
face; it is only an holy heart in which something of God can be seen;
there's nothing of God to be seen in an unsanctified man; you may
see Satan's picture in him; envy is the devil's eye, hypocrisy his
cloven foot, but nothing of God's image can be seen in him. You can
see no more of God in him than you can see a man's face in a glass
that is dusty and foul.
4thly, Sanctification is that which God bears a great love to. Not any
outward ornaments, high blood, or worldly grandeur, draws God's
love, but an heart embellished with holiness. Christ never admired
any thing but the beauty of holiness; he slighted the glorious
buildings of the temple, but admired the woman's faith, "O woman,

great is thy faith," Amor fundatur similitudine. A king delights to see
his image upon a piece of coin: where God sees his likeness, there he
gives his love. The Lord hath two heavens he dwells in, and the holy
heart is one of them.
5thly, Sanctification is the only thing doth difference us from the
wicked: God's people have his seal upon them, 2 Tim. 2:19., "The
foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth
them that are his: and let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from iniquity." The godly are sealed with a double seal: 1. A
seal of election, "The Lord knoweth who are his:" 2. A seal of
sanctification, "Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart
from iniquity." This is the name by which God's people are known,
Isa. 63:18., "The people of thy holiness." As chastity distinguisheth a
virtuous woman from a harlot, so sanctification distinguisheth God's
people from others, 1 John 2:20., "Ye have an unction from the Holy
One."
6thly, It is as great a shame to have the name of a Christian, yet want
sanctity, as to have the name of steward and yet want fidelity; the
name of a virgin, yet want chastity. It exposeth religion to reproach,
to be baptized into the name of Christ, yet unholy; to have eyes full of
tears on a sabbath, and on a week-day eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet.
2:15. To be so devout at the Lord's table as if men were stepping into
heaven, and so profane the week after as if they came out of hell. To
have the name of Christians, yet unholy, is a scandal to religion, and
makes the ways of God evil spoken of.
7thly, Sanctification fits for heaven, 2 Pet. 1:8., "Who hath called us
to glory and virtue;" glory is the throne, and sanctification is the step
by which we ascend to it. First, you cleanse the vessel, and then you
pour in the wine; first God cleanseth us by sanctification, and then

pours in the wine of glory. Solomon was first anointed with oil, and
then he was a king, 1 Kings 1:39. First God anoints us with the holy
oil of his Spirit, and then he sets the crown of happiness upon our
head. Pureness of heart and seeing God are linked together, Mat. 5:8.
QUEST. How may sanctification be attained to?
Ans. 1. Be conversant in the word of God, John 17:17., "Sanctify them
through thy truth." The word is both a glass to shew us the spots of
our soul, and a laver to wash them away; the word hath a
transforming virtue in it, it irradiates the mind, and consecrates the
heart.
A. 2. Get faith in Christ's blood, Acts 15:9., "Purifying their hearts by
faith." She in the gospel that touched the hem of Christ's garment
was healed: a touch of faith purifies. Nothing can have a greater force
upon the heart, to sanctify it, than faith; if I believe Christ and his
merits are mine, how can I sin against him? Justifying faith doth that
in a spiritual sense, which miraculous faith doth, it removes
mountains, the mountains of pride, lust, envy. Faith and the love of
sin are inconsistent.
A. 3. Breathe after the Spirit; it is called "the sanctification of the
Spirit," 2 Thess. 2:13. The Spirit sanctifies the heart, as lightning
purifies the air, as fire refines metals. Omne agens generat sibi
simile. The Spirit stamps the impression of its own sanctity upon the
heart, as the seal prints its effigies and likeness upon the wax. The
Spirit of God in a man perfumes him with holiness, and makes his
heart a map of heaven.
A. 4. Associate with sanctified persons. They may, by their counsel,
prayers, holy example, be a means to make you holy: as the
communion of saints is in our creed, so it should be in our company,

Prov. 13:20., "He that walketh with wise men, shall be wise."
Association begets assimilation.
A. 5. Pray for sanctification. Job propounds a question, "Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean?" Job 14:4. God can do it. Out
of an unholy heart he can produce grace. O! make David's prayer,
Psal. 51:10., "Create in me a clean heart, O God." Lay thy heart before
the Lord, and say, "Lord, my unsanctified heart pollutes all it
toucheth. I am not fit to live with such an heart, for I cannot honour
thee; nor die with such an heart, for I cannot see thee. O create in me
a new heart; Lord consecrate my heart, and make it thy temple, and
thy praises shall be sung there for ever!"
Use 3d. Of thankfulness. Hath God brought a clean thing out of an
unclean,—hath he sanctified you? wear this jewel of sanctification
with thankfulness, Col. 1:12., "Giving thanks to the Father, which
hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance," &c. Christian,
thou couldest defile thyself, but not sanctify thyself; but God hath
done it, he hath not only chained up sin, but changed thy nature, and
made thee as a king's daughter, all glorious within. He hath put upon
thee the breast-plate of holiness, which, though it may be shot at, can
never be shot through. Are there any here that are sanctified? God
hath done more for you than millions: they may be illuminated, but
not sanctified. He hath done more for you, than if he had made you
the sons of princes, and caused you to ride upon the high places of
the earth. Are you sanctified? heaven is begun in you; happiness is
nothing but the quintessence of holiness. O how thankful should you
be to God! Do as that blind man in the gospel, after he had received
his sight, "He followed Christ, glorifying God," Luke 18:43. Make
heaven ring of God's praises!