PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 13 Of Christ'S Humiliation In His — Christ The Redeemer

OF CHRIST'S HUMILIATION IN HIS INCARNATION 1 TIM. 3:16. Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifest in the flesh. QUEST. XXVII. WHEREIN did Christ's humiliation consist? Ans. In his being born, and that in a low condition, made under the law, undergoing the miseries of this life, the wrath of God, and the cursed death of the cross. Christ's humiliation consisted in his incarnation, his taking flesh and being born. It was real flesh Christ took; not the image of a body (as the Manichees erroneously held) but a true body; therefore Christ is said to be "made of a woman," Gal. 4:4. As the bread is made of the wheat, and the wine is made of the grape, so Christ is made of a woman, his body was part of the flesh and substance of the virgin. This is a glorious mystery, "God manifest in the flesh." In the

creation, man was made in God's image; in the incarnation, God was made in man's image. QUEST. How came it about that Christ was made flesh? Ans. It was by his Father's special designation, Gal. 4:4., "God sent forth his Son, made of a woman." God the Father did in a special manner appoint Christ to be incarnate, which shews how needful a call is to any business of weight and importance: to act without a call, is to act without a blessing. Christ himself would not be incarnate, and take upon him the work of a Mediator till he had a call. "God sent forth his Son, made of a woman." QUEST. But was there no other way for the restoring of fallen man but this, that God should take flesh? Ans. We must not ask a reason of God's will; it is dangerous to pry into God's ark; we are not to dispute but adore. The wise God saw this the best way for our redemption that Christ should be incarnate; it was not fit for any to satisfy God's justice but man; none could do it but God; therefore, Christ being both God and man, he is the fittest to undertake this work of redemption. QUEST. Why was Christ born of a woman? Ans. 1. That God might fulfil that promise, Gen. 3:15., The seed of the woman shall break the serpent's head.—2. Christ was born of a woman, that he might roll away that reproach from the woman which she had contracted by being seduced by the serpent. Christ, in taking his flesh from the woman, hath honoured her sex; that as at the first the woman had made man a sinner; so now, to make him amends, she should bring him a Saviour.

QUEST. Why was Christ born of a virgin? Ans. 1. For decency. It became not God to have any mother but a maid, and it became not a maid to have any other son but a God. A. 2. For necessity. Christ was to be an high priest, most pure and holy. Had he been born after the ordinary course of nature, he had been defiled; all that spring out of Adam's loins have a tincture of sin, but, that 'Christ's substance might remain pure and immaculate,' he was born of a virgin. A. 3. To answer the type. Melchisedec was a type of Christ; he is said to be "without father and without mother." Christ being born of a virgin, answered the type; he was without father and without mother; without mother as he was God, without father as he was man. QUEST. How could Christ be made of the flesh and blood of a virgin, and yet be without sin! The purest virgin that is, her soul is stained with original sin. Ans. This knot the scripture unties, Luke 1:35., "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and overshadow thee: therefore that holy thing, which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God." "The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee," that is, the Holy Ghost did consecrate and purify that part of the virgin's flesh whereof Christ was made. As the alchymist extracts and draws away the dross from the gold, so the Holy Ghost did refine and clarify that part of the virgin's flesh, separating it from sin. Though the virgin Mary herself had sin, yet, that part of her flesh, whereof Christ was made, was without sin; otherwise it must have been an impure conception.

QUEST. What is meant by the power of the Holy Ghost overshadowing the virgin? Ans. Basil saith, "It was the Holy Ghost's blessing that flesh of the virgin whereof Christ was formed." But there is a further mystery in it; the Holy Ghost having framed Christ in the virgin's womb, did, in a wonderful manner, unite Christ's human nature to his divine, and so of both made one person. This is a mystery, which the angels pry into with adoration. QUEST. When was Christ incarnate? Ans. In the fulness of time, Gal. 4:4., "When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman." By the fulness of time, we must understand tempus a patre præfinitum; so Ambrose, Luther, Corn, a Lap., the determinate time that God hath set. More particularly, this fulness of time was when all the prophecies of the coming of the Messiah were accomplished; and all legal shadows and figures, whereby he was typified, were abrogated: "in the fulness of time God sent his Son." And, by the way, observe, this may comfort us in regard of the church of God, though at present we do not see that peace and purity in the church as we could desire, yet in the fulness of time, when God's time is come and mercy is ripe, then shall deliverance spring up, and God will come riding upon the chariots of salvation. When the fulness of time was come, then God sent forth his Son, made of a woman. QUEST. Why was Jesus Christ made flesh? Ans. 1. The causa prima, and impulsive cause was free grace; it was love in God the Father to send Christ, and love in Christ that he came to be incarnate. Love was the intrinsical motive. Christ is God-man, because he is a lover of man. Christ came out of pity and indulgence

to us: non merita nostra, sed miseria nostra, AUG. Not our deserts, but our misery, made Christ take flesh. Christ's taking flesh, was a plot of free grace, and a pure design of love. God himself, though Almighty, was overcome with love. Christ incarnate is nothing but love covered with flesh. Christ's assuming our human nature, as it was a master-piece of wisdom, so a monument of free grace. A. 2. Christ took our flesh upon him, that he might take our sins upon him. He was, saith Luther, maximus peccatur,—the greatest sinner, having the weight of the sins of the whole world lying upon him. He took our flesh that he might take our sins, and so appease God's wrath. A. 3. Christ took our flesh, that he might make the human nature appear lovely to God, and the divine nature appear lovely to man. 1. That he might make the human nature lovely to God. Upon our fall from God, our nature became odious to him; no vermin is so odious to us as the human nature was to God. When once our virgin nature was become sinful, it was like flesh imposthumated, or running into sores, loathsome to behold: such was our nature when corrupt, odious to God, he could not endure to look upon us. Now, Christ taking our flesh, makes this human nature appear lovely to God. As when the sun shines on the glass, it casts a bright lustre; so Christ being clad with our flesh, makes the human nature shine, and appear amiable in God's eyes.—2. As Christ being clothed with our flesh, makes the human nature appear lovely to God, so he makes the divine nature appear lovely to man. The pure Godhead is terrible to behold, we could not see it and live; but Christ clothing himself with our flesh, makes the divine nature more amiable and delightful to us. Now we need not be afraid to look upon God, seeing him through Christ's human nature. It was a custom of old among the shepherds, they were wont to clothe themselves with sheep-skins, to be more

pleasing to the sheep; so Christ clothed himself with our flesh, that the divine nature may be more pleasing to us. The human nature is a glass, through which we may see the love and wisdom, and glory of God clearly represented to us. Through the lantern of Christ's humanity, we may behold the light of the Deity shining. Christ being incarnate, he makes the sight of the Deity not formidable, but delightful to us. A. 4. Jesus Christ united himself to man, 'that man might be drawn nearer to God.' God before was an enemy to us, by reason of sin; but Christ taking our flesh, doth mediate for us, and bring us into favour with God. As when a king is angry with a subject, the king's son marries the daughter of this subject, and so mediates for this subject, and brings him into favour with the king again; so, when God the Father was angry with us, Christ married himself to our nature, and now mediates for us with his Father, and brings us to be friends again, and now God looks upon us with a favourable aspect. As Joab pleaded for Absalom, and brought him to king David, and David kissed him, so doth Jesus Christ ingratiate us into the love and favour of God. Therefore he may well be called a peace-maker, having taken our flesh upon him, and so made peace between us and his angry Father. Use 1st. Branch 1. See here, as in a glass, the infinite love of God the Father; that when we had lost ourselves by sin, then God, in the riches of his grace, did send forth his Son, made of a woman, to redeem us. And behold the infinite love of Christ, that he was willing thus to condescend to take our flesh. Surely the angels would have disdained to have taken our flesh, it would have been a disparagement to them! What king would be willing to wear sackcloth over his cloth of gold? But Christ did not disdain to take our flesh. O the love of Christ! had not Christ been made flesh, we

had been made a curse; had not he been incarnate, we had been incarcerate, and had been for ever in prison. Well might an angel be the herald to proclaim this joyful news of Christ's incarnation, Luke 2:10., "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy; for unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour; which is Christ the Lord." The love of Christ in being incarnate, will the more appear if we consider, 1. Whence Christ came. He came from heaven, and from the richest place in heaven, his Father's bosom, that hive of sweetness. 2. To whom Christ came. Was it to his friends? No; he came to sinful man. Man that had defaced his image, abused his love; man who was turned rebel; yet he came to man, resolving to conquer obstinacy with kindness. If he would come to any, why not to the angels that fell? Heb. 2:16., "He took not upon him the nature of angels." The angels are of a more noble extract,—more intelligible creatures,— more able for service; ay, but behold the love of Christ, he came not to the fallen angels, but to mankind. Among the several wonders of the loadstone, this is not the least, that it will not draw gold or pearl, but despising these, it draws the iron to it, one of the most inferior metals: thus Christ leaves the angels, those noble spirits, the gold and the pearl, and he comes to poor sinful man and draws him into his embraces. 3. In what manner he came. He came not in the majesty of a king, attended with his life-guard, but he came poor; not like the heir of heaven, but like one of an inferior descent. The place he was born in was poor: not the royal city Jerusalem, but Bethlehem, a poor obscure place. He was born in an inn, and a manger was his cradle, the cobwebs his curtains, the beasts his companions; he descended of poor parents. One would have thought, if Christ would have come

into the world, he would have made choice of some queen or personage of honour to have descended from; but he comes of mean obscure parents; that they were poor appears by their offering, Luke 2:24., "A pair of turtle-doves," which was the usual offering of the poor, Lev. 12:8. Christ was so poor, that when he wanted money, he was fain to work a miracle for it, Mat. 17:27. He, when he died, made no will. He came into the world poor. 4. Why he came. That he might take our flesh, and redeem us; that he might instate us into a kingdom. He was poor that he might make us rich, 2 Cor. 8:3. He was born of a virgin that we might be born of God. He took our flesh that he might give us his Spirit. He lay in the manger that we might lie in paradise. He came down from heaven that he might bring us to heaven. And what was all this but love? If our hearts be not rocks, this love of Christ should affect us. Behold love that passeth knowledge! Eph. 3:10. Branch 2. See here the wonderful humility of Christ; Christ was made flesh, O sancta humilitas, tu filium Dei descendere fecisti in uterum, Mariæ Virginis! AUST. That Christ should clothe himself with our flesh, a piece of that earth which we tread upon; O infinite humility! Christ's taking our flesh was one of the lowest steps of his humiliation. Christ did humble himself more in lying in the virgin's womb, than in hanging upon the cross. It was not so much for man to die, but for God to become man, that was the wonder of humility, Phil. 2:7., "He was made in the likeness of man." For Christ to be made flesh was more humility than for the angels to be made worms. Christ's flesh is called a vail, Heb. 10:20., "Through the vail," that is, his flesh; Christ's wearing our flesh, vailed his glory. For him to be made flesh, who was equal with God, O humility! Phil. 2:6., "Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God." He stood upon even ground with God, he was coessential and

consubstantial with his Father, as Austin and Cyril and the council of Nice express it; yet for all this he takes flesh. Christ stript himself of the robes of his glory, and covered himself with the rags of our humanity. If Solomon did so wonder that God should dwell in the temple, which was enriched and hung with gold, how may we wonder that God should dwell in man's weak and frail nature? Nay, which is yet more humility, Christ not only took our flesh, but took it when it was at the worst, under disgrace; as if a servant should wear a nobleman's livery, when he is impeached of high treason. Nay, besides, Christ took all the infirmities of our flesh. There are two sorts of infirmities: such as are sinful without pain, or such as are painful without sin. The first of these infirmities Christ did not take upon him; sinful infirmities,—to be covetous or ambitious,—Christ never took these upon him; but Christ took upon him painful infirmities; as, 1. Hunger, Matth. 21:18., He came to the fig-tree, and would have eaten. 2. Weariness; as when he sat on Jacob's well to rest him, John 4:6. 3. Sorrow, Matth. 26:38., "My soul is exceeding sorowful, even unto death." It was a sorrow guided with reason, not disturbed with passion. 4. Fear, Heb. 5:7., "He was heard in that he feared." Nay, yet a further degree of Christ's humility, he not only was made flesh, but in the likeness of sinful flesh, "He knew no sin, yet he was made sin," 2 Cor. 5:21. He was like a sinner; he had all sin laid upon him, but no sin lived in him. Isa. 53:12., "He was numbered among transgressors." He who was numbered with the persons of the Trinity, he is said "to bear the sins of many," Heb. 9:28. Now, this was the lowest degree of Christ's humiliation. For Christ to be reputed as a sinner, never such a pattern of humility! That Christ, who would not endure sin in the angels, should himself endure to have sin imputed to him, it is the most amazing humility that ever was!

From all this learn to be humble. Dost thou see Christ humbling himself, and art thou proud? 'Tis the humble saint that is Christ's picture. Christians, be not proud of your fine feathers: 1. Hast thou an estate? be not proud, the earth thou treadest on is richer than thou: it hath mines of gold and silver in the bowels of it. 2. Hast thou beauty? be not proud: it is but air and dust mingled. 3. Hast thou skill and parts? be humble: Lucifer hath more knowledge than thou. 4. Hast thou grace? be humble: thou hast it not of thy own growth, it is borrowed. Were it not folly to be proud of a ring that is lent? 1 Cor. 4:7. Thou hast more sin than grace, spots than beauty. O look on Christ, this rare pattern, and be humbled! It is an unseemly sight to see God humbling himself, and man exalting himself: to see an humble Saviour, and a proud sinner. God hates the very resemblance of pride, Lev. 2:11. He would have no honey in the sacrifice. Indeed leaven is sour; but why no honey? because, when honey is mingled with meal or flour, it makes the meal to rise and swell; therefore no honey. God hates the resemblance of the sin of pride; better want parts, and the comforts of the Spirit, than humility. Si Deus superbientibus angelis non pepercit,—if God, saith Austin, spared not the angels, when they grew proud, will he spare thee, who are but dust and rottenness? Branch 3. Behold here a sacred riddle or paradox, "God manifest in the flesh." The text calls it a mystery. That man should be made in God's image, was a wonder; but that God should be made in man's image, is a greater wonder. That the Ancient of Days should be born, —that he who thunders in the heavens should cry in the cradle,—Qui tonitruat in cœlis, clamat in cunabulis; qui regit sidera, sugit ubera,— that he who rules the stars, should suck the breast,—that a virgin should conceive,—that Christ should be made of a woman, and of that woman which himself made,—that the branch should bear the vine,—that the mother should be younger than the child she bare,

and the child in the womb bigger than the mother,—that the human nature should not be God, yet one with God: this was not only mirum but miraculum. Christ taking flesh is a mystery we shall never fully understand till we come to heaven, when our light shall be clear, as well as our love perfect. Branch 4. From hence, 'God manifest in the flesh, Christ born of a virgin,'—a thing not only strange in nature, but impossible,—learn, that there are no impossibilities with God: God can bring about things which are not within the sphere of nature to produce; that iron should swim,—that the rock should gush out water,—that the fire should lick up the water in the trenches, 1 Kings 18:38. It is natural for the water to quench the fire, but for the fire to consume the water, this is impossible in the course of nature: but God can bring about all this, Jer. 32:27., "There is nothing too hard for thee." Zech. 8:6., "If it be marvellous in your eyes, should it be marvellous in my eyes? saith the Lord." How should God be united to our flesh? It is impossible to us, but not with God; he can do what transcends reason, and exceeds faith. He would not be our God if he could not do more than we can think, Eph. 3:20. He can reconcile contraries. How apt are we to be discouraged with seeming impossibilities! How do our hearts die within us, when things go cross to our sense and reason! We are apt to say as that prince, 2 Kings 7:2., "If the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be?" It was a time of famine, and now that a measure of wheat—which was a good part of a bushel—should be sold for a shekel, viz. half an ounce of silver, how can this be? So when things are cross, or strange, God's own people are apt to question, how they should be brought about with success? Moses, who was a man of God, and one of the brightest stars that ever shined in the firmament of God's church, yet he was apt to be discouraged with seeming impossibilities, Num. 11:21, 22., "And Moses said, the people among whom I am, are six hundred

thousand footmen, and thou hast said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat for a whole month: shall the flocks and herds be slain for them to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered for them, to suffice them?" As if he had said, in plain language, he did not see how the people of Israel, being so numerous, could be fed for a month, v. 23., "And the Lord said, Is the Lord's hand waxed short?" Surely, that God who brought Isaac out of a dead womb, and the Messiah out of a virgin's womb, what cannot he do? O let us rest upon the arm of God's power, and believe in him, in the midst of seeming impossibilities. Remember, 'there are no impossibilities with God.' He can subdue a proud heart. He can raise a dying church. Christ born of a virgin; that wonder-working God that wrought this can bring to pass the greatest seeming impossibilities. Use 2d. Of exhortation. Branch 1. Seeing Christ took our flesh, and was born of a virgin, let us labour that he may be spiritually born in our hearts. What will it profit us, that Christ was born into the world, unless he be born in our hearts: that he was united to our nature, unless he be united to our persons? Marvel not that I say unto you, Christ must be born again, viz. in our hearts, Gal. 4:19., "Till Christ be formed in you." Now, then, try if Christ be born in your hearts. QUEST. How shall we know that? Ans. 1. There are pangs before the birth; so, before Christ be born in the heart, there are spiritual pangs. Some pangs of conscience, deep convictions, Acts 2:37., "They were pricked at their heart." I grant the new-birth doth recipere magis et minus; all have not the same pangs of sorrow and humiliation, yet all have pangs. If Christ be born in thy heart, thou hast been deeply afflicted for sin. Christ is never born in the heart without pangs. Many thank God they never had any trouble

of spirit, they were always quiet: a sign Christ is not yet formed in them. A. 2. As, when Christ was born into the world, he was made flesh; so, if he be born in thy heart, he makes thy heart an heart of flesh, Ezek. 36:26. Is thy heart incarnate? before it was a rocky heart, and would not yield to God, or take the impressions of the world,—durum est quod non cedit tactui; now it is fleshy and tender like melted wax, to take any stamp of the Spirit. This is a sign Christ is born in our hearts; when they are hearts of flesh, they melt in tears and in love. What is it the better Christ was made flesh, unless he hath given thee a heart of flesh? A. 3. Christ was conceived in the womb of a virgin, so, if he be born in thee, thy heart is a virgin-heart, in respect of sincerity and sanctity. Art thou purified from the love of sin? If Christ be born in thy heart, it is a sanctum sanctorum,—an holy of holies. If thy heart be polluted with the predominant love of sin, never think Christ is born there. Christ will never lie any more in a stable. If he be born in thy heart, it is consecrated by the Holy Ghost. A. 4. If Christ be born in thy heart, then it is with thee as in a birth: 1. There is life. Faith is principium vivens,—it is the vital artery of the soul, Gal. 2:20., "The life that I live in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of God." 2. There is appetite, 1 Pet. 2:2., "As new-born babes, desire the sincere milk of the word." The word is like breast-milk,— pure, sweet, nourishing; the soul in which Christ is formed desires this breast-milk. St. Bernard, in one of his soliloquies, comforts himself with this, that sure he had the new-birth in him, because he found in his heart such strong anhelations and thirstings after God. 3. Motion. After Christ is born in the heart, there is a violent motion; there is striving to enter in at the strait gate, and offering violence to

the kingdom of heaven, Matth. 12:11. By this we may know Christ is formed in us. This is the only comfort, that as Christ was born into the world, so he is born in our hearts; as he was united to our flesh, so he is united to our person. Branch 2. As Christ was made in our image, let us labour to be made in his image. Christ being incarnate was made like us, let us labour to be made like him. There are three things in which we should labour to be like Christ. 1. In disposition. He was of a most sweet disposition, deliciæ humani generis, Tit. Vespasian. He invites sinners to come to him. He hath bowels to pity us, breasts to feed us, wings to cover us. He would not break our heart, but with mercy. Was Christ made in our likeness? let us labour to be made in his likeness. Let us be like him in this sweetness of disposition: be not of a morose spirit. It was said of Nabal, 1 Sam. 25:17., "He is such a son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him." Some are so barbarous, as if they were a-kin to the ostrich, they are fired with rage, and breathe forth nothing but revenge; like those two men in the gospel, 'possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce," Mat. 8:28. Let us be like Christ in mildness and sweetness. Let us pray for our enemies, and conquer them by love. David's kindness melted Saul's heart, 1 Sam. 24:16. A frozen heart will be thawed with the fire of love. 2. Be like Christ in grace. He was like us in having our flesh, let us be like him in having his grace. In three graces we should labour to be like Christ: 1. In humility, Phil. 2:8., "He humbled himself." He left the bright robes of his glory to be clothed with the rags of our humanity: a wonder to humility! Let us be like Christ in this grace. Humility, saith St. Bernard, is contemptus propriæ excellentiæ,—a contempt of self-excellency, a kind of self-annihilation. This is the glory of a Christian. We are never so comely in God's eyes, as when

we are black in our own. In this let us be like Christ. True religion is to imitate Christ. And indeed, what cause have we to be humble, if we look within us, about us, below us, above us? (1.) If we look intra nos,—within us, here we see our sins represented to us in the glass of conscience; lust, envy, passion. Our sins are like vermin crawling in our souls, Job 13:23., "How many are my iniquities?" Our sins are as the sands of the sea for number, as the rocks of the sea for weight. Austin cries out, Væ mihi fœcibus peccatorum polluitur templum Domini! My heart, which is God's temple, is polluted with sin.—(2.) If we look juxta nos,—about us, here is that may humble us. We may see other Christians out-shining us in gifts and graces, as the sun out-shines the lesser planets Others are laden with fruit, perhaps we have but here and there an olive-berry growing, to shew that we are of the right kind, Isa. 17:6.—(3.) If we look infra nos,—below us, here is that may humble us. We may see the mother earth, out of which we came. The earth is the most ignoble element, Job. 30:8., "They were viler than the earth." Thou that dost set up thy scutcheon, and blaze thy coat of arms, behold thy pedigree; thou art but pulvis animatus,—walking ashes: and wilt thou be proud? What is Adam? He is the son of dust. And what is dust? The son of nothing.—(4.) If we look supra nos,—above us, here is that may humble us. If we look up to heaven, there we may see God resisting the proud. Superbos sequitur ultor a tergo Deus. The proud man is the mark which God shoots at, and he never misses the mark. He threw proud Lucifer out of heaven,—he thrust proud Nebuchadnezzar out of his throne, and turned him to eat grass, Dan. 4:33., O then be like Christ in humility! 3. Did Christ take our flesh? was he made like to us? let us be made like to him in zeal, John 2:17., "The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up." He was zealous when his Father was dishonoured. In this let us be like Christ, zealous for God's truth and glory, which are the two orient pearls of the crown of heaven. Zeal is as needful for a

Christian, as salt for the sacrifice, or fire on the altar. Zeal without prudence, is rashness; prudence without zeal, is cowardliness. Without zeal, our duties are not acceptable to God. Zeal is like rosin to the bow-strings, without which the lute makes no music. 4. Be like Christ, in the contempt of the world. When Christ took our flesh, he came not in the pride of flesh, he did not descend immediately from kings and nobles, but was of mean parentage. Christ was not ambitious of titles of honour. Christ did as much decline the worldly dignity and greatness as others seek it. When they would have made him a king, he refused it; he chose rather to ride upon the foal of an ass, than to be drawn in a chariot; and to hang upon a wooden cross, than to wear a golden crown. Christ scorned the pomp and glory of the world: he waved secular affairs, Luke 12:14., "Who made me a judge?" His work was not to arbitrate matters of law; he came not into the world to be a magistrate, but a Redeemer. Christ was like a star in an higher orb, he minded nothing but heaven. Was Christ made like us? let us be made like him, in heavenliness and contempt of the world. Let us not be ambitious of the honours and preferments of the world; let us not purchase the world with the loss of a good conscience. What wise man would damn himself to grow rich? or pull down his soul, to build up an estate? Be like Christ in an holy contempt of the world. 5. Be like Christ in conversation. Was Christ incarnate? was he made like us? let us be made like him in holiness of life. No temptation could fasten upon Christ, John 14:30., "The prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me." Temptation to Christ was like a spark of fire upon a marble pillar, which glides off. Christ's life, saith Chrysostom, was brighter than the sunbeams. Let us be like him in this, 1 Pet. 1:15., "Be ye holy in all manner of conversation." We are not, saith Austin, to be like Christ in working miracles, but in a holy

life. A Christian should be both a loadstone and a diamond,—a loadstone, in drawing others to Christ,—a diamond, casting a sparkling lustre of holiness in his life. O let us be so just in our dealings, so true in our promises, so devout in our worship, so unblameable in our lives, that we may be the walking pictures of Christ! Thus as Christ was made in our likeness, let us labour to be made in his likeness. Branch 3. If Jesus Christ was so abased for us,—he took our flesh which was a disparagement to him,—it was mingling dust with gold, —if he, I say, abased himself so for us, let us be willing to be abased for him. If the world reproach us for Christ's sake, and cast dust on our name, let us bear it with patience. The apostles, Acts 5:41., departed from the council "rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name;" that they were graced to be disgraced for Christ. That is a good saying of St. Austin, Quid sui detrahit famæ meæ, addet mercedi meæ,—they who take away from a saint's name, shall add to his reward; and while they make his credit weigh lighter, they make his crown weigh heavier. O was Christ content to be humbled and abased for us, to take our flesh, and to take it when it was in disgrace! Let us not think much to be abased for Christ. Say as David, 2 Sam. 6:22., "If this be to be vile, I will yet be more vile." If to serve my Lord Christ, if to keep my conscience pure, if this be to be vile, I will yet be more vile. Use 3d. Of comfort. Jesus Christ having taken our flesh, hath ennobled our nature,—naturam nostrum nobilitavit. Our nature is now invested with greater royalties and privileges than in time of innocency. Before, in innocency, we were made in the image of God; but now, Christ having assumed our nature, we are made one with God; our nature is ennobled above the angelical nature. Christ taking our flesh, hath made us nearer to himself than the angels. The angels

are his friends, believers are flesh of his flesh, his members, Eph.
5:30., and 1:23. And the same glory which is put upon Christ's
human nature, shall be put upon believers.

CHRIST'S EXALTATION PHIL. 2:9. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted him, and given him a name above every name, &c. Before, we have spoken of Christ's humiliation; now of his exaltation; before, you saw the Sun of Righteousness in the eclipse; now, you shall see it coming out of the eclipse, and shining in its full splendour and glory: "Wherefore God hath highly exalted him,"—super exaltavit, AMBR. "Above all exaltation." QUEST. XXVIII. Wherein consists Christ's exaltation? ANS. In his rising from the dead, his ascending into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God the Father, &c. QUEST. In what sense hath God exalted Christ? Ans. Not in respect of Christ's Godhead, for that cannot be exalted higher than it is; as in Christ's humiliation the Godhead was not lower, so in his exaltation, the Godhead is not higher; but Christ is exalted as Mediator, his human nature is exalted. QUEST. How many ways is Christ exalted? Ans. Five ways: God hath exalted Christ, 1. In his titles. 2. In his office. 3. In his ascension. 4. In his session at God's right hand. 5. In

constituting him judge of the world. I. First title. God hath exalted Christ in his titles. 1. He is exalted to be a Lord, Acts 9:17., "The name of the Lord Jesus was magnified." He is a Lord in respect of his sovereignty; he is Lord over angels and men, Mat. 28:18., "All power is given unto me." Christ hath three keys in his hand,—the key of the grave, to open the graves of men at the resurrection,—the key of heaven, to open the kingdom of heaven to whom he will,—the key of hell, Rev. 1:18., to lock up the damned in that fiery prison. To this Lord all knees must bow, Phil. 2:10., "That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow:" name, is put here for person,—to that holy thing Jesus, to the sceptre of that divine person every knee shall bow. Bowing is put for subjection,—all must be subdued to him as sons or captives, submit to him as to the Lord or Judge; "Kiss the Son," Ps. 2:12., with a kiss of love and loyalty. We must not only cast ourselves into Christ's arms to be saved by him, but we must cast ourselves at his feet, to serve him. Second title. Christ is exalted to be a prince: Dan. 12:1., "There shall stand up Michael the great prince;" some think it was a created angel, but it was Angelus fœderis, Christ the angel of the covenant. He is a great prince, Rev. 1:5., "The prince of the kings of the earth." They hold their crowns by immediate tenure from him; his throne is above the stars, he hath angels and archangels for his attendants. Thus he is exalted in his titles of honour. II. God hath exalted Christ in his office; he hath honoured him to be Salvator mundi,—the Saviour of the world, Acts 5:31., "Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour." It was a great honour to Moses to be a temporal saviour; but what is it to be the Saviour of souls! Christ is called 'the horn of salvation,' Luke 1:69. He saves from sin, Mat. 1:21.; from wrath, 1 Thess. 1:10. To save

is a flower belongs only to his crown, Acts 4:12., "Neither is there salvation in any other." What an honour is this to Christ! How did this make heaven ring of saints' praises! they sing hallelujahs to Christ their Saviour, Rev. 5:9., "They sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the book and open the seals; for thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood." III. God hath exalted Christ in his ascension; if he be ascended, then he is exalted. Austin saith, "Some were of opinion that Christ's body ascended into the orb and circle of the sun:" so the Hermians. But the scripture is plain, he ascended into heaven, Luke 24:51., and Eph. 4:10., "Far above all heavens,"—therefore above the firmament. He is ascended into the highest part of the empyrean heaven which Paul calls the third heaven. Concerning Christ's ascension, two things: 1. The manner of Christ's ascension: 1st, Christ being to ascend, blessed his disciples, Luke 24:50., "He lifted up his hands, and blessed them, and while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven." Christ did not leave his disciples houses and lands, but he left them his blessing.—2dly, Christ ascended as a conqueror, in a way of triumph, Ps. 68:18., "Thou hast led captivity captive," &c. He triumphed over sin, hell, and death; and Christ's triumph is a believer's triumph: Christ hath conquered sin and hell for every believer. 2. The fruit of Christ's ascension: Christ's ascension to heaven causeth the descension of the Holy Spirit into our hearts, Eph. 4:8., "When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men." Christ having ascended up in the clouds, as his triumphant chariot, gives the gift of his Spirit to us: as a king at his coronation bestows gifts liberally to his favourites.

IV. God hath exalted Christ in his session at God's right hand, Mark 16:19., "After the Lord had spoken to them, he was received up into heaven, and sat upon the right hand of God." Eph. 1:20., "He raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand, far above all principality and power, and every name that is named." QUEST. What is meant by Christ's sitting at God's right hand? Ans. To speak properly, God hath no right hand or left; for being a Spirit, he is void of all bodily parts; but it is a borrowed speech,—a metaphor taken from the manner of kings who were wont to advance their favourites next to their own persons, and set them at their right hand: Solomon caused a seat to be set for the queen his mother, and placed her at his right hand, 1 Kings 2:19. So for Christ to sit at the right hand of God, is to be in the next place to God the Father in dignity and honour. The human nature of Christ, being personally united to the divine, is now set down on a royal throne in heaven, and adored even of angels. By virtue of the personal union of Christ's human nature with the divine, there is a communication of all that glory from the Deity of Christ which his human nature is capable of. Not that the manhood of Christ is advanced to an equality with the Godhead, but the divine nature being joined with the human, the human nature is wonderfully glorified, though not deified. Christ as Mediator is filled with all majesty and honour, beyond the comprehension of the highest order of angels: Christ in his humiliation descended so low, that it was not fit to go lower; and in his exaltation he ascended so high that it is not possible to go higher. In his resurrection he was exalted above the grave,—in his ascension he was exalted above the airy and starry heaven,—in his sitting at God's right hand, he is exalted above the highest heavens far, Eph. 4:10., "Far above all heavens."

V. God hath exalted Christ in constituting him Judge of the whole world, John 5:22., "The Father hath committed all judgment to the Son." At the day of judgment shall Christ be exalted supereminently, "He shall come in the glory of his Father," Mark 8:38. He shall wear the same embroidered robes of majesty as the Father; and he shall come with all his holy angels, Mat. 25:31. He who was led to the bar with a band of soldiers shall be attended to the bench with a guard of angels; Christ shall judge his judges, he shall judge Pilate that condemned him; kings must leave their thrones, and come to his bar. And this is the highest court of judicature, from whence is no appeal. Use 1st. Of information. Branch 1. See Christ's different state on earth, and now in heaven. O how is the scene altered! When he was on earth, he lay in a manger,—now he sits on a throne; then he was hated and scorned of men,—now he is adored of angels; then his name was reproached,—now "God hath given him a name above every name," Phil. 2:9. Then he came in the form of a servant, and as a servant, stood with his basin and towel, and washed his disciples' feet, John 13:4, 5.,—now he is clad in his prince's robes, and the kings of the earth cast their crowns before him; on earth he was a man of sorrow,—now he is anointed with the oil of gladness; on earth was his crucifixion,—now his coronation; then his Father frowned upon him in desertion,—now he hath set him at his right hand; before he seemed to have no form or beauty in him, Isa. 53:2.,—now he is in the brightness of his Father's glory, Heb. 1:3. O what a change is here! "Him hath God highly exalted." Branch 2. Was Christ first humble and then exalted? hence learn, the way to true honour is humility: Luke 14:11., "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted." The world looks upon humility as that which will make one contemptible, but it is the ready way to honour; the way to rise is to fall, the way to ascend is to descend. Humility

exalts us in the esteem of men, and it exalts us to an higher throne in heaven, Mat. 18:4., "Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven," viz. He shall have a greater degree of glory in it. Branch 3. Christ suffered, and then was exalted: see hence, that sufferings must go before glory. Many desire to be glorified with Christ, but they are not content to suffer for Christ, 2 Tim. 2:12., "If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him." The wicked first reign and then suffer; the godly first suffer, and then reign: there is no way to Constantinople but through the Straits; no way to heaven, but through sufferings; no way to the crown, but by the way of the cross. Jerusalem above is a pleasant city,—streets of gold, gates of pearl; but we must travel through a dirty road to this city,—through many reproaches and sufferings, Acts 14:22. We must enter into glory as Christ did, first he suffered shame and death, and now is exalted to sit at God's right hand. Use 2d. Of comfort. Branch 1. Christ, being so highly exalted, hath ennobled our nature; he hath crowned it with glory, and lifted it above angels and archangels; though Christ, as he was man, was made a little lower than the angels, Heb. 2:9., yet as the human nature is united to the divine, and is at God's right hand, so the human nature is above the angels. And if God hath so dignified our human nature, what a shame is it that we should debase it! God hath exalted the human nature above the angels, and the drunkard abaseth the human nature below the beasts. Branch 2. Christ being exalted at God's right hand, the key of government is laid upon his shoulders; he governs all the affairs of the world for his own glory. Do you think when Christ is so highly advanced, and hath all power in heaven and earth in his hand, he will

not take care of his elect, and turn the most astonishing providences to the good of his church? In a clock, the wheels move cross one to another, but all make the clock strike: so Christ being at his Father's right hand, he will make the most cross providences tend to the salvation of his church. Branch 3. Christ being at God's right hand, we may be assured he hath now finished the work of man's redemption, Heb. 10:12., "This man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on the right hand of God." If Christ had not fully expiated sin, and satisfied God's law, he had not sitten down at God's right hand, but had still lain in the grave; but now he is exalted to glory,—this is an evident token he hath done and suffered all that was required of him, for the working out of our redemption. Branch 4. Though Jesus Christ is so highly exalted in glory, yet he is not forgetful of us on earth. Some, when they are raised to places of honour forget their friends; when the chief butler was restored to his place at court, then he forgot poor Joseph in prison; but it is not so with Christ, though he be exalted to such glory in heaven, yet he is not unmindful of his saints on earth. Our high priest hath all the names and wants of his people written upon his breastplate. Art thou tempted? Though Christ be in glory, he knows how to pity and succour thee, Heb. 4:15., "We have not an high priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities." Dost thou mourn for sin? Christ, though in a glorified state, he hears thy sighs, bottles thy tears. Branch 5. Christ being exalted at God's right hand, this is for the comfort of believers, that they shall one day be exalted to that place of glory where he is. Christ's exaltation is our exaltation. Christ hath prayed for this, John 17:24., "Father, I will, that all those whom thou

hast given me, be with me where I am." And he is said to go before to "prepare a place" for believers, John 14:2. Christ is called the head, the church is called his body, Eph. 1:22, 23. The head being exalted to honour, the body mystical shall be exalted too; as sure as Christ is exalted far above all heavens, so sure will he instate believers in all that glory which his human nature is adorned with, John 17:22. As here he puts his grace upon the saints, so shortly will he put his glory upon them. This is comfort to the poorest Christian; perhaps thou hast scarce an house to put thy head in, yet thou mayest look up to heaven, and say, "there is my house, there is my country, and I have already taken possession of heaven in my head Christ; he sits there, and it will not be long before I shall sit there with him; he is upon the throne of glory, and I have his word for it, I shall sit upon the throne with him," Rev. 3:21. Use 3d. Of exhortation. Hath God highly exalted Christ? Let us labour to exalt him. Let us exalt, 1. His person. 2. His truths 1. Let us exalt Christ in our hearts; believe! O adore and love him! We cannot lift Christ up higher in heaven, but we may in our hearts. 2. Let us exalt him in our lips; let us praise him. Our bodies are the temples of the Holy Ghost, our tongues must be the organs in these temples; by praising and commending Christ we exalt him in the esteem of others. 3. Let us exalt him in our lives, by living holy lives: vera religio hæc, sine macula vivera lactant. It is not all the doxologies and prayers in the world do so exalt Christ as an holy life: this makes Christ renowned, and lifts him up indeed, when his followers walk worthy of Christ. 2. Let us exalt Christ's truths, Bucholcerus, in his Chronology, reports of the nobles of Polonia, that whenever the gospel is read, they lay their hands upon their swords, by that intimating they are

ready to maintain the gospel with the hazard of their lives. Let us exalt Christ's truths,—maintain the truths of Christ against error,— maintain the doctrine of free grace against merit,—the Deity of Christ against Socinianism. Truth is the most orient pearl of Christ's crown: contend for the truth as one would for a sum of money, that it should not be wrested out of his hand; this Christ takes to be an exalting of him, when we exalt his truths, wherein his glory is so much concerned.

CHRIST THE REDEEMER QUEST. XXX. HOW doth the Spirit apply to us the redemption purchased to us by Christ? ANS. The Spirit applies to us the redemption purchased by Christ, by working faith in us, and thereby uniting us to Christ in our effectual calling. Here are in this answer two things: 1st. Something implied, viz. That Christ is the glorious purchaser of our redemption, in these words, "The redemption purchased by Christ."—2d. Something expressed, viz. that the Spirit applies to us this redemption purchased, by working faith in us, &c. I. The thing here implied, that Jesus Christ is the glorious purchaser of our redemption. The doctrine of redemption by Jesus Christ is a glorious doctrine; it is the marrow and quintessence of the gospel; in this all a Christian's comfort lies. Great was the work of creation, but greater the work of redemption; it cost more to redeem us than to

make us; in the one there was but the speaking of a word, in the other shedding of blood, Luke 1:51. The creation was but the work of God's fingers, Ps. 8:3.; redemption the work of his arm, Heb. 9:12., "Having obtained eternal redemption for us." Christ's purchasing redemption for us, implies that our sins did mortgage and sell us; had there not been some kind of mortgaging, there had been no need of redemption: redimere, q. rursus emere, HIEROM. Now Christ, when we were thus mortgaged and sold by sin, did purchase our redemption; Christ had the best right to redeem us, for he is our kinsman. The Hebrew word for Redeemer, goel, signifies a kinsman, —one that is near in blood: in the old law the nearest kinsman was to redeem his brother's land, Ruth. 4:4. Thus Christ being near akin to us, 'Flesh of our flesh,' is the fittest to redeem us. QUEST. How doth Christ redeem us? Ans. By his own precious blood, Eph. 1:7., "In whom we have redemption through his blood." Among the Romans, he was said to redeem another that laid down a price equivalent for the ransom of the prisoner. In this sense Christ is a Redeemer, he hath paid a price. Never such a price paid to ransom prisoners, 1 Cor. 6:20., "Ye are pretio empti,—bought with a price;" and this price was his own blood. So, in the text, "by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us," this blood being the blood of that person who was God as well as man, is a price sufficient for the ransom of millions. QUEST. From what doth Christ redeem us? Ans. From sin. To be redeemed from Turkish slavery is a great mercy, but it is infinitely more to be redeemed from sin. There is nothing can hurt the soul, but sin; it is not affliction hurts it, it often makes it better, as the furnace makes gold the purer; but it is sin that

doth damnify. Now, Christ redeems us from sin, Heb. 9:26., "Now once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." QUEST. But how are we redeemed from sin? Do we not see corruption stirring in the regenerate? Much pride and unmortified passion? Ans. We must distinguish of redemption: redemption is either inchoate or plena, i.e. begun redemption, or perfect redemption; sin cannot stand with a perfect redemption, but here it is begun; sin may stand with an imperfect redemption. There may be some darkness in the air at the sun's first rising, but not when the sun is at the full meridian; while our redemption is but begun, there may be sin; but not when it is perfect in glory. QUEST. But in what sense hath Christ redeemed justified persons from sin? Ans. 1. A reatu,—from the guilt of sin, though not the stain. Guilt is the binding a person over to punishment. Now Christ hath redeemed a justified person from the guilt of sin; he hath discharged his debts. Christ saith to God's justice, as Paul to Philemon, "If he hath wronged thee any thing, or owes thee ought, put that on my account," v. 18. A. 2. A justified person is redeemed a dominio,—from the power and regency of sin, though not the presence. Sin may furere, but not regnare; it may rage in a child of God, but not reign; lust did rage in David, fear in Peter, but it did not reign, they recovered themselves by repentance, Rom. 6:14., "Sin shall not have dominion over you." Sin lives in a child of God, but is deposed from the throne; it lives not as a king, but a captive.

A. 3. A believer is redeemed a maledictione,—from the curse due to sin, Gal. 3:13., "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us." Christ said to his Father, as Rebecca to Jacob, "upon me, upon me be the curse; let the blessing be upon them, but upon me be the curse." And now, there is no condemnation to believers, Rom. 8:1. An unbeliever hath a double condemnation,—one from the law which he hath transgressed,—and the other from the gospel which he hath despised; but Christ hath redeemed a believer from this malediction, he hath set him out of the power of hell and damnation. QUEST. To what hath Christ redeemed us? Ans. He hath redeemed us to a glorious inheritance, 1 Pet. 1:4., "To an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for you." 1. 'To an inheritance:' Christ hath not only redeemed us out of prison, but he hath redeemed us to a state of happiness,—to an inheritance. Heaven is not a lease which soon expires, but an inheritance,—and a glorious inheritance, Col. 1:12., an inheritance in light. Lumen actuat colores,—light adorns and gilds the world. What were the world without light but a prison? The heavenly inheritance is irradiated with light: Christ, as a continual sun, enlightens it with his beams, Rev. 21:23. 2. 'To an inheritance incorruptible:' It doth not moulder away, or suffer dissolution. Earthly comforts are shadowed out by the tabernacle, which was transient; but heaven is set out by the temple which was fixed and permanent, built with stone, overlaid with gold. This is the glory of the celestial inheritance; it is incorruptible. Eternity is written upon the frontispiece of it.

3. 'Undefiled:' The Greek word for undefiled, alludes to a precious stone called amianthus, which cannot be blemished: such a place is heaven, undefiled,—nothing can stain it,—there's no sin there to eclipse its purity. For the holiness and undefiledness of it, it is compared to pure gold, and to the sapphire and emerald, Rev. 21. "The sapphire hath a virtue," saith Pliny, "to preserve chasteness; the emerald to expel poison." These are the lively emblems of heaven, to shew the sanctity of it,—no fever of lust,—no venom of malice,—there are none but pure virgin spirits inhabit it. 4. It 'fadeth not away:' The Greek word is the name of a flower amaranthus, which keeps a long time fresh and green, as Clem. Alexandrinus writes. Such is the heavenly inheritance, it doth not lose its orient colour, but keeps its freshness and greenness to eternity; the beauty of it fadeth not away. To this glorious inheritance hath Christ redeemed the saints: an inheritance which cannot be fully described or set forth by all the lights of heaven, though every star were a sun. And that which is the diamond in the ring, the glory of this inheritance is, the eternal sight and fruition of the blessed God; the sight of God will be a most alluring, heart-ravishing object; the king's presence makes the court, John 3:2., "We shall see him as he is." It is comfortable to see God shewing himself through the lattice of an ordinance,—to see him in the word and sacrament; the martyrs thought it comfortable to see him in a prison; O then, what will it be to see him in glory, shining ten thousand times brighter than the sun! And not only see him but enjoy him for ever; Præmium quod fide non attingitur,—AUG. Faith itself is not able fully to comprehend this reward. And all this blessedness hath Christ purchased through the redemption of his blood. Use 1st. Branch 1. See into what a wretched deplorable condition we had brought ourselves by sin. We had sinned ourselves into slavery,

so that we needed Christ to purchase our redemption: nihil durius servitute, CICERO, "Slavery is the worst condition;" such as are now prisoners in Algiers think it so.—But by sin we are in a worse slavery, slaves to Satan, a merciless tyrant, who sports in the damnation of souls. In this condition we were when Christ came to redeem us. Branch 2. See in this, as in a transparent glass, the love of Christ to the elect; he came to redeem them, these he died intentionally for. Were it not great love for a king's son to pay a great sum of money to redeem a captive? But that he should be content to be a prisoner in his stead, and die for his ransom; this were matter of wonder. Jesus Christ hath done all this, he hath written his love in characters of blood. It had been much for Christ to speak a good word to his Father for us, but he knew that was not enough to redeem us; though a word speaking made a world, yet it would not redeem a sinner, Heb. 9:22., "Without shedding of blood there is no remission." Use 2d. Of trial. If Christ came to purchase our redemption, then let us try whether we are the persons whom Christ hath redeemed from the guilt and curse due to sin. This is a needful trial; for, let me tell you, there is but a certain number whom Christ hath redeemed. O, say sinners, Christ is a Redeemer, and we shall be saved by him! Beloved, Christ came not to redeem all; then we overthrow the decrees of God. Redemption is not as large as creation. I grant there is a sufficiency of merit in Christ's blood to save all; but there's difference between sufficiency and efficiency. Christ's blood is a sufficient price for all, but it is effectual only to them that believe. A plaster may have a sovereign virtue in it to heal any wound, but it doth not heal unless applied to the wound. And if it be so, that all have not the benefit of Christ's redemption, only some; then it is a necessary question to ask our souls, Whether we are in the number of them that are redeemed by Christ or not?

QUEST. How shall we know that? Ans. Such as are redeemed, are reconciled to God; the enmity is taken away; their judgments approve, their wills incline ad bonum, Col. 1:21. Are they redeemed, that are unreconciled to God? Who hate God and his people, (as the vine and laurel have an antipathy)— who do all they can to disparage holiness? Are these redeemed who are unreconciled? Christ hath purchased a reprieval for these: but a sinner may have a reprieve and yet go to hell, John 5:6. A. 2. Such as are redeemed by Christ are redeemed from the world, Gal. 1:4., "Who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver (or redeem) us from this present evil world." Such as are redeemed by Christ are risen with Christ, Col. 3:1. As the birds, though they light upon the ground to pick up a little seed, yet immediately they take their wings and fly up to heaven again: so the redeemed of the Lord, though they use the world, and take the lawful comforts of it, yet their hearts are presently off these things, and they ascend to heaven; live here, and trade above. Such as Christ hath died for, are 'dead to the world;' to the honours, profits, and preferments of it. What shall we think of them who say, they are redeemed of the Lord, yet are lovers of the world? Like the tribes who desired to have their portion on this side Canaan: Phil. 3:19., "Who mind earthly things." They pull down their souls to build up an estate. They are not redeemed by Christ who are not redeemed from the world. Use 3d. Of comfort, to such as are redeemed. You are happy,—the lot of free grace is fallen upon you,—you who were once in the devil's prison, you have broke this prison,—you that were once bound in the chains of sin, God hath begun to beat off your chains, and hath freed you from the power of sin, and the curse due to it. What a comfort is this? And is there any consolation in Christ? it is thine. Is there any

sweet fruit growing upon the promise? thou mayest gather it. Are there any glorious privileges in the gospel? they are thy jointure, justification, adoption, coronation. Is there any glory in heaven? thou shalt shortly drink of that river of pleasure. Hast thou any temporal comforts? these are but a pledge and earnest of more: thy meal in the barrel is but a bait by the way, and an earnest of that angels' food which God hath prepared for thee. How mayest thou be comforted in all worldly afflictions, though the fig-tree flourish not! Nay, in case of death, death hath lost its sting, Mors ebiit morte Christi. Death shall carry thee to thy Redeemer; fear not dying since you cannot be perfectly happy but by dying Use ult. Of exhortation. Long for the time when you shall have a full and perfect redemption in heaven, an eternal jubilee; when you shall be freed not only from the power but from the presence of sin. Here a believer is as a prisoner that hath broken prison, but walks with a fetter on his leg; when the banner of glory shall be displayed over you, you shall be as the angels of God,—you shall never have a sinful thought more,—no pain or grief, no aching head or unbelieving heart. You shall see Christ's face, and lie for ever in his arms; you shall be as Joseph, Gen. 41:14., "They brought him hastily out of the dungeon, and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment and came in unto Pharaoh." Long for that time when you shall put off your prison-garments, and change your raiment, and put on the embroidered garment of glory. O long! yet be content to wait for this full and glorious redemption, when you shall be more happy than you can desire, when you shall have "that which eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor can it enter into man's heart to conceive."

OF FAITH

GAL. 2:20. The life that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. II. The Spirit applies to us the redemption purchased by Christ, by working faith in us. CHRIST is the glory, and faith in Christ the comfort of the gospel. QUEST. What are the kinds of faith? Ans. Fourfold: 1. An historical or dogmatical faith, which is the believing the truths revealed in the word, because of divine authority. 2. There is a temporary faith, which lasteth but for a time, and vanisheth, Mat. 13:21., "Yet hath he no root in himself, but dureth for a while." A temporary faith is like Jonah's gourd, which came up in a night and withered, chap. 4:10. 3. A miraculous faith, which was granted to the apostles, to work miracles for the confirmation of the gospel. This Judas had; he cast out devils, yet was cast out to the devil. 4. A true justifying faith, which is called "A faith of the operation of God," Col. 2:12., and is a jewel hung only upon the elect. QUEST. What is justifying faith? Ans. I shall show, 1st. What it is not. It is not a bare acknowledgment that Christ is a Saviour. Indeed there must be an acknowledgment, but that is not sufficient to justify. The devils acknowledged Christ's Godhead, Mat. 8:29., 'Jesus the Son of God.' There may be an assent to divine truth, yet no work of grace on the heart; many assent in their judgments, that sin is an evil thing, but they go on in sin, their

corruptions are stronger than their convictions, and that Christ is excellent, they cheapen the pearl, but do not buy. 2d. What justifying faith is? I answer, true justifying faith consists in three things. 1. Self-renunciation. Faith is a going out of one's self; a man is taken off from his own bottom, he sees he hath no righteousness of his own to save him, Phil. 3:9., "Not having mine own righteousness." Selfrighteousness is a broken reed the soul dares not lean on. Repentance and faith are both humbling graces; by repentance a man abhors himself; by faith he goes out of himself. It is with a sinner in the first act of believing, as with Israel in their wilderness march, behind them they saw Pharaoh and his chariots pursuing them, before them the Red sea ready to devour them: so the soul behind sees God's justice pursuing him for sin, before hell ready to devour him; and, in this forlorn condition, he sees nothing in himself to help him but he must perish unless he can find help in another. 2. Recumbency. The soul casts itself upon Jesus Christ; faith rests on Christ's person. Faith believes the promise; but that which faith rests upon in the promise, is the person of Christ; therefore the spouse is said to "lean upon her beloved," Cant. 8:5. And faith is described to be a "believing on the name of the Son of God," John 3:23., viz. on his person. The promise is but the cabinet, Christ is the jewel in it which faith embraceth? The promise is but the dish, Christ is the food in it which faith feeds on. And as faith rests on Christ's person, so on his person under this notion, as he was crucified. Faith glories in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6:14. To consider Christ as he is crowned with all manner of excellencies, doth rather stir up admiration and wonder; but Christ looked upon as bleeding and dying, is the proper

object of our faith; therefore it is called "faith in his blood," Rom. 3:25. 3. Appropriation, or the applying Christ to ourselves. A medicine, though it be ever so sovereign, yet if not applied to the wound, will do no good,—though the plaster be made of Christ's own blood, yet it will not heal, unless it be applied by faith,—the blood of God, without faith in God, will not save. This applying of Christ is called a receiving of him, John 1:12. The hand receiving of gold, enricheth; so the hand of faith receiving Christ's golden merits with salvation, enricheth us. QUEST. How is faith wrought? Ans. By the blessed Spirit; who is called the 'Spirit of grace,' Zech. 12:10., because he is the spring and efficient of all grace. Faith is the chief work which the Spirit of God works in a man's heart. In making the world God did but speak a word, but in working faith he puts forth his arm, Luke 1:51. The Spirit's working faith is called, "The exceeding greatness of God's power." What a power was put forth in raising Christ from the grave, when such a tombstone lay upon him, "the sins of all the world!" Yet he was raised up by the Spirit; the same power the Spirit of God puts forth in working faith. The Spirit irradiates the mind, subdues the will; the will naturally is like a garrison, which holds out against God; the Spirit with sweet violence conquers, or rather changeth the will, making the sinner willing to have Christ upon any terms, to be ruled by him as well as saved by him. QUEST. Wherein lies the preciousness of faith? Ans. 1. In its being the chief gospel-grace,—the head of the graces; as gold among the metals, so is faith among the graces. Clem.

Alexandrinus calls the other graces the daughters of faith. Indeed, in heaven, love will be the chief grace; but, while we are here militant, love must give place to faith; love takes possession of glory, but faith gives a title to it. Love is the crowning grace in heaven, but faith is the conquering grace upon earth, 1 John. 5:4., "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith." A. 2. In its having influence upon all the graces, and setting them awork, not a grace stirs till faith set it a-work. As the clothier sets the poor a-work, he sets their wheel a-going: faith sets hope a-work. The heir must believe his title to an estate in reversion before he can hope for it; faith believes its title to glory, and then hope waits for it. Did not faith feed the lamp of hope with oil, it would soon die. Faith, sets love a-work, Gal. 5:6., "Faith which worketh by love;" believing the mercy and merit of Christ causeth a flame of love to ascend. Faith sets patience a-work, Heb. 6:12, "Be followers of them, who through faith and patience inherit the promise.' Faith believes the glorious rewards given to suffering. This makes the soul patient in suffering. Thus faith is the master-wheel, it sets all the other graces a-running. A. 3. In its being the grace which God honours to justify and save: thus indeed it is 'precious faith,' as the apostle calls it, 2 Pet. 1:1. The other graces help to sanctify, but it is faith that justifies, Rom. 5:1., "Being justified by faith." Repentance or love do not justify, but faith. QUEST. How doth faith justify? Ans. Faith doth not justify, 1. As it is a work, that were to make a Christ of our faith; but faith justifies, as it lays hold of the object, viz. Christ's merits. If a man had a precious stone in a ring that could heal, we say the ring heals; but properly it is not the ring, but the precious stone in the ring that heals. Thus faith saves and justifies,

but it is not any inherent virtue in faith, but as it lays hold on Christ, so it justifies. 2. Faith doth not justify as it exerciseth grace. It cannot be denied, faith doth invigorate all the graces, it puts strength and liveliness into them, but it doth not justify under this notion. Faith works by love, but it doth not justify as it works by love, but as it applies Christ's merits. QUEST. Why should faith save and justify more than any other grace? Ans. 1. Because of God's sanction. He hath appointed this grace to be justifying: and he doth it, because faith is a grace that takes a man off himself, and gives all the honour to Christ and free grace, Rom 4:20., "Strong in faith giving glory to God." Therefore God hath put this honour on faith, to make it saving and justifying. The king's stamp makes the coin pass for current; if he would put his stamp upon leather as well as silver, it would make it current; so God having put his sanction, the stamp of his authority and institution upon faith, this makes it to be justifying and saving. A. 2. Because faith makes us one with Christ, Eph. 3:17. It is the espousing, incorporating grace, it gives us coalition and union with Christ's person: other graces make us like Christ, faith makes us members of Christ. Use 1st. Of exhortation. Let us above all things labour for faith. Fides est sanctissimum humani pectoris bonum: Eph. 6:19. "Above all taking the shield of faith." Faith will be of more use to us than any grace: as an eye though dim, was of more use to an Israelite than all the other members of his body,—not a strong arm, or a nimble foot, —it was his eye looking on the brazen serpent that cured him. It is

not knowledge, though angelical,—not repentance, though we could shed rivers of tears,—could justify us: only faith, whereby we look on Christ. "Without faith it is impossible to please God," Heb. 11:6.; and if we do not please him by believing, he will not please us in saving of us. Faith is the condition of the covenant of grace; without faith,— without covenant; and without covenant,—without hope, Eph. 2:12. Use 2d. Of trial: Let us try whether we have faith. There is something looks like faith, and is not; a Bristol-stone looks like a diamond. Some plants have the same leaf with others, but the herbalist can distinguish them by the root, and taste. Something may look like true faith, but it may be distinguished by the fruits. Let us be serious in the trial of our faith; there is much depends upon our faith; if our faith be not good, there is nothing good comes from us; our duties and graces are adulterate. QUEST. Well then, how shall we know it is a true faith? Ans. By the noble effects: 1. Faith is a Christ-prizing grace, it puts an high valuation upon Christ, 1 Pet. 2:7., "To you, that believe, be is precious." St. Paul did best know Christ, 1 Cor. 9:1., "Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" Paul saw Christ with his bodily eyes in a vision, when he was caught up into the third heaven, and saw him with the eye of his faith in the holy supper, therefore he best knew Christ. And see how he styles all things in comparison of him, Phil. 3:8., "I count all things but dung, that I may win Christ." Do we set an high estimate upon Christ? could we be willing to part with the wedge of gold for the pearl of price? Greg. Nazianzen blessed God, he had any thing to lose for Christ's sake. 2. Faith is a refining grace, 1 Tim. 3:9., "Mystery of faith in a pure conscience." Faith is in the soul as fire among metals: It refines and purifies. Morality may wash the outside, faith washeth the inside,

Acts 15:9., "Having purified their hearts by faith." Faith makes the heart a sacristy or holy of holies. Faith is a virgin-grace, though it doth not take away the life of sin, yet is takes away the love of sin. Examine if your hearts be an unclean fountain, sending out mud and dirt, pride, envy; if there be legions of lusts in thy soul, there is no faith. Faith is an heavenly plant, which will not grow in an impure soil. 3. Faith is an obediential grace, Rom. 16:26., 'The obedience of faith.' Faith melts our will into God's; faith runs at God's call; if God commands duty (though cross to flesh and blood) faith obeys, Heb. 11:8., "By faith Abraham obeyed." Faith is not an idle grace, as it hath an eye to see Christ, so it hath an hand to work for him. Faith doth not only believe God's promise, but obey his command. It is not your having knowledge will evidence you to be believers; the devil hath knowledge, but wants obedience, and that makes him a devil. And the true obedience of faith is a cheerful obedience; God's commands do not seem grievous. Have you the obedience, and obey cheerfully? What say you to this? Do you look upon God's command as your burden, or privilege,—as an iron fetter about your leg, or a gold chain about your neck? 4. Faith is an assimilating grace. It changeth the soul into the image of the object; it makes it like Christ. Never did any look upon Christ with a believing eye, but he was made like Christ. A deformed person may look on a beautiful object, but not be made beautiful; but faith looking on Christ transforms a man, and turns him into his similitude. Faith looking on a bleeding Christ causeth a soft bleeding heart; looking on an holy Christ causeth sanctity of heart; looking on an humble Christ makes the soul humble. As the camelion is changed into the colour of that which it looks upon; so faith looking on Christ, changeth a Christian into the similitude of Christ.

5. By the growth of it; if it be a true faith, it grows; living things grow, Rom. 1:17., "From faith to faith." QUEST. How may we judge of the growth of faith? Ans. Growth of faith is judged, 1. By strength. We can do that now, which we could not do before. When one is man-grown, he can do that which he could not do when he was a child; he can carry a heavier burden, so thou canst bear crosses with more patience. 2. Growth of faith is seen by doing duties in a more spiritual manner, viz. with fervency; we put coals to the incense, from a principle of love to God. When an apple hath done growing in bigness, it grows in sweetness; thou dost duties in love, and now art sweeter, and come off with a better relish. OBJ. But I fear I have no faith? Ans. We must distinguish between weakness of faith and nullity; a weak faith is true. The bruised reed is but weak, yet it is such as Christ will not break. Though thy faith be but weak, yet be not discouraged. 1. A weak faith may receive a strong Christ; a weak hand can tye the knot in marriage, as well as a strong; a weak eye might have seen the brazen serpent. The woman in the gospel, that but touched Christ, received virtue from him. The touch of faith. 2. The promise is not made to strong faith, but to true. The promise doth not say, whosoever hath a giant-faith that can remove mountains, that can stop the mouths of lions, shall be saved; but whosoever believes, be his faith ever so small. Though Christ

sometimes chides a weak faith; yet that it may not be discouraged, he makes a promise to it, Mat. 5:3, Beati qui esuriunt. 3. A weak faith may be fruitful. Weakest things multiply most; the vine is a weak plant, but it is fruitful. Weak Christians may have strong affections. How strong is the first love, which is after the first planting of faith! 4. Weak faith may be growing. The seeds spring up by degrees; first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear. Therefore be not discouraged; God who would have us receive them that are weak in faith, Rom. 14:1., will not himself refuse them. A weak believer is a member of Christ; and though Christ will cut off rotten members from his body, yet not weak members.
