PURITAN GOLD -- Religious Affections by Jonathan Edwards: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 11
Part III: Distinguishing Signs VII-VIII


VII. Another thing, wherein gracious affections are distinguished from others, is, that they
are attended with a change of nature.
All Gracious affections do arise from a spiritual understanding, in which the soul has the
excellency and glory of divine things discovered to it, as was shown before. But all spiritual
discoveries are transforming; and not only make an alteration of the present exercise, sensation,
and frame of the soul, but such power and efficacy have they, that they make an alteration in the
very nature of the soul: 2 Cor. 3:18, "But we all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord." Such power as this is properly divine power, and is peculiar to the Spirit of the Lord: other
power may make an alteration in men's present frames and feelings: but it is the power of a Creator
only that can change the nature, or give a new nature. And no discoveries or illuminations but
those that are divine and supernatural, will have this supernatural effect. But this effect all those
discoveries have, that are truly divine. The soul is deeply affected by these discoveries, and so
affected as to be transformed.
Thus it is with those affections that the soul is the subject of in its conversion. The
Scripture representations of conversion do strongly imply and signify a change of nature: such as
"being born again; becoming new creatures; rising from the dead; being renewed in the spirit of the
mind; dying to sin, and living to righteousness; putting off the old man, and putting on the new
man; a being ingrafted into a new stock; a having a divine seed implanted in the heart; a being made
partakers of the divine nature," &c.
Therefore if there be no great and remarkable abiding change in persons that think they
have experienced a work of conversion, vain are all their imaginations and pretenses, however they
have been affected.63 Conversion is a great and universal change of the man, turning him from sin
to God. A man may be restrained from sin before he is converted; but when he is converted, he is
not only restrained from sin, his very heart and nature is turned from it unto holiness: so that
thenceforward he becomes a holy person, and an enemy to sin. If, therefore, after a person's high
affections at his supposed first conversion, it comes to that in a little time, that there is no very
sensible, or remarkable alteration in him, as to those bad qualities, and evil habits, which before
were visible in him, and he is ordinarily under the prevalence of the same kind of dispositions that
63"I would not judge of the whole soul's coming to Christ, so much by sudden pangs as

by inward bent. For the whole soul, in affectionate expressions and actions, may be
carried to Christ; but being without this bent, and change of affections, is unsound."
Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 203.

127
he used to be, and the same thing seems to belong to his character; he appears as selfish, carnal, as
stupid, and perverse, as unchristian and unsavory as ever; it is greater evidence against him, than
the brightest story of experiences that ever was told, is for him. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, neither high profession, nor low profession, neither a fair story,
nor a broken one, avails any thing; but a new creature.
If there be a very great alteration visible in a person for a while; if it be not abiding, but he
afterwards returns, in a stated manner, to be much as he used to be; it appears to be no change of
nature; for nature is an abiding thing. A swine that is of a filthy nature may be washed, but the
swinish nature remains; and a dove that is of a cleanly nature may be defiled, but its cleanly nature
remains.64
Indeed allowances must be made for the natural temper; conversion does not entirely root
out the natural temper; those sins which a man by his natural constitution was most inclined to
before his conversions he may be most apt to fall into still. But yet conversion will make a great
alteration even with respect to these sins. Though grace, while imperfect, does not root out an evil
natural temper, yet it is of great power and efficacy with respect to it, to correct it. The change that
is wrought in conversion, is a universal change; grace changes a man with respect to whatever is
sinful in him; the old man is put off, and the new man put on, he is sanctified throughout; and the
man becomes a new creature, old things are passed away, and all things are become new; all sin is
mortified, constitution sins, as well as others. If a man before his conversion; was by his natural
constitution especially inclined to lasciviousness, or drunkenness, or maliciousness; converting
grace will make a great alteration in him, with respect to these evil dispositions; so that however he
may be still most in danger of these sins, yet they shall no longer have dominion over him; nor will
they any more be properly his character. Yea, true repentance does in some respects, especially
turn a man against his own iniquity, that wherein he has been most guilty, and has chiefly
dishonored God. He that forsakes other sins, but saves his leading sin, the iniquity he is chiefly
inclined to, is like Saul, when sent against God's enemies the Amalekites, with a strict charge to
save none of them alive, but utterly to destroy them, small and great; who utterly destroyed inferior
people, but saved the king, the chief of them all, alive.
Some foolishly make it an argument in favor of their discoveries and affections, that when
they are gone, they are left wholly without any life or sense, or anything beyond what they had
before. They think it an evidence that what they experienced was wholly of God, and not of
themselves, because (say they) when God is departed, all is gone; they can see and feel nothing,
and are no better than they used to be.
It is very true, that all grace and goodness in the hearts of the saints is entirely from God;
and they are universally and immediately dependent on him for it. But yet these persons are
mistaken, as to the manner of God's communicating himself and his Holy Spirit, in imparting
saving grace to the soul. He gives his Spirit to be united to the faculties of the soul, and to dwell
there after the manner of a principle of nature; so that the soul, in being endued with grace, is
endued with a new nature: but nature is an abiding thing. All the exercises of grace are entirely
from Christ: but those exercises are not from Christ, as something that is alive, moves and stirs,
something that is without life, and remains without life; but as having life communicated to it; so
as, through Christ's power, to have inherent in itself a vital nature. In the soul where Christ
savingly is, there he lives. He does not only live without it, so as violently to actuate it, but he lives
in it, so that that also is alive. Grace in the soul is as much from Christ, as the light in a glass, held
out in the sunbeams, is from the sun. But this represents the manner of the communication of grace
to the soul, but in part; because the glass remains as it was, the nature of it not being at all changed,
it is as much without any lightsomeness in its nature as ever. But the soul of a saint receives light
from the Sun of righteousness, in such a manner, that its nature is changed, and it becomes
properly a luminous thing; not only does the sun shine in the saints, but they also become little
64"It is with the soul, as with water; all the cold may be gone, but the native principle

of cold remains still. You may remove the burning of lusts, not the blackness of
nature. Where the power of sin lies, change of conscience from security to terror,
change of life from profaneness to civility, and fashions of the world, to escape the
pollutions thereof, change of lusts, may quench them for a time: but the nature is
never changed in the best hypocrite that ever was." Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 194.

128
suns, partaking of the nature of the fountain of their light. In this respect, the manner of their
derivation of light, is like that of the lamps in the tabernacle, rather than that of a reflecting glass;
which, though they were lit up by fire from heaven, yet thereby became themselves burning
shining things. The saints do not only drink of the water of life, that flows from the original
fountain; out this water becomes a fountain of water in them, springing up there, and flowing out
of them, John 4:14, and chap. 7:38, 39. Grace is compared to a seed implanted, that not only is in
the ground, but has hold of it, has root there, and grows there, and is an abiding principle of life
and nature there.
As it is with spiritual discoveries and affections given at first conversion, so it is in all
illuminations and affections of that kind, that persons are the subjects of afterwards; they are all
transforming. There is a like divine power and energy in them, as in the first discoveries; and they
still reach the bottom of the heart, and affect and alter the very nature of the soul, in proportion to
the degree in which they are given. And a transformation of nature is continued and carried on by
them, to the end of life, until it is brought to perfection in glory. Hence the progress of the work of
grace in the hearts of the saints, is represented in Scripture, as a continued conversion and
renovation of nature. So the apostle exhorts those that were at Rome, "beloved of God, called to be
saints," and that were subjects of God's redeeming mercies, "to be transformed by the renewing of
their mind:" Rom. 12:1, 2, "I beseech you therefore, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies a living sacrifice; and be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind;" compared with chap. 1:7. So the apostle, writing to the "saints and
faithful in Christ Jesus," that were at Ephesus (Eph. 1:1), and those who were once dead in
trespasses and sins, but were now quickened and raised up, and made to sit together in heavenly
places in Christ, and created in Christ Jesus unto good works, that were once far off, but were
now made nigh by the blood of Christ, and that were no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow
citizens with the saints, and of the household of God, and that were built together for a habitation
of God through the Spirit; I say, the apostle writing to these, tells them, "that he ceased not to pray
for them, that God would give them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of
Christ; the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, that they might know, or experience,
what was the exceeding greatness of God's power towards them that believe, according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and
set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places," Eph. 1:16, to the end. In this the apostle has
respect to the glorious power and work of God in converting and renewing the soul; as is most
plain by the sequel. So the apostle exhorts the same persons "to put off the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of their minds; and to put on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness," Eph. 4:22, 23, 24.
There is a sort of high affections that some have from time to time, that leave them without
any manner of appearance of an abiding effect. They go off suddenly; so that from the very height
of their emotion, and seeming rapture, they pass at once to be quite dead, and void of all sense and
activity. It surely is not wont to be thus with high gracious affections;65 they leave a sweet savor
and a relish of divine things on the heart, and a stronger bent of soul towards God and holiness.
As Moses' face not only shone while he was in the mount, extraordinarily conversing with God,
but it continued to shine after he came down from the mount. When men have been conversing
with Christ in an extraordinary manner, there is a sensible effect of it remaining upon them; there is
something remarkable in their disposition and frame, which if we take knowledge of, and trace to
its cause, we shall find it is because they have been with Jesus, Acts 4:13.
VIII. Truly gracious affections differ from those affections that are false and delusive, in
that they tend to, and are attended with the lamblike, dovelike spirit and temper of Jesus Christ; or
in other words, they naturally beget and promote such a spirit of love, meekness, quietness,
forgiveness and mercy, as appears in Christ.
The evidence of this in the Scripture is very abundant. If we judge of the Nature of
Christianity, and the proper spirit of the gospel, by the word of God, this spirit is what may, by
way of eminency, be called the Christian spirit; and may be looked upon as the true, and
distinguishing disposition of the hearts of Christians as Christians. When some of the disciples of
65"Do you think the Holy Ghost comes on a man as on Balaam, by immediate acting,

and then leaves him, and then he has nothing?" Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 126.

129
Christ said something, through inconsideration and infirmity, that was not agreeable to such a
spirit, Christ told them, that they knew not what manner of spirit they were of, Luke 9:55,
implying that this spirit that I am speaking of, is the proper spirit of his religion and kingdom. All
that are truly godly, and real disciples of Christ, have this spirit in them; and not only so, but they
are of this spirit; it is the spirit by which they are so possessed and governed, that it is their true
and proper character. This is evident by what the wise man says, Prov. 17:27 (having respect
plainly to such a spirit as this): "A man of understanding is of an excellent spirit." And by the
particular description Christ gives of the qualities and temper of such as are truly blessed, that shall
obtain mercy, and are God's children and heirs: Matt. 5:5, 7, 9, "Blessed are the meek: for they
shall inherit the earth. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the
peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God." And that this spirit is the special
character of the elect of God, is manifested by Col. 3:12, 13: "Put on therefore as the elect of God,
holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering;
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another." And the apostle, speaking of that temper and
disposition, which he speaks of as the most excellent and essential thing in Christianity, and that
without which none are true Christians, and the most glorious profession and gifts are nothing
(calling this spirit by the name of charity), he describes it thus, 1 Cor. 13:4, 5: "Charity suffereth
long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave
itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil." And the same
apostle, Gal. 5, designedly declaring the distinguishing marks and fruits of true Christian grace,
chiefly insists on the things that appertain to such a temper and spirit as I am speaking of, ver. 22,
23: "The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance." And so does the Apostle James, in describing true grace, or that wisdom
that is from above, with that declared design, that others who are of a contrary spirit may not
deceive themselves, and lie against the truth, in professing to be Christians, when they are not,
James 3:14-17: "If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not; and lie not against the
truth. This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly, sensual, devilish. For where
envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits."
Every thing that appertains to holiness of heart, does indeed belong to the nature of true
Christianity; and the character of Christians; but a spirit of holiness as appearing in some particular
graces, may more especially be called the Christian spirit or temper. There are some amiable
qualities and virtues, that do more especially agree with the nature of the gospel constitution, and
Christian profession; because there is a special agreeableness in them, with those divine attributes
which God has more remarkably manifested and glorified in the work of redemption by Jesus
Christ, that is the grand subject of the Christian revelation; and also a special agreeableness with
those virtues that were so wonderfully exercised by Jesus Christ towards us in that affair, and the
blessed example he hath therein set us; and likewise because they are peculiarly agreeable to the
special drift and design of the work of redemption, and the benefits we thereby receive, and the
relation that it brings us into, to God and one another. And these virtues are such as humility,
meekness, love, forgiveness, and mercy. These things therefore especially belong to the character
of Christians, as such.
These things are spoken of as what are especially the character of Jesus Christ himself, the
great head of the Christian church. They are so spoken of in the prophecies of the Old Testament;
as in that cited Matt. 21:5: "Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh unto thee,
meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass." So Christ himself speaks of them,
Matt. 11:29: "Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart." The same appears by the name by
which Christ is so often called in Scripture, viz., the Lamb. And as these things are especially the
character of Christ, so they are also especially the character of Christians. Christians are Christlike;
none deserve the name of Christians, that are not so in their prevailing character. "The new man is
renewed, after the image of him that created him," Col. 3:10. All true Christians behold as in a
glass the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image, by his Spirit, 2 Cor. 3:18. The
elect are all predestinated to be conformed to the image of the Son of God, that he might be the first
born among many brethren, Rom. 8:29. As we have borne the image of the first man, that is
earthly, so we must also bear the image of the heavenly; for as is the earthly, such are they also that
are earthly; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly, 1 Cor. 15:47, 48, 49.—
Christ is full of grace; and Christians all receive of his fullness, and grace for grace; i.e., there is

130
grace in Christians answering to grace in Christ, such an answerableness as there is between the
wax and the seal; there is character for character: such kind of graces, such a spirit and temper, the
same things that belong to Christ's character, belong to theirs. That disposition, wherein Christ's
character does in a special manner consist, therein does his image in a special manner consist.
Christians that shine by reflecting the light of the Sun of righteousness, do shine with the same sort
of brightness, the same mild, sweet, and pleasant beams. These lamps of the spiritual temple, that
are enkindled by fire from heaven, burn with the same sort of flame. The branch is of the same
nature with the stock and root, has the same sap, and bears the same sort of fruit. The members
have the same kind of life with the head. It would be strange if Christians should not be of the
same temper and spirit that Christ is of; when they are his flesh and his bone, yea, are one spirit, 1
Cor. 6:17; and live so, that it is not they that live, but Christ that lives in them. A Christian spirit is
Christ's mark that he sets upon the souls of his people, his seal in their foreheads, bearing his
image and superscription.—Christians are the followers of Christ; and they are so, as they are
obedient to that call of Christ, Matt. 11:28, 29, "Come unto me—and learn of me: for I am meek
and lowly of heart." They follow him as the Lamb: Rev. 14:4, "These are they which follow the
Lamb whithersoever he goeth." True Christians are as it were clothed with the meek, quiet, and
loving temper of Christ; for as many as are in Christ, have put on Christ. And in this respect the
church is clothed with the sun, not only by being clothed with his imputed righteousness, but also
by being adorned with his graces, Rom. 13:14. Christ, the great Shepherd, is himself a Lamb, and
believers are also lambs; all the flock are lambs: John 21:15, "Feed my lambs." Luke 10:3, "I send
you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves. "The redemption of the church by Christ from the
power of the devil, was typified of old, by David's delivering the lamb out of the mouth of the lion
and the bear.
That such manner of virtue as has been spoken of, is the very nature of the Christian spirit,
or the spirit that worketh in Christ, and in his members, and in the distinguishing nature of it, is
evident by this, that the dove is the very symbol or emblem, chosen of God, to represent it. Those
things are fittest emblems of other things, which do best represent that which is most
distinguishing in their nature. The Spirit that descended on Christ, when he was anointed of the
Father, descended on him like a dove. The dove is a noted emblem of meekness, harmlessness,
peace and love. But the same Spirit that descended on the head of the church, descends to the
members. "God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into their hearts," Gal. 4:6. And "if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his," Rom. 8:9. There is but one Spirit to the whole
mystical body, head and members, 1 Cor. 6:17, Eph. 4:4. Christ breathes his own Spirit on his
disciples, John 20:22. As Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost, descending on him like a
dove, so Christians also "have an anointing from the Holy One," 1 John 2:20, 27. And they are
anointed with the same oil; it is the same "precious ointment on the head, that goes down to the
skirts of the garments." And on both, it is a spirit of peace and love. Psalm 133:1, 2, "Behold,
how good and how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the precious
ointment upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that went down to the
skirts of his garments." The oil on Aaron's garments had the same sweet and inimitable odor with
that on his head; the smell of the same sweet spices, Christian affections, and a Christian behavior,
is but the flowing out of the savor of Christ's sweet ointments. Because the church has a dovelike
temper and disposition, therefore it is said of her that she has doves' eyes, Cant. 1:15: "Behold,
thou art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair, thou hast doves' eyes." And chap. 4:1, "Behold, thou
art fair, my love, behold, thou art fair, thou hast doves' eyes within thy locks." The same that is
said of Christ, chap. 6:12: "His eyes are as the eyes of doves." And the church is frequently
compared to a dove in Scripture: Cant. 2:14, "O, my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock." Chap.
5:2, "Open to me, my love, my dove." And chap. 6:9, "My dove, my undefiled is but one." Psal.
68:13, "Ye shall be as the wings of a dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow
gold." And 74:19, "O deliver not the soul of the turtle dove unto the multitude of the wicked." The
dove that Noah sent out of the ark, that could find no rest for the sole of her foot, until she
returned, was a type of a true saint.
Meekness is so much the character of the saints, that the meek and the godly, are used as
synonymous terms in Scripture: so Psalm 37:10, 11, the wicked and the meek are set in opposition
one to another, as wicked and godly: "Yet a little while and the wicked shall not be; but the meek
shall inherit the earth." So Psal. 147:6, "The Lord lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down
to the ground."

131
It is doubtless very much on this account, that Christ represents all his disciples, all the
heirs of heaven, as little children: Matt. 19:14, "Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven." Matt. 10:42, "Whosoever shall give to drink unto
one of these little ones, a cup of cold water, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he
shall in no wise lose his reward." Matt. 18:6, "Whoso shall offend one of these little ones, &c."
Ver. 10, "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones." Ver. 14, "It is not the will of your
Father which is in heaven, that one of these little ones should perish." John 13:33, "Little children,
yet a little while I am with you." Little children are innocent and harmless; they do not do a great
deal of mischief in the world; men need not be afraid of them; they are no dangerous sort of
persons; their anger does not last long, they do not lay up injuries in high resentment, entertaining
deep and rooted malice. So Christians, in malice, are children, 1 Cor. 14:20. Little children are not
guileful and deceitful, but plain and simple; they are not versed in the arts of fiction and deceit; and
are strangers to artful disguises. They are yieldable and flexible, and not willful and obstinate; do
not trust to their own under standing, but rely on the instructions of parents, and others of superior
understanding. Here is therefore a fit and lively emblem of the followers of the Lamb. Persons
being thus like little children, is not only a thing highly commendable, and what Christians approve
and aim at, and which some extraordinary proficiency do attain to: but it is their universal
character, and absolutely necessary in order to entering into the kingdom of heaven: Matt. 18:3,
"Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven." Mark 10:15, "Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein."
But here some may be ready to say, Is there no such thing as Christian fortitude, and
boldness for Christ, being good soldiers in the Christian warfare, and coming out boldly against
the enemies of Christ and his people?
To which I answer, There doubtless is such a thing. The whole Christian life is compared
to a warfare, and fitly so. And the most eminent Christians are the best soldiers, endued with the
greatest degrees of Christian fortitude. And it is the duty of God's people to be steadfast and
vigorous in their opposition to the designs and ways of such as are endeavoring to overthrow the
kingdom of Christ, and the interest of religion. But yet many persons seem to be quite mistaken
concerning the nature of Christian fortitude. It is an exceeding diverse thing from a brutal
fierceness, or the boldness of the beasts of prey. True Christian fortitude consists in strength of
mind, through grace, exerted in two things; in ruling and suppressing the evil and unruly passions
and affections of the mind; and in steadfastly and freely exerting, and following good affections
and dispositions, without being hindered by sinful fear, or the opposition of enemies. But the
passions that are restrained and kept under, in the exercise of this Christian strength and fortitude,
are those very passions that are vigorously and violently exerted in a false boldness for Christ. And
those affections that are vigorously exerted in true fortitude, are those Christian, holy affections
that are directly contrary to them. Though Christian fortitude appears, in withstanding and
counteracting the enemies that are without us; yet it much more appears, in resisting and
suppressing the enemies that are within us; because they are our worst and strongest enemies, and
have greatest advantage against us. The strength of the good soldier of Jesus Christ appears in
nothing more, than in steadfastly maintaining the holy calm, meekness, sweetness, and
benevolence of his mind, amidst all the storms, injuries, strange behavior, and surprising acts and
events of this evil and unreasonable world. The Scripture seems to intimate that true fortitude
consists chiefly in this: Prov. 16:32, "He that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he
that ruleth his spirit, than he that taketh a city."
The directest and surest way in the world, to make a right judgment what a holy fortitude
is, in fighting with God's enemies, is to look to the Captain of all God's hosts, and our great
leader and example, and see wherein his fortitude and valor appeared, in his chief conflict, and in
the time of the greatest battle that ever was, or ever will be fought with these enemies, when he
fought with them alone, and of the people there was none with him, and exercised his fortitude in
the highest degree that ever he did, and got that glorious victory that will be celebrated in the
praises and triumphs of all the hosts of heaven, throughout all eternity; even to Jesus Christ in the
time of his last sufferings, when his enemies in earth and hell made their most violent attack upon
him, compassing him round on every side, like renting and roaring lions. Doubtless here we shall
see the fortitude of a holy warrior and champion in the cause of God, in its highest perfection and
greatest luster, and an example fit for the soldiers to follow that fight under this Captain. But how

132
did he show his holy boldness and valor at that time? Not in the exercise of any fiery passions; not
in fierce and violent speeches, and vehemently declaiming against and crying out of the intolerable
wickedness of opposers, giving them their own in plain terms: but in not opening his mouth when
afflicted and oppressed, in going as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before his shearers is
dumb, not opening his mouth; praying that the Father would forgive his cruel enemies because
they knew not what they did; not shedding others' blood, but with all conquering patience and
love, shedding his own. Indeed one of his disciples, that made a forward pretense to boldness for
Christ, and confidently declared he would sooner die with Christ than deny him, began to lay
about him with a sword: but Christ meekly rebukes him, and heals the wound he gives. And never
was the patience, meekness, love, and forgiveness of Christ in so glorious a manifestation, as at
that time. Never did he appear so much a lamb, and never did he show so much of the dovelike
spirit, as at that time. If therefore we see any of the followers of Christ, in the midst of the most
violent, unreasonable, and wicked opposition of God's and his own enemies, maintaining under
all this temptation, the humility, quietness, and gentleness of a lamb, and the harmlessness, and
love and sweetness of a dove, we may well judge that here is a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
When persons are fierce and violent, and exert their sharp and bitter passions, it shows
weakness instead of strength and fortitude. 1 Cor. 3 at the beginning, "And I, brethren, could not
speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. For ye are yet
carnal: for whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men?"
There is a pretended boldness for Christ that arises from no better principle than pride. A
man may be forward to expose himself to the dislike of the world, and even to provoke their
displeasure out of pride. For it is the nature of spiritual pride to cause men to seek distinction and
singularity; and so oftentimes to set themselves at war with those that they call carnal, that they
may be more highly exalted among their party. True boldness for Christ is universal, and
overcomes all, and carries men above the displeasure of friends and foes; so that they will forsake
all rather than Christ; and will rather offend all parties, and be thought meanly of by all, than
offend Christ. And that duty which tries whether a man is willing to be despised by them that are
of his own party, and thought the least worthy to be regarded by them, is a much more proper trial
of his boldness for Christ, than his being forward to expose himself to the reproach of opposers.
The apostle sought not glory, not only of Heathens and Jews, but of Christians; as he declares, 1
Thess. 2:6.66 He is bold for Christ, that has Christian fortitude enough, to confess his fault
openly, when he has committed one that requires it, and as it were to come down upon his knees
before opposers. Such things as these are of vastly greater evidence of holy boldness, than
resolutely and fiercely confronting opposers.
As some are much mistaken concerning the nature of true boldness for Christ, so they are
concerning Christian zeal. It is indeed a flame, but a sweet one; or rather it is the heat and fervor of
a sweet flame. For the flame of which it is the heat, is no other than that of divine love, or
Christian charity; which is the sweetest and most benevolent thing that is, or can be, in the heart of
man or angel. Zeal is the fervor of this flame, as it ardently and vigorously goes out towards the
good that is its object, in desires of it, and pursuit after it and so consequentially, in opposition to
the evil that is contrary to it, and impedes it. There is indeed oppositions and vigorous opposition,
that is a part of it, or rather is an attendant of it; but it is against things and not persons. Bitterness
against the persons of men is no part of it, but is very contrary to it; insomuch that so much the
warmer true zeal is, and the higher it is raised, so much the farther are persons from such
bitterness, and so much fuller of love, both to the evil and to the good. As appears from what has
been just now observed, that it is no other, in its very nature and essence, than the fervor of a spirit
of Christian love. And as to what opposition there is in it to things, it is firstly and chiefly against
the evil things in the person himself, who has this zeal: against the enemies of God and holiness,
that are in his own heart (as these are most in view, and what he has most to do with); and but
secondarily against the sins of others And therefore there is nothing in a true Christian zeal, that is
66Mr. Shepard, speaking of hypocrites affecting applause, says, "Hence men forsake

their friends and trample under foot the scorns of the world: they have credit
elsewhere. To maintain their interest in the love of godly men, they will suffer
much." Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part I. p. 180.

133
contrary to that spirit of meekness, gentleness, and love, that spirit of a little child, a lamb and
dove, that has been spoken of; but it is entirely agreeable to it, and tends to promote it.
But to say something particularly concerning this Christian spirit I have been speaking of,
as exercised in these three things, forgiveness, love, and mercy; I would observe that the Scripture
is very clear and express concerning the absolute necessity of each of these, as belonging to the
temper and character of every Christian.
It is so as to a forgiving spirit, or a disposition to overlook and forgive injuries. Christ
gives it to us both as a negative and positive evidence; and is express in teaching us, that if we are
of such a spirit, it is a sign that we are in a state of forgiveness and favor ourselves: and that if we
are not of such a spirit, we are not forgiven of God; and seems to take special care that we should
take good notice of it, and always bear it on our minds: Matt. 6:12, 14, 15, "Forgive us our debts
as we forgive our debtors. For if ye forgive men their trespassed your heavenly Father will also
forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
trespasses." Christ expresses the same again at another time, Mark 11:25, 26, and again in Matt.
18:22, to the end, in the parable of the servant that owed his lord ten thousand talents, that would
not forgive his fellow servant a hundred pence; and therefore was delivered to the tormentors. In
the application of the parable Christ says, ver. 35, "So likewise shall my heavenly Father do, if ye
from your hearts forgive not everyone his brother their trespasses."
And that all true saints are of a loving, benevolent, and beneficent temper, the Scripture is
very plain and abundant. Without it the apostle tells us, though we should speak with the tongues
of men and angels, we are as a sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal; and that though we have the
gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, yet without this spirit we are
nothing. And there is no one virtue or disposition of the mind, that is so often, and so expressly
insisted on, in the marks that are laid down in the New Testament, whereby to know true
Christians. It is often given as a sign that is peculiarly distinguishing, by which all may know
Christ's disciples, and by which they may know themselves; and is often laid down, both as a
negative and positive evidence. Christ calls the law of love, by way of eminency, his
commandment: John 13:34, "A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love one another; as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another." And chap. 15:12, "This is my commandment, that
ye love one another as I have loved you." And ver. 17, "These things I command you, that ye love
one another." And says, chap. 13:35, "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye
have love one to another." And chap. 14:21 (still with a special reference to this which he calls his
commandment), "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." The
beloved disciple who had so much of this sweet temper himself, abundantly insists on it, in his
epistles. There is none of the apostles so much in laying down express signs of grace, for
professors to try themselves by, as he; and in his signs, he insists scarcely on anything else, but a
spirit of Christian love, and an agreeable practice: 1 John 2:9, 10, "He that saith he is in the light,
and hateth his brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loveth his brother abideth in the light,
and there is none occasion of stumbling in him." Chap. 3:14, "We know that we are passed from
death unto life, because we love the brethren: he that loveth not his brother abideth in death." Ver.
18, l9, "My little children, let us not love in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth. And
hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him." Ver. 23, 24,
"This is his commandment, that we should love one another. And he that keepeth his
commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the
Spirit which he hath given us." Chap. 4:7, 8, "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God;
and everyone that loveth, is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God:
for God is love." Ver. 12, 13, "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God
dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, because he
hath given us of his Spirit." Ver. 16, "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God,
and God in him." Ver. 20, "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar; for he that
loveth not his brother, whom he hath seen, how can he love God, whom he hath not seen?"
And the Scripture is as plain as it is possible it should be, that none are true saints, but
those whose true character it is, that they are of a disposition to pity and relieve their fellow
creatures, that are poor, indigent, and afflicted: Psal. 37:21, "The righteous showeth mercy, and
giveth." Ver. 26, "He is ever merciful, and lendeth." Psal. 112:5, "A good man showeth favor,
and lendeth." Ver. 9, "He hath dispersed abroad, and given to the poor." Prov. 14:31, "He that
honoreth God, hath mercy on the poor." Prov. 21:26, "The righteous giveth, and spareth not."

134
Jer. 22:16, "He judged the cause of the poor and needy, then it was well with him: Was not this to
know me? saith the Lord." Jam 1:27, "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father, is
this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction," &c. Hos. 6:6, "For I have desired
mercy, and not sacrifice; and the knowledge of God, more than burnt offerings." Matt. 5:7,
"Blessed are the merciful; for they shall obtain mercy. "2 Cor. 8:8, "I speak not by commandment,
but by occasion of the forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love." Jam. 2:1316, "For he shall have judgment without mercy, that hath showed no mercy. What doth it profit,
my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? Can faith save him? If a brother
or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food; and one of you say unto them, Depart in peace, be
you warmed and filled; notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the
body, what doth it profit?" 1 John 3:17, "Whoso hath this world's good and seeth his brother have
need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?"
Christ in that description he gives us of the day of judgment, Matt. 25 (which is the most particular
that we have in the Bible), represents that judgment will be passed at that day, according as men
have been found to have been of a merciful spirit and practice or otherwise. Christ's design in
giving such a description of the process of that day, is plainly to possess all his followers with that
apprehension, that unless this was their spirit and practice, there was no hope of their being
accepted and owned by him at that day. Therefore this is an apprehension that we ought to be
possessed with. We find in Scripture, that a righteous man, and a merciful man are synonymous
expressions, Isa: 57:1, "The righteous perisheth and no man layeth it to heart; and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come."
Thus we see how full, clear, and abundant, the evidence from Scripture is that those who
are truly gracious, are under the government of that lamblike, dovelike Spirit of Jesus Christ, and
that this is essentially and eminently the nature of the saving grace of the gospel, and the proper
spirit of true Christianity. We may therefore undoubtedly determine, that all truly Christian
affections are attended with such a spirit, and that this is the natural tendency of the fear and hope,
the sorrow and the joy, the confidence and the zeal of true Christians.
None will understand me, that true Christians have no remains of a contrary Spirit, and can
never, in any instances, be guilty of a behavior disagreeable to such a spirit. But this I affirm, and
shall affirm, until I deny the Bible to be anything worth, that everything in Christians that belongs
to true Christianity, is of this tendency, and works this way; and that there is no true Christian
upon earth, but is so under the prevailing power of such a spirit, that he is properly denominated
from it, and it is truly and justly his character, and that therefore ministers, and others, have no
warrant from Christ to encourage persons that are of a contrary character and behavior, to think
they are converted, because they tell a fair story of illuminations and discoveries. In so doing, they
would set up their own wisdom against Christ's, and judge without, and against that rule by which
Christ has declared all men should know his disciples. Some persons place religion so much in
certain transient illuminations and impressions (especially if they are on such a particular method
and order) and so little in the spirit and temper persons are of, that they greatly deform religion,
and form notions of Christianity quite different from what it is, as delineated in the Scriptures. The
Scripture knows of no such true Christians, as are of a sordid, selfish, cross and contentious
spirit. Nothing can be invented that is a greater absurdity, than a morose, hard, close, highspirited, spiteful, true Christian. We must learn the way of bringing men to rules, and not rules to
men, and so strain and stretch the rules of God's word, to take in ourselves, and some of our
neighbors, until we make them wholly of none effect.
It is true, that allowances must be made for men's natural temper, with regard to these
things, as well as others; but not such allowances, as to allow men, that once were wolves and
serpents, to be now converted, without any remarkable change in the spirit of their mind. The
change made by true conversion is wont to be most remarkable and sensible, with respect to that
which before was the wickedness the person was most notoriously guilty of. Grace has as great a
tendency to restrain and mortify such sins, as are contrary to the spirit that has been spoken of, as
it is to mortify drunkenness or lasciviousness. Yea, the Scripture represents the change wrought by
gospel grace, as especially appearing in an alteration of the former sort: Isa. 11:6-9, "The wolf
shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calf, and the young
lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear shall feed,
their young ones shall lie down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking
child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice's

135
den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." And to the same purpose is Isa. 65:25.
Accordingly we find, that in the primitive times of the Christian church, converts were remarkably
changed in this respect: Tit. 3:3, &c., "For we ourselves also were sometimes foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and
hating one another. But after that the kindness and love of God our Savior towards man
appeared—he saved us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost." And
Col. 3:7, 8, "In the which ye also walked sometime, when ye lived in them. But now ye also put
off all these: anger, wrath, malice, blasphemy, filthy communications out of your mouth."
