PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 14
The Necessity of Mortification

---

Chapter 5

WHAT MORTIFICATION IS NOT
These things being premised, I come to my principal intention: handling some questions or
practical cases that present themselves in this business of mortification of sin in believers.
The first, which is the head of all the rest, and whereunto they are reduced, may be considered as lying under the following proposal.
Suppose a man to be a true believer, and yet finds in himself a powerful indwelling sin,
leading him captive to the law of it, consuming his heart with trouble, perplexing his
thoughts, weakening his soul as to duties of communion with God, disquieting him as to
peace and perhaps defiling his conscience, and exposing him to hardening through the deceitfulness of sin. What shall he do? What course shall he take and insist on for the mortification
of this sin, lust, distemper, or corruption—to such a degree that, though it be not utterly destroyed, yet in his contest with it, he may be enabled to keep up power, strength, and peace in
communion with God?
In answer to this important inquiry, I shall do these things:
I. Show what it is to mortify any sin, and that both negatively and positively, that we be not
37
mistaken in the foundation.
II. Give general directions for such things as without which it will be utterly impossible for
anyone to get any sin truly and spiritually mortified. 38
III. Draw out the particulars whereby this is to be done, in the whole carrying on this consideration, that it is not of the doctrine of mortification in general, but only in reference to
the particular case before proposed, that I am treating.
We begin, then, with the first head: I. What Mortification Is, and deal with the foundational
question in this first section: What Mortification Is Not.

1. Not to Utterly Destroy Sin
To mortify a sin is not utterly to kill, root it out, and destroy it, so that it has no more hold
at all nor residence in our hearts. It is true this is that which is aimed at, but this is not in this
life to be accomplished. There is no man that truly sets himself to mortify any sin, but he aims
at, intends, and desires its utter destruction so that it leaves neither root nor fruit in the heart
or life. He would so kill it that it should never move nor stir any more, cry or call, seduce or
tempt, to eternity. Its “not-being” is the thing aimed at.
37

This head (I.) includes What Mortification Is Not, which comprises Chapter 5; and What Mortification Is,
which comprises Chapter 6.
38
This head (II.) includes Owen’s two general rules for mortification, Chapters 7 and 8.

5. What Mortification Is Not

23

Now, though doubtless there may be attained, by the Spirit and grace of Christ, a wonderful
success and eminency of victory against any sin—so that a man may have almost constant triumph over it—yet an utter killing and destruction of it, that it should not exist at all, is not in
this life to be expected. This Paul assures us of: “Not as though I had already attained, either
were already perfect” (Phi 3:12). He was a choice saint, a pattern for believers, who had not his
equal in the world in faith and love and all the fruits of the Spirit, and on that account ascribes
perfection to himself in comparison to others, as shown by his statement: “Let us…as many as
be perfect” (Phi 3:15); 39 yet he had not “attained,” he was not “perfect,” but was “following after.” He still had a vile body, as do we, that must be changed by the great power of Christ at
last (3:21). This we desire to have; but God sees it best for us that we should be complete in
nothing in ourselves, so that in all things we must be “complete in Christ”—which is best for
us (Col 2:10).

2. Not to Conceal a Sin
I think I do not need to say it is not the dissimulation 40 of a sin. When a man on some outward respects forsakes the practice of any sin, men perhaps may look on him as a changed
man. But God knows that to his former iniquity he has added cursed hypocrisy and is got in a
more sure path to hell than he was in before. He has got another heart than he had that is
more cunning, not a new heart that is more holy.

3. Not to Improve a Quiet Nature
The mortification of sin consists not in the improvement 41 of a quiet, sedate nature. Some
men have an advantage by their natural constitution so far as that they are not exposed to
such violence of unruly passions and tumultuous affections as many others are. Let now these
men cultivate and improve their natural frame and temper by discipline, consideration, and
prudence, and they may seem to themselves and others very mortified men, when perhaps
their hearts are a standing cesspool of all abominations. Perhaps some man is never so much
troubled all his life with anger and passion, nor troubles others, as another is almost every day;
and yet the latter has done more to the mortification of the sin than the former. Let not such
persons try their mortification by things which their natural disposition does not tend toward.
Let them attempt to deny self or to mortify unbelief, envy, or some such spiritual sin, and they
will have a better view of themselves.

4. Not to Divert a Sin
A sin is not mortified when it is only diverted. Simon Magus 42 for a season left his sorceries;
but his covetousness and ambition, which had set him on his work, remained still, and would
have been acting another way. Therefore Peter tells him, “I perceive that thou art in the gall of
bitterness” (Act 8:23)—that is, notwithstanding the profession you have made, notwithstand39

Many conservative scholars understand “perfect” to mean “spiritually mature,” not sinless perfection.
dissimulation – deceitful concealment.
41
improvement – advantageous use of what is already in man’s nature.
42
Simon Magus – the sorcerer of Acts 8:9-24 (magus is Latin for “magician”).
40

24

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

ing your relinquishment of your sorceries, your lust is as powerful as ever. It is the same lust;
only the streams of it are diverted. It now exerts and puts forth itself another way, but it is the
old gall of bitterness still.
A man may be sensible of a lust, set himself against the eruptions of it, take care that it shall
not break forth as it has done, but in the meantime suffer the same corrupted habit to vent
itself some other way. This is as he who heals and skins a running sore thinks himself cured,
but in the meantime his flesh festers underneath by the corruption of the same infection and
breaks out in another place. And this diversion, with the alterations that attend it, often befalls
men for reasons wholly foreign to grace.
Change of the course of life that a man was in—of relations, interests, designs—may effect 43
it; yea, the very alterations in men’s constitutions, occasioned by a natural progress in the
course of their lives, may produce such changes as these. Men in age do not usually persist in
the pursuit of youthful lusts, although they have never mortified any of them.
And the same is the case of trading lusts: a man’s leaving off from serving one so that he
may serve another. He that changes pride for worldliness, sensuality for Pharisaism, vanity in
himself to the contempt of others, let him not think that he has mortified the sin that he
seems to have left. He has changed his master but is a servant still.

5. Not to Conquer Sin Occasionally
Occasional conquests of sin do not amount to a mortifying of it. There are two occasions or
seasons wherein a man who is contending with any sin may seem to himself to have mortified
it.

a. When sin erupts suddenly
A man may consider a sin mortified when it has had some sad eruption to the disturbance
of his peace, terror of his conscience, dread of scandal, and evident provocation of God. This
awakens and stirs up all that is in the man and amazes him, fills him with abhorrence of sin
and himself (for doing it), sends him to God, makes him cry out as for life, to abhor his lust as
hell, and to set himself against it. The whole man, spiritual and natural, being now awaked, sin
shrinks in its head, appears not, but lies before him as if dead.
This is just as one who has drawn near to an army in the night and has killed a highranking person. Instantly the guards awake, men are roused up, and strict inquiry is made after the enemy, who hides himself or lies like one that is dead in the meantime until the noise
and tumult be over, yet with firm resolution to do the like mischief again upon the like opportunity. Upon the sin among the Corinthians, see how they muster up themselves for the surprise and destruction of it (2Co 7:11).
So it is in a person when a breach has been made upon his conscience, peace, or reputation
by his lust in some eruption of actual sin. Carefulness, indignation, desire, fear, and revenge
are all set at work about it and against it; and lust is quiet for a season, being run down before
them. But when the hurry is over and the inquest 44 past, the thief appears again alive and is as
busy as ever at his work.
43
44

effect – cause.
inquest – investigation of the situation.

5. What Mortification Is Not

25

b. When in some affliction
In a time of some judgment, calamity, or pressing affliction, the heart is taken up with
thoughts and contrivances of flying from the present troubles, fears, and dangers. This, as a
convinced 45 person concludes, is to be done only by relinquishing sin, which gains peace with
God. It is the anger of God in every affliction that galls 46 a convinced person. To be relieved of
this, men resolve at such times to fight against their sins. Sin never again shall have any place
in them; they will never again give up themselves to the service of it. Accordingly, sin is quiet,
stirs not, and seems to be mortified; not indeed that it has received any wound, but merely because the soul has possessed its faculties, 47 whereby it should exert itself with thoughts against
the motions of that sin—which, when they are laid aside, sin returns again to its former life
and vigor.
Those described in Psalm 78 are a full instance and description of this frame of spirit
whereof I speak:
For all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works. Therefore their days
did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble. When he slew them, then they sought
him: and they returned and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was
their rock, and the high God their redeemer. Nevertheless they did flatter him with their
mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. For their heart was not right with him,
neither were they stedfast in his covenant (Psa 78:32-37).
I no way doubt but that when they sought, returned, and inquired early after God, they did it
with full purpose of heart as to the relinquishing of their sins; it is expressed in the word returned. To turn or return to the Lord is by a forsaking of sin. This they did “early,” with earnestness and diligence; but yet their sin was unmortified for all this (vv. 36-37). This is the
state of many humiliations in the days of affliction. A great deceit in the hearts of believers
themselves often lies here.
These and many other ways there are whereby poor souls deceive themselves and suppose
they have mortified their lusts when [their lusts] live and are mighty, and on every occasion
break forth to their disturbance and disquiet.

45

convinced – brought to a state of conviction; firmly persuaded.
galls – irritates and unsettles.
47
faculties – powers or properties of one’s mind.
46