PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 14
The Glory of Christ in His Love


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 5. The Glory of Christ in His Love.

– which was the imagination of some of the Arians of old; and we have yet (to my own knowledge) some that follow them in the
same dotage. They say that the “Word which was in the beginning,” by which all things were made, being in itself an effect of the
divine will and power, was in the fulness of time turned into flesh; – that is, the substance of it was so, as the water in the miracle
wrought by our Saviour was turned into wine; for, by an act of the divine power of Christ, it ceased to be water substantially, and was
wine only, – not water mixed with wine. So these men suppose a substantial change of the one nature into the other, – of the divine
nature into the human, – like what the Papists imagine in their transsubstantiation. So they say God was made man, his essence
being turned into that of a man.
But this no way belongs unto the condescension of Christ. We may call it Ichabod, – it has no glory in it. It destroys both his natures,
and leaves him a person in whom we are not concerned. For. according unto this imagination, that divine nature, wherein he was in
the form of God, did in its own form cease to be, yea, was utterly destroyed, as being substantially changed into the nature of man, as
the water did cease to be when it was turned into wine; and that human nature which was made thereof has no alliance or kindred
unto us or our nature, seeing it was not “made of a woman,” but of the substance of the Word.
(3.) There was not in this condescension the least change or alteration in the divine nature. Eutyches and those that followed him of
old conceived that the two natures of Christ, the divine and human, were mixed and compounded, as it were, into one. And this could
not be without an alteration in the divine nature, for it would be made to be essentially what it was not; – for one nature has but one
and the same essence.
But, as we said before, although the Lord Christ himself in his person was made to be what he was not before, in that our nature
hereby was made to be his, yet his divine nature was not so. There is in it neither “variableness nor shadow of turning.” It abode the
same in him, in all its essential properties, acting, and blessedness, as it was from eternity. It neither did, acted, nor suffered any thing
but what is proper unto the Divine Being. The Lord Christ did and suffered many things in life and death, in his own person, by his
human person, wherein the divine neither did nor suffered any thing at all – although, in the doing of them, his person be
denominated from that nature; so, “God purchased his church with his own blood,” Acts 20:28.
(4.) It may, then, be said, What did the Lord Christ, in this condescension, with respect unto his divine nature? The apostle tells us
that he “humbled himself, and made himself of no reputation,” Phil. 2: 7, 8. He veiled the glory of his divine nature in ours, and what
he did therein, so as that there was no outward appearance or manifestation of it. The world hereon was so far from looking on him
as the true God, that it believed him not to be a good man. Hence they could never bear the least intimation of his divine nature,
supposing themselves secured from any such thing, because they looked on him with their eyes to be a man, – as he was, indeed, no
less truly and really than any one of themselves. Wherefore, on that testimony given of himself, “Before Abraham was, I am,” which
asserts a pre-existence from eternity in another nature than what they saw, – they were filled with rage, and “took up stones to cast at
him,” John 8: 58,59. And they gave treason of their madness, John 10:33, – namely, that “he, being a man, should make himself to
be God.” This was such a thing, they thought, as could never enter into the heart of a wise and sober man, – namely, that being so,
owning himself to be such, he should yet say of himself that he was God. This is that which no reason can comprehend, which
nothing in nature can parallel or illustrate, that one and the same person should be both God and man. And this is the principal plea
of the Socinians at this day, who, through the Mohammedans, succeed unto the Jews in an opposition unto the divine nature of
Christ.
But all this difficulty is solved by the glory of Christ in this condescension; for although in himself, or his own divine person, he was
“over all, God blessed for ever,” yet he humbled himself for the salvation of the church, unto the eternal glory of God, to take our
nature upon him, and to be made man: and those who cannot see a divine glory in his so doing, do neither know him, nor love him,
nor believe in him, nor do any way belong unto him.
So is it with the men of these abominations. Because they cannot behold the glory hereof, they deny the foundation of our religion, –
namely, the divine person of Christ. Seeing he would be made man, he shall be esteemed by them no more than a man. So do they
reject that glory of God, his infinite wisdom, goodness, and grace, wherein he is more concerned than in the whole creation. And they
dig up the root of all evangelical truths, which are nothing but branches from it.
I t is true, and must be confessed, that herein it is that our Lord Jesus Christ is “a stumbling-stone and a rock of offence” unto the
world. If we should confess him only as a prophet, a man sent by God, there would not be much contest about him, nor opposition
unto him. The Mohammedans do all acknowledge it, and the Jews would not long deny it; for their hatred against him was, and is,
solely because he professed himself to be God, and as such was believed on in the world. And at this day, partly through the
insinuation of the Socinians, and partly from the efficacy of their own blindness and unbelief, multitudes are willing to grant him to be
a prophet sent of God, who do not, who will not, who cannot, believe the mystery of this condescension in the susception of our
nature, nor see the glory of it. But take this away, and all our religion is taken away with it. Farewell Christianity, as to the mystery,
the glory, the truth, the efficacy of it; – let a refined heathenism be established in its room. But this is the rock on which the church is
built, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail.
(5.) This condescension of Christ was not by a phantasm or an appearance only. One of the first heresies that pestered the church
immediately after the days of the apostles was this, that all that was done or suffered by Christ as a man were not the acts, doings or
sufferings of one that was truly and really a man, but an outward representation of things, like the appearance of angels in the shape
of men, eating and drinking, under the Old Testament; and suitably hereunto some in our days have spoken, – namely, that there
was only an appearance of Christ in the man Jesus at Jerusalem, in whom he suffered no more than in other believers. But the
ancient Christians told those men the truth, – namely, that “as they had feigned unto themselves an imaginary Christ, so they should
have an imaginary salvation only.”
But the true nature of this divine condescension does consist in these three things: – 1. That “the eternal person of the Son of God, or
the divine nature in the person of the Son, did, by an ineffable act of his divine power and love, assume our nature into an individual
subsistence in or with himself; that is, to be his own, even as the divine nature is his.” This is the infallible foundation of faith, even to
them who can comprehend very little of these divine mysteries. They can and do believe that the Son of God did take our nature to be
his own; so as that whatever was done therein was done by him, as it is with every other man. Every man has human nature
appropriated unto himself by an individual subsistence, whereby he becomes to be that man which he is and not another; or that

nature which is common unto all, becomes in him to be peculiarly his own, as if there were none partaker of it but himself. Adam, in
his first creation, when all human nature was in him alone, was no more that individual man which he was, than every man is now
the man that he is, by his individual subsistence. So the Lord Christ taking that nature which is common unto all into a peculiar
subsistence in his own person, it becometh his, and he the man Christ Jesus. This was the mind that was in him.
2. By reason of this assumption of our nature, with his doing and suffering therein whereby he was found in fashion as a man, the
glory of his divine person was veiled, and he made himself of no reputation. This also belongs unto his condescension, as the first
general effect and fruit of it. But we have spoken of it before.
3. It is also to be observed, that in the assumption of our nature to be his own, he did not change it into a thing divine and spiritual;
but preserved it entire in all its essential properties and actings. Hence it really did and suffered, was tried, tempted, and forsaken, as
the same nature in any other man might do and be. That nature (as it was peculiarly his, and therefore he, or his person therein) was
exposed unto all the temporary evils which the same nature is subject unto in any other person.
This is a short general view of this incomprehensible condescension of the Son of God, as it is described by the apostle, Phil. 2: 5-8. And
this is that wherein in an especial manner we are to behold the glory of Christ by faith whilst we are in this world.
But had we the tongue of men and angels, we were not able in any just measure to express the glory of this condescension; for it is the
most ineffable effect of the divine wisdom of the Father and of the love of the Son, – the highest evidence of the care of God towards
mankind. What can be equal unto it? what can be like it? It is the glory of Christian religion, and the animating soul of all evangelical
truth. This carrieth the mystery of the wisdom of God above the reason or understanding of men and angels, to be the object of faith
and admiration only. A mystery it is that becomes the greatness of God, with his infinite distance from the whole creation, – Which
renders it unbecoming him that all his ways and works should be comprehensible by any of his creatures, Job 11: 7-9; Rom. 11: 33-36.
He who was eternally in the form of God, – that is, was essentially so, God by nature, equally participant of the same divine nature
with God the Father; “God over all, blessed for ever;” who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven and earth, – he
takes on him the nature of man, takes it to be his own, whereby he was no less truly a man in time than he was truly God from
eternity. And to increase the wonder of this mystery, because it was necessary unto the end he designed, he so humbled himself in this
assumption of our nature, as to make himself of no reputation in this world, – yea, unto that degree, that he said of himself that he
was a worm, and no man, in comparison of them who were of any esteem.
We speak of these things in a poor, low, broken manner, – we teach them as they are revealed in the Scripture, – we labour by faith to
adhere unto them as revealed; but when we come into a steady, direct view and consideration of the thing itself, our minds fail, our
hearts tremble, and we can find no rest but in a holy admiration of what we cannot comprehend. Here we are at a loss, and know that
we shall be so whilst we are in this world; but all the ineffable fruits and benefits of this truth are communicated unto them that do
believe.
It is with reference hereunto that that great promise concerning him is given unto the church, Isa. 8: 14, “He shall be for a sanctuary”
(namely, unto all that believe, as it is expounded, 1 Peter 2: 7, 8); “but for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of offence,” – “even to
them that stumble at the word, being disobedient; whereunto also they were appointed.”
He is herein a sanctuary, an assured refuge unto all that betake themselves unto him. What is it that any man in distress, who flies
whereunto, may look for in a sanctuary? A supply of all his wants, a deliverance from all his fears, a defence against all his dangers, is
proposed unto him therein. Such is the Lord Christ herein unto sin-distressed souls; he is a refuge unto us in all spiritual diseases and
disconsolation, Heb. 6: 18. See the exposition of the place. Are we, or any of us, burdened with a sense of sin? are we perplexed with
temptations? are we bowed down under the oppression. of any spiritual adversary? do we, on any of these accounts, “walk in darkness
and have no light?” One view of the glory of Christ herein is able to support us and relieve us.
Unto whom we retake ourselves for relief in any case, we have regard to nothing but their will and their power. If they have both, we
are sure of relief. And what shall we fear in the will of Christ as unto this end? What will he not do for us? He who thus emptied and
humbled himself, who so infinitely condescended from the prerogative of his glory in his being and self sufficiency, in the susception of
our nature for the discharge of the office of a mediator on our behalf, – will he not relieve us in all our distresses? will he not do all for
us we stand in need of, that we may be eternally saved? will he not be a sanctuary unto us? Nor have we hereon any ground to fear
his power; for, by this infinite condescension to be a suffering man, he lost nothing of his power as God omnipotent, – nothing of his
infinite wisdom or glorious grace. He could still do all that he could do as God from eternity. If there be any thing, therefore, in a
coalescence of infinite power with infinite condescension, to constitute a sanctuary for distressed sinners, it is all in Christ Jesus. And if
we see him not glorious herein, it is because there is no light of faith in us.
This, then, is the rest wherewith we may cause the weary to rest, and this is the refreshment. Herein is he “a hiding-place from the
wind, and a covert from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.” Hereon he
says, “I have satiated the weary soul, and have refreshed every sorrowful soul.” Under this consideration it is that, in all evangelical
promises and invitations for coming to him, he is proposed unto distressed sinners as their only sanctuary.
Herein is he “a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence” unto the unbelieving and disobedient, who stumble at the word. They
cannot, they will not, see the glory of this condescension; – they neither desire nor labour so to do, – yea, they hate it and despise it.
Christ in it is “a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence” unto them. Wherefore they choose rather utterly to deny his divine person
than allow that he did thus abase himself for our sakes. Rather than they will own this glory, they will allow him no glory. A man
they say he was, and no more; and this was his glory. This is that principle of darkness and unbelief which works effectually at this
day in the minds of many. They think it an absurd thing, as the Jews did of old, that he, being a man, should be God also; or, on the
other hand, that the Son of God should thus condescend to take our nature on him. This they can see no glory in, no relief, no refuge,
no refreshment unto their souls in any of their distresses; therefore do they deny his divine person. Here faith triumphs against them;
it finds that to be a glorious sanctuary which they cannot at all discern.
But it is not so much the declaration or vindication of this glory of Christ which I am at present engaged in, as an exhortation unto
the practical contemplation of it in a way of believing. And I know that among many this is too much neglected; yea, of all the evils

which I have seen in the days of my pilgrimage, now drawing to their close, there is none so grievous as the public contempt of the
principal mysteries of the Gospel among them that are called Christians. Religion, in the profession of some men, is withered in its
vital principles, weakened in its nerves and sinews; but thought to be put off with outward gaiety and bravery.
But my exhortation is unto diligence in the contemplation of this glory of Christ, and the exercise of our thoughts about it. Unless we
are diligent herein, it is impossible we should be steady in the principal acts of faith, or ready unto the principal duties of obedience.
The principal act of faith respects the divine person of Christ, as all Christians must acknowledge. This we can never secure (as has
been declared) if we see not his glory in this condescension: and whoever reduceth his notions unto experience, will find that herein
his faith stands or falls. And the principal duty of our obedience is self-denial, with readiness for the cross. Hereunto the consideration
of this condescension of Christ is the principal evangelical motive, and that whereinto our obedience in it is to be resolved; as the
apostle declares, Phil. 2: 5-8. And no man does deny himself in a due manner, who does it not on the consideration of the self-denial of
the Son of God. But a prevalent motive this is thereunto. For what are the things wherein we are to deny ourselves, or forego what we
pretend to have a right unto? It is in our goods, our liberties, our relations, – our lives. And what are they, any or all of them, in
themselves, or unto us, considering our condition, and the end for which we were made? Perishing things, which, whether we will or
no, within a few days death will give us an everlasting separation from, under the power of a fever or an asthma, &c., as unto our
interest in them. But how incomparable with respect hereunto is that condescension of Christ, whereof we have given an account! If,
therefore, we find an unwillingness in us, a tergiversation in our minds about these things, when called unto them in a way of duty,
one view by faith of the glory of Christ in this condescension, and what he parted from therein when he “made himself of no
reputation,” will be an effectual cure of that sinful distemper.
Herein, then, I say, we may by faith behold the glory of Christ, as we shall do it by sight hereafter. If we see no glory in it, if we
discern not that which is matter of eternal admiration, we walk in darkness. It is the most ineffable effect of divine wisdom and grace.
Where are our hearts and minds, if we can see no glory in it? know in the contemplation of it, it will quickly overwhelm our reason,
and bring our understanding into a loss: but unto this loss do I desire to be brought every day; for when faith can no more act itself in
comprehension, when it finds the object it is fixed on too great and glorious to be brought into our minds and capacities, it will issue
(as we said before) in holy admiration, humble adoration, and joyful thanksgiving. In and by its acting in them does it fill the soul
with “joy unspeakable, and full of glory.”

The Glory of Christ in this Love.
In the susception and discharge of the mediatory office by the Son of God, the Scripture does most eminently represent, – II. His
Love, as the sole impelling and leading cause thereof, Gal. 2: 20; 1 John 3: 16; Rev. 1: 5.
Herein is he glorious, in a way and manner incomprehensible; for in the glory of divine love the chief brightness of glory does consist.
There is nothing of dread or terror accompanying it, – nothing but what is amiable and infinitely refreshing. Now, that we may take a
view of the glory of Christ herein by faith, the nature of it must be inquired into.
1 . The eternal disposing cause of the whole work wherein the Lord Christ was engaged by the susception of this office, for the
redemption and salvation of the church, is the love of the Father. Hereunto it is constantly ascribed in the Scripture. And this love of
the Father acted itself in his eternal decrees, “before the foundation of the world,” Eph. 1: 4; and afterward in the sending of his Son to
render it effectual, John 3: 16. Originally, it is his eternal election of a portion of mankind to be brought unto the enjoyment of
himself, through the mystery of the blood of Christ, and the sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thess. 2: 13,16; Eph. 1:9; 1 Peter 1: 2.
This eternal act of the will of God the Father does not contain in it an actual approbation of, and complacency in, the state and
condition of those that are elected; but only designeth that for them on the account whereof they shall be accepted and approved. And
it is called his love on sundry accounts.
(1.) Because it is an act suited unto that glorious excellency of his nature wherein he is love; for “God is love,” 1 John 4: 8, 9. And the
first egress of the divine properties must, therefore, be in an act of communicative love. And whereas this election, being an eternal act
of the will of God, can have no moving cause but what is in himself, – if we could look into all the treasures of the divine excellencies,
we should find none whereunto it could be so properly ascribed as unto love. Wherefore, – (2.) It is styled Love, because it was free
and undeserved, as unto anything on our part; for whatever good is done unto any altogether undeserved, if it be with a design of
their profit and advantage, it is an set of love, and can have no other cause. So is it with us in respect of eternal election. There was
nothing in us, nothing foreseen, as that which, from ourselves, would be in us, that should any way move the will of God unto this
election; for whatever is good in the best of men is an effect of it, Eph. 1: 4. Whereas, therefore, it tends unto our eternal good, the
spring of it must be love. And, – (3.) The fruits or effects of it are inconceivable sets of love. It is by multiplied acts of love that it is
made effectual; John 3: 16; Jer. 31: 3; Eph. 1: 3-6; 1 John 4: 8, 9, 16.
2. This is the eternal spring which is derived unto the church through the mediation of Christ. Wherefore, that which put all the design
of this eternal love of the Father into execution, and wrought out the accomplishment of it, was the love of the Son, which we inquire
after; and light may be given unto it in the ensuing observations: – (1.) The whole number or society of the elect were creatures made
in the image of God, and thereby in a state of love with him. All that they were, had, or hoped for, were effects of divine goodness and
love. And the life of their souls was love unto God. And a blessed state it was, preparatory for the eternal life of love in heaven.
(2.) From this state they fell by sin into a state of enmity with God; which is comprehensive of all miseries, temporal and eternal.
(3.) Notwithstanding this woeful catastrophe of our first state, yet our nature, on many accounts, was recoverable unto the enjoyment
of God; as I have at large elsewhere declared.

(4.) In this condition, the first act of love in Christ towards us was in pity and compassion. A creature made in the image of God, and
fallen into misery, yet capable of recovery, is the proper object of divine compassion. That which is so celebrated in the Scripture, as
the bowels, the pity, the compassion of God, is the acting of divine love towards us on the consideration of our distress and misery. But
all compassion ceaseth towards them whose condition is irrecoverable. Wherefore the Lord Christ pitied not the angels that fell,
because their nature was not to be relieved. Of this compassion in Christ, see Heb. 2: 14-16; Isa. 63: 9.
(5.) As then we lay under the eye of Christ in our misery, we were the objects of his pity and compassion; but as he looketh on us as
recoverable out of that state, his love worketh in and by delight. It was an inconceivable delight unto him, to take a prospect of the
deliverance of mankind unto the glory of God; which is also an act of love. See this divinely expressed, Prov. 8: 30, 31, as that place
has been elsewhere explained.
(6.) If it be inquired, whence this compassion and delight in him should arise, what should be the cause of them, that he who was
eternally blessed in his own self-sufficiency should so deeply concern himself in our lost, forlorn condition? I say it did so merely from
the infinite love and goodness of his own nature, without the least procuring inducement from us or any thing in us, Tit. 3: 5.
(7.) In this his readiness, willingness, and delight, springing from love and compassion, the counsel of God concerning the way of our
recovery is, as it were, proposed unto him. Now, this was a way of great difficulties and perplexities unto himself, – that is, unto his
person as it was to be constituted. To the divine nature nothing is grievous, – nothing is difficult; but he was to have another nature,
wherein he was to undergo the difficulties of this way and work. It was required of him that he should pity us until he had none left to
pity himself when he stood in need of it, – that he should pursue his delight to save us until his own soul was heavy and sorrowful
unto death, – that he should relieve us in our sufferings by suffering the same things that we should have done. But he was not in the
least hereby deterred from undertaking this work of love and mercy for us; yea, his love rose on this proposal like the waters of a
mighty stream against opposition. For hereon he says, “Lo, I come to do thy will, O God;” – it is my delight to do it, Heb. 10: 5-7; Isa.
50: 5-7.
(8.) Being thus inclined, disposed, and ready, in the eternal love of his divine person, to undertake the office of mediation and the work
of our redemption, a body was prepared for him. In this body or human nature, made his own, he was to make this love effectual in
all its inclinations and acting. It was provided for him unto this end, and filled with all grace in a way unmeasurable, especially with
fervent love unto mankind. And hereby it became a meet instrument to actuate his eternal love in all the fruits of it.
(9.) It is hence evident, that this glorious love of Christ does not consist alone in the eternal acting of his divine person, or the divine
nature in his person. Such, indeed, is the love of the Father, – namely, his eternal purpose for the communication of grace and glory,
with his acquiescence therein; but there is more in the love of Christ. For when he exercised this love he was man also, and not God
only. And in none of those eternal acts of love could the human nature of Christ have any interest or concern; yet is the love of the
man Christ Jesus celebrated in the Scripture.
(10.) Wherefore this love of Christ which we inquire after is the love of his person, – that is, which he in his own person acts in and by
his distinct natures, according unto their distinct essential properties. And the acts of love in these distinct natures are infinitely distinct
and different; yet are they all acts of one and the same person. So, then, whether that act of love in Christ which we would at any time
consider, be an eternal act of the divine nature in the person of the Son of God; or whether it be an act of the human, performed in
time by the gracious faculties and powers of that nature, it is still the love of one and the self same person, – Christ Jesus.
I t was an act of inexpressible love in him, that he assumed our nature, Heb. 2: 14, 17. But it was an act in and of his divine nature
only; for it was antecedent unto the existence of his human nature, which could not, therefore, concur therein. His laying down his
life for us was an act of inconceivable love, 1 John 3: 16. Y et was it only an act of the human nature, wherein he offered himself and
died. But both the one and the other were acts of his divine person; whence it is said that God laid down his life for us, and purchased
the church with his own blood.
This is that love of Christ wherein he is glorious, and wherein we are by faith to behold his glory. A great part of the blessedness of the
saints in heaven, and their triumph therein, consists in their beholding of this glory of Christ, – in their thankful contemplation of the
fruits of it. See Rev. 5: 9, 10, &c.
The illustrious brightness wherewith this glory shines in heaven, the all-satisfying sweetness which the view of it gives unto the souls
of the saints there possessed of glory, are not by us conceivable, nor to be expressed. Here, this love passeth knowledge, – there, we
shall comprehend the dimensions of it. Y et even here, if we are not slothful and carnal, we may have a refreshing prospect of it; and
where comprehension fails, let admiration take place.
My present business is, to exhort others unto the contemplation of it, though it be but a little, a very little, a small portion of it, that I
can conceive; and less than that very little that I can express. Y et may it be my duty to excite not only myself, but others also, unto
due inquiries after it; unto which end I offer the things ensuing.
1. Labour that your minds may continually be fitted and prepared for such heavenly contemplations. If they are carnal and sensual,
or need with earthly things, a due sense of this love of Christ and its glory will not abide in them. Virtue and vice, in their highest
degrees, are not more diametrically opposite and inconsistent in the same mind, than are a habitual course of sensual, worldly
thoughts and a due contemplation of the glory of the love of Christ; yea, an earnestness of spirit, pregnant with a multitude of
thoughts about the lawful occasions of life, is obstructive of all due communion with the Lord Jesus Christ herein.
Few there are whose minds are prepared in a due manner for this duty. The actions and communications of the most evidence what is
the inward frame of their souls. They rove up and down in their thoughts, which are continually led by their affections into the
corners of the earth. It is in vain to call such persons unto contemplations of the glory of Christ in his love. A holy composure of mind,
by virtue of spiritual principles, an inclination to seek after refreshment in heavenly things, and to bathe the soul in the fountain of
them, with constant apprehensions of the excellency of this divine glory, are required hereunto.
2 . Be not satisfied with general notions concerning the love of Christ, which represent no glory unto the mind, wherewith many
deceive themselves. All who believe his divine person, profess a valuation of his love, – and think them not Christians who are

otherwise minded; but they have only general notions, and not any distinct conceptions of it, and really know not what it is. To deliver
us from this snare, peculiar meditations on its principal concerns are required of us.
(1.) Whose love it is, – namely, of the divine person of the Son of God. He is expressly called God, with respect unto the exercise of this
love, that we may always consider whose it is, 1 John 3: 16, “Hereby perceive we the love [of God], because he laid down his life for
us.”
(2.) By what ways and means this wonderful love of the Son of God does act itself, – namely, in the divine nature, by eternal acts of
wisdom, goodness, and grace proper thereunto; and in the human, by temporary acts of pity or compassion, with all the fruits of them
in doing and suffering for us. See Eph 3: 19; Heb. 2: 14, 15; Rev. 1: 5.
(3.) What is the freedom of it, as to any desert on our part, 1 John 4: 10. It was hatred, not love, that we in ourselves deserved; which
is a consideration suited to fill the soul with self-abasement, – the best of frames in the contemplation of the glory of Christ.
(4.) What is the efficacy of it in its fruits and effects, with sundry other considerations of the like nature.
By a distinct prospect and admiration of these things, the soul may walk in this paradise of God, and gather here and there a heavenly
flower, conveying unto it a sweet savour of the love of Christ. See Cant. 2: 2-4.
Moreover, be not contented to have right notions of the love of Christ in your minds, unless you can attain a gracious taste of it in
your hearts; no more than you would be to see a feast or banquet richly prepared, and partake of nothing of it unto your refreshment.
It is of that nature that we may have a spiritual sensation of it in our minds; whence it is compared by the spouse to apples and
flagons of wine. We may taste that the Lord is gracious; and if we find not a relish of it in our hearts, we shall not long retain the
notion of it in our minds. Christ is the meat, the bread, the food of our souls. Nothing is in him of a higher spiritual nourishment than
his love, which we should always desire.
In this love is he glorious; for it is such as no creatures, angels or men, could have the least conceptions of, before its manifestation by
its effects; and, after its manifestation, it is in this world absolutely incomprehensible.

The Glory of Christ in the Discharge of his Mediatory Office.
Secondly, As the Lord Christ was glorious in the susception of his office, so was he also in its discharge.
An unseen glory accompanied him in all that he did, in all that he suffered. Unseen it was unto the eyes of the world, but not in His
who alone can judge of it. Had men seen it, they would net have crucified the Lord of glory. Y et to some of them it was made
manifest. Hence they testified that, in the discharge of his office, they “beheld his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the
Father,” John 1:14; and that when other could see neither “form nor comeliness in him that he should be desired,” Isa. 53: 2. And so it
is at this day. I shall only make some few observations; first, on what he did in a way of obedience; and then on what he suffered in
the discharge of his office so undertaken by him.
I . What he did, what obedience he yielded unto the law of God in the discharge of his office (with respect whereunto he said, “Lo, I
come to do thy will, O God; yea, thy law is in my heart”), it was all on his own free choice or election, and was resolved whereinto
alone. It is our duty to endeavour after freedom, willingness, and cheerfulness in all our obedience. Obedience has its formal nature
from our wills. So much as there is of our wills in what we do towards God, so much there is of obedience, and no more. Howbeit we
are, antecedently unto all acts of our own wills, obliged unto all that is called obedience. From the very constitution of our natures we
are necessarily subject unto the law of God. All that is left unto us is a voluntary compliance with unavoidable commands; with him it
was not so. An act of his own will and choice preceded all obligation as unto obedience. He obeyed because he would, before because
he ought. He said, “Lo, I come to do thy will, O God,” before he was obliged to do that will. By his own choice, and that in an act of
infinite condescension and love, as we have showed, he was “made of a woman,” and thereby “made under the law.” In his divine
person he was Lord of the law, – above it, – no more obnoxious unto its commands than its curse. Neither was he afterwards in
himself, on his own account, unobnoxious unto its curse merely because he was innocent, but also because he was every way above
the law itself, and all its force.
This was the original glory of his obedience. This wisdom, the grace, the love, the condescension that was in this choice, animated
every act, every duty of his obedience, – rendering it amiable in the sight of God, and useful unto us. So, when he went to John to be
baptised, he, who knew he had no need of it on his own account, would have declined the duty of administering that ordinance unto
him; but he replied, “Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness,” Matt. 3: 15. This I have undertaken
willingly, of my own accord, without any need of it for myself, and therefore will discharge it. For him, who was Lord of all
universally, thus to submit himself to universal obedience, carrieth along with it an evidence of glorious grace.
2. This obedience, as unto the use and end of it, was not for himself, but for us. We were obliged unto it, and could not perform it; – he
was not obliged unto it any otherwise but by a free act of his own will, and did perform it. God gave him this honour, that he should
obey for the whole church, – that by “his obedience many should be made righteous,” Rom. 5: 19. Herein, I say, did God give him
honour and glory, that his obedience should stand in the stead of the perfect obedience of the church as unto justification.
3. His obedience being absolutely universal, and absolutely perfect, was the great representative of the holiness of God in the law. It
was represented glorious when the ten words were written by the finger of God in tables of stone; it appears yet more eminently in the
spiritual transcription of it in the hearts of believers: but absolutely and perfectly it is exemplified only in the holiness and obedience of
Christ, which answered it unto the utmost. And this is no small part of his glory in obedience, that the holiness of God in the law was
therein, and therein alone, in that one instance, as unto human nature, fully represented.
