PURITAN GOLD -- Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices by Thomas Brooks: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 12
Satan Extenuates and Lessens Sin


Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. By Thomas Brooks.

Chapter 4. Satan Extenuates and Lessens Sin.

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
'Ring out his knell—the man is dead.' So when God gives over a soul to sin without
control, you may truly say, 'This soul is lost,' you may ring out his knell, for he is twice
dead, and plucked up by the roots.
Freedom from chastisement is the mother of carnal security, the poison of religion, the
moth of holiness, and the introducer of wickedness. 'Nothing,' said one, 'seems more
unhappy to me, than he to whom no adversity has happened.' Outward mercies often
times prove a snare to our souls. 'I will lay a stumbling block' (Ezek. 3:20). Vatablus's
note there is, 'I will prosper him in all things, and not by affliction restrain him from sin.'
Prosperity has been a stumbling-block, at which millions have stumbled and fallen, and
broke the neck of their souls forever! "Religion brought forth riches, and the daughter
soon devoured the mother," said Augustine. So if we have enough food and clothing, let
us be content. But people who long to be rich fall into temptation and are trapped by
many foolish and harmful desires that plunge them into ruin and destruction. For the
love of money is at the root of all kinds of evil. And some people, craving money, have
wandered from the faith and pierced themselves with many sorrows." 1 Timothy 6:8-10
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That the lack of wicked men, under all their outward mercy and freedom from adversity,
is far greater than all their outward enjoyments. They have many mercies, yet they lack
more than they enjoy. The mercies which they enjoy are nothing to the mercies they
lack. It is true, they have honors and riches, and pleasures and friends, and are mighty
in power; their family is established, and their offspring are before their eyes. 'Their
houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon them.' 'They send forth their
little ones like a flock, and their children dance. They take the timbrel and harp, and
rejoice at the sound of the organ.' 'They spend their days in wealth, their eyes stand out
with fatness, they have more than heart can wish: and they have no bands in their
death—but their strength is firm; they are not in trouble as other men.'
Yet all this is nothing to what they lack. They lack a saving interest in God, Christ, the
Spirit, the promises, the covenant of grace, and everlasting glory. They lack acceptance
and reconciliation with God; they lack righteousness, justification, sanctification,
adoption, and redemption. They lack the pardon of sin, and power against sin, and
freedom from the dominion of sin. They lack that favor with God, which is better than
life, and that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory, and that peace which passes
understanding, and that grace, the least spark of which is more worth than heaven and
earth. They lack a house that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. They
lack those riches that perish not, the glory that fades not, that kingdom that shakes not.
Wicked men are the most needy men in the world, yes, they lack those two things that
should render their mercies sweet, that is, the blessing of God, and contentment with
their condition! Without these things, their heaven is but hell on this side hell. (Psalm
49:11, 73:7; Job 21:12) When their hearts are lifted up and grown big upon the
thoughts of their abundance, if conscience does but put in a word and say, It is true,
here is this and that outward mercy—Oh—but where is a saving interest in Christ?
Where is the favor of God? Where are the comforts of the Holy Spirit? Where are the
evidences for heaven? This word from conscience makes the man's countenance to
change, his thoughts to be troubled, his heart to be amazed, and all his mercies on the
right hand and left to be as dead and withered. Ah, were but the eyes of wicked men
open to see their spiritual needs under their temporal abundance, they would cry out
44

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
and say, as Absalom did, 'What are all these to me so long as I cannot see the king's
face?' (2 Sam. 14:23, 32). What is honor, and riches, and the favor of creatures—so
long as I lack the favor of God, the pardon of my sins, a saving interest in Christ, and
the hope of glory! O Lord, give me these, or I die! Give me these, or else I shall
eternally die!
Neither Christ nor heaven can be hyperbolized. A crown of gold cannot cure the
headache; a velvet slipper cannot ease the gout; honor or riches cannot quiet and still
the conscience. The heart of man is a three-sided triangle, which the whole round circle
of the world cannot fill, as mathematicians say—but all the corners will complain of
emptiness, and hunger for something else.
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
outward things are not as they seem and are esteemed. They have, indeed, a glorious
outside—but if you view their insides, you will easily find that they fill the head full of
cares, and the heart full of fears. What if the fire should consume one part of my estate,
and the sea should be a grave to swallow up another part of my estate! What if my
servants should be unfaithful abroad, and my children should be deceitful at home! Ah,
the secret fretting, vexing, and gnawing that does daily, yes hourly, attend those men's
souls whose hands are full of worldly goods!
It was a good speech of an emperor: 'You,' said he, 'gaze on my purple robe and golden
crown—but did you know what cares are under it, you would not take it up from the
ground to have it.' It was a true saying of Augustine on the 26th Psalm: 'Many are
miserable by loving hurtful things—but they are more miserable by having them.' It is
not what men enjoy—but the principle from whence it comes, that makes men happy.
Much of these outward things do usually cause great distraction, great vexation, and
great condemnation at last, to the possessors of them. If God gives them in his wrath,
and does not sanctify them in his love, they will at last be witnesses against a man, and
millstones forever to sink a man in that day when God shall call men to an account, not
for the use—but for the abuse of mercy.
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider the
end and the design of God in heaping up mercy upon the heads of the wicked, and in
giving them rest and quiet from those sorrows and sufferings that others sigh under.
David shows the end and design of God in this. "When I tried to understand all this, it
was oppressive to me till I entered the sanctuary of God; then I understood their final
destiny. Surely you place them on slippery ground; you cast them down to ruin. How
suddenly are they destroyed, completely swept away by terrors! As a dream when one
awakes, so when you arise, O Lord, you will make them vanish from this life." Psalm
73:16-20. So in Psalm 92:7, "Although the wicked flourish like weeds, and evildoers
blossom with success, there is only eternal destruction ahead of them." God's setting
them up, is but in order to his casting them down; his raising them high, is but in order
to his bringing them low. Exod. 9:16: 'And in very deed, for this cause have I raised you
up, for to show in you my power, and that my name may be declared throughout all the
earth.' I have constituted and set you up as a target—that I may let fly at you, and
follow you close with plague upon plague, until I have beaten the very breath out of
your body, and got myself a name, by setting my feet upon the neck of all your pride,
power, pomp, and glory.

45

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Ah, souls, what man in his wits would be lifted up that he might be cast down; would be
set higher than others, when it is but in order to his being brought down lower than
others? There is not a wicked man in the world that is set up with Lucifer, as high as
heaven—but shall with Lucifer be brought down as low as hell. Can you think seriously
of this, O soul, and not say, O Lord, I humbly crave that you will let me be little in this
world, that I may be great in another world; and low here, that I may be high forever
hereafter. Let me be low, and feed low, and live low, so I may live with you forever; let
me now be clothed with rags, so you will clothe me at last with your robes; let me now
be set upon a ash-heap, so I may at last be advanced to sit with you upon your throne.
Lord, make me rather gracious than great, inwardly holy than outwardly happy, and
rather turn me into my first nothing, yes, make me worse than nothing, rather than set
me up for a time, that you may bring me low forever. "Grant us, Lord, that we may so
partake of temporal felicity, that we may not lose eternal happiness." (Bernard).
Valens, the Roman emperor, fell from being an emperor to be a footstool to Sapor, king
of Persia. Dionysius, king of Sicily, fell from his kingly glory to be a schoolmaster. The
brave Queen Zenobia was brought to Rome in golden chains. Belisarius, a famous
general, Henry the Fourth, Bajazet Pythias, great Pompey, and William the Conqueror,
these, from being very high were brought very low; they all fell from great glory and
majesty to great poverty and misery.
Remedy (7). The seventh remedy against this device of Satan is solemnly to consider,
That God does often most plague and punish those whom others think he does most
spare and love; that is, God does plague and punish them most with spiritual
judgments—which are the greatest, the sorest, and the heaviest—whom he least
punishes with temporal punishments. (Psalm 81:12, 78:26-31, 106:15) He gave them
their requests—but sent leanness into their soul. It is a heavy plague to have a fat body
and a lean soul; a house full of gold, and a heart full of sin. There are no men on earth
so internally plagued as those who meet with least external plagues. Oh the blindness of
mind, the hardness of heart, the searedness of conscience, that those souls are given
up to, who, in the eye of the world, are reputed the most happy men, because they are
not outwardly afflicted and plagued as other men.
Ah, souls, it were better that all the temporal plagues that ever befell the children of
men since the fall of Adam should at once meet upon your souls, than that you should
be given up to the least spiritual plague, to the least measure of spiritual blindness or
spiritual hardness of heart. Nothing will better that man, nor move that man, who is
given up to spiritual judgments. Let God smile or frown, stroke or strike, cut or kill—he
minds it not, he regards it not; let life or death, heaven or hell, be set before him—it
stirs him not; he is mad upon his sin, and God is fully set to do justice upon his soul.
This man's preservation is but a reservation unto a greater condemnation; this man can
set no bounds to himself; he is become a brat of fathomless perdition; he has guilt in
his bosom and vengeance at his back wherever he goes. Neither ministry nor misery,
neither miracle nor mercy, can mollify his heart! And if this soul be not in hell, on this
side hell—who is? It is better to have an ulcerated body—than a seared conscience. It is
better to have no heart—than a hard heart. It is better to have no mind—than a blind
mind.
Remedy (8). The eighth remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell more upon that
strict account that vain men must make for all that good that they do enjoy. "In that
46

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
day men shall give an account of good things committed unto them, of good things
neglected by them, of evil committed by them, and of evils allowed by them. Then shall
a good conscience be more worth than all the world's good." (Bernard) Ah! did men
dwell more upon that account that they must before long—give for all the mercies that
they have enjoyed, and for all the favors that they have abused, and for all the sins
they have committed—it would make their hearts to tremble and their lips to quiver,
and rottenness to enter into their bones; it would cause their souls to cry out, and say,
'Oh that our mercies had been fewer and lesser, that our account might have been
easier, and our torment and misery, for our abuse of so great mercy, not greater than
we are able to bear. Oh cursed be the day wherein the crown of honor was set upon our
heads, and the treasures of this world were cast into our laps; oh cursed be the day
wherein the sun of prosperity shined so strong upon us, and this flattering world smiled
so much upon us, as to occasion us to forget God, to slight Jesus Christ, to neglect our
souls, and to put far from us the day of our account!'
Philip the Third of Spain, whose life was free from gross evils, professed, that he 'would
rather lose his kingdom than offend God willingly.' Yet being in the agony of death, and
considering more thoroughly of his account he was to give to God, fear struck into him,
and these words broke from him 'Oh! would to God I had never reigned. Oh that those
years that I have spent in my kingdom, I had lived a solitary life in the wilderness! Oh
that I had lived a solitary life with God! How much more securely would I now have
died! How much more confidently would I have gone to the throne of God! What does
all my glory profit me—but that I have so much the more torment in my death?'
God keeps an exact account of every penny that is laid out upon him and his, and that
is laid out against him and his; and this in the day of account men shall know and feel,
though now they wink and will not understand. The sleeping of vengeance causes the
overflowing of sin, and the overflowing of sin causes the awakening of vengeance.
Abused mercy will certainly turn into fury. God's forbearance of sin, is not the
overlooking of sin. The day is at hand when he will pay wicked men for the abuse of old
and new mercies. If he seems to be slow, yet he is sure. He has leaden heels—but iron
hands. The farther he stretches his bow, or draws his arrow, the deeper he will wound
in the day of vengeance. Men's actions are all in print in heaven, and God will, in the
day of account, read them aloud in the ears of all the world, that they may all say Amen
to that righteous sentence that he shall pass upon all despisers and abusers of mercy.
Jerome still thought that voice was in his ears. 'Arise you dead, and come to judgment.'
As often as I think on that day, how does my whole body quake, and my heart within
me tremble.
DEVICE 9: By presenting to the soul the crosses, losses, reproaches, sorrows, and
sufferings, which daily attend those who walk in the ways of holiness. Says Satan, Do
not you see that there are none in the world that are so vexed, afflicted, and tossed, as
those who walk more circumspectly and holily than their neighbors? They are a byword
at home, and a reproach abroad; their miseries come in upon them like Job's
messengers, one upon the neck of another, and there is no end of their sorrows and
troubles. Therefore, says Satan, you were better to walk in ways that are less
troublesome, and less afflicted, though they be more sinful; for who but a madman
would spend his days in sorrow, vexation, and affliction, when it may be prevented by
walking in the ways that I set before him?
47

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
all the afflictions that attend the people of God, are such as shall turn to their profit and
glorious advantage. They shall discover that filthiness and vileness in sin, that yet the
soul has never seen.
It was a speech of a German divine in his sickness, 'In this disease I have learned how
great God is, and what the evil of sin is; I never knew in my experience, who God was,
nor what sin meant—until now.' Afflictions are a crystal glass, wherein the soul has the
clearest sight of the ugly face of sin. In this glass the soul comes to see sin to be but a
bitter-sweet; yes, in this glass the soul comes to see sin not only to be an evil—but to
be the greatest evil in the world, to be an evil far worse than hell itself.
Again, They shall contribute to the mortifying and purging away of their sins (Isa. 1:15,
and 27:8, 9). Afflictions are God's furnace, by which he cleanses his people from their
dross. Affliction is a fire to purge out our dross, and to make virtue shine. Afflictions are
medicines which heal soul diseases, better than all the remedies of physicians. Aloes kill
worms; colds and frosts do destroy vermin; so do afflictions the corruptions that are in
our hearts. The Jews, under all the prophet's thunderings, retained their idols; but after
their Babylonish captivity, it is observed, there have been no idols found among them.
Again, Afflictions are sweet preservatives to keep the saints from sin, which is a greater
evil than hell itself. As Job spoke, 'Surely it is fit to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach me; if I have done
iniquity, I will do it no more. Once have I spoken foolishly, yes, twice, I will do so no
more' (Job 34:31, 32; 40:5). The burnt child dreads the fire. Ah! says the soul under
the rod, sin is but a bitter-sweet; and for the future I intend, by the strength of Christ,
that I will not buy repentance at so dear a rate.
Salt brine preserves from putrefaction, and salt marshes keep the sheep from the rot:
so do afflictions the saints from sin. The ball in the Emblem says, the harder you beat
me down in affliction, the higher I shall bound in affection towards heaven and heavenly
things.
The Rabbis, to scare their scholars from sin, were accustomed to tell them, 'That sin
made God's head ache.' And saints under the rod have found by woeful experience, that
sin makes not only their heads—but their hearts ache also.
Augustine, by wandering out of his way, escaped one that lay in wait to harm him. If
afflictions did not put us out of our way, we would many times meet with some sin or
other, that would harm our precious souls.
Again, They will work the saints to be more fruitful in holiness (Heb. 12:10, 11): 'But he
afflicts us for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.' The flowers smell
sweetest after a shower; vines bear the better fruit, after pruning; the walnut tree is
most fruitful when most beaten. Saints spring and thrive most internally when they are
most externally afflicted. Afflictions are called by some 'the mother of virtue.'
Manasseh's chain was more profitable to him than his crown. Luther could not
understand some Scriptures until he was in affliction. The Christ-cross is no letter, and
yet that taught him more than all the letters in the row. God's house of correction is his
48

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
school of instruction. All the stones that came about Stephen's ears did but knock him
closer to Christ, the corner-stone. The waves did but lift Noah's ark nearer to heaven;
and the higher the waters grew, the more near the ark was lifted up to heaven.
Afflictions lift up the soul to more rich, clear, and full enjoyments of God (Hosea 2:14):
'Behold, I will allure her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her' (or rather, as
the Hebrew has it), 'I will earnestly or vehemently speak to her heart.' God makes
afflictions to be but inlets to the soul's more sweet and full enjoyment of his blessed
self. When was it that Stephen saw the heavens open, and Christ standing at the right
hand of God—but when the stones were about his ears, and there was but a short step
between him and eternity? And when did God appear in his glory to Jacob—but in the
day of his troubles, when the stones were his pillows, and the ground his bed, and the
hedges his curtains, and the heavens his canopy? Then he saw the angels of God
ascending and descending in their glistering robes.
The plant grows with cutting; being cut, it flourishes; it contends with the axe, it lives
by dying, and by cutting it grows. So do saints by their afflictions which befall them;
they gain more experience of the power of God supporting them, of the wisdom of God
directing them, of the grace of God refreshing and cheering them, and of the goodness
of God quieting and quickening of them, to a greater love to holiness, and to a greater
delight in holiness, and to a more vehement pursuing after holiness.
It is reported of Tiberius the emperor that, passing by a place where he saw a cross
lying in the ground upon a marble stone, and causing the stone to be dug up, he found
a great deal of treasure under the cross. So many a precious saint has found much
spiritual and heavenly treasure under the crosses they have met withal.
I have read of a fountain, that at noonday is cold, and at midnight it grows warm; so
many a precious soul is cold God-wards, and heaven-wards, and holiness-wards, in the
day of prosperity; that grow warm God-wards and heaven-wards, and holiness-wards,
in the midnight of adversity.
Again, Afflictions serve to keep the hearts of the saints humble and tender (Lam. 3:19,
20): 'Remembering my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall. My soul
has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me,' or bowed down in me, as the
original has it. So David, when he was under the rod, could say, 'I was mute, I opened
not my mouth; because you did it' (Psalm 39:4).
I have read of Gregory Nazianzen, who, when anything fell out prosperously, would read
over the Lamentation of Jeremiah, and that kept his heart tender, humbled, and low.
Prosperity does not contribute more to the puffing up the soul, than adversity does to
the bowing down of the soul. This the saints by experience find; and therefore they can
kiss and embrace the cross, as others do the world's crown. The more the purest spices
are beaten and bruised—the sweeter scent and fragrance they send abroad. So do
saints when they are afflicted.
Again, They serve to bring the saints nearer to God, and to make them more
importunate and earnest in prayer with God. 'Before I was afflicted, I went astray; but
now have I kept your word.' 'It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might
learn your statutes.' 'I will be to Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of
49

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Judah. I, even I, will tear and go away: I will take away, and none shall rescue him.' 'I
will go and return to my place, until they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face:
in their affliction they will seek me early.' And so they did. 'Come,' say they, 'and let us
return unto the Lord: for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will
bind us up. After two days he will revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we
shall live in his sight.' (Psalm 119:67, 71. Hosea 5:14, 15; 6:1, 2.)
So when God had hedged up their way with thorns, then they say, 'I will go and return
to my first husband; for then was it with me better than now' (Hosea 2:6, 7). Ah the
joy, the peace, the comfort, the delight, and contentment that did attend us, when we
kept close communion with God, does bespeak our return to God. 'We will return to our
first husband; for then was it with us better than now.'
When Tiribazus, a noble Persian, was arrested, he drew out his sword, and defended
himself; but when they told him that they came to carry him to the king, he willingly
yielded. So, though a saint may at first stand a little out, yet when he remembers that
afflictions are to carry him nearer to God, he yields, and kisses the rod. Afflictions are
like the prick at the nightingale's bosom—which awakens her, and puts her upon her
sweet and delightful singing.
Again, Afflictions serve to revive and recover decayed graces; they inflame that love
that is cold, and they quicken that faith that is decaying, and they put life into those
hopes that are withering, and spirits into those joys and comforts that are languishing.
Most men are like a top, which will not go unless you whip it, and the more you whip it
the better it goes. You know how to apply it. Those who are in adversity, says Luther,
do better understand Scriptures; but those who are in prosperity read them as a verse
in Ovid. Bees are killed with too much honey, but quickened with vinegar. The honey of
prosperity kills our graces—but the vinegar of adversity quickens our graces. Musk, says
one, when it has lost its fragrance, if it is put into the sink among filth—that recovers it.
So do afflictions recover and revive decayed graces. The more saints are beaten with
the hammer of afflictions, the more they are made the trumpets of God's praises, and
the more are their graces revived and quickened. Adversity abases the loveliness of the
world which strives to entice us; it abates the lustiness of the flesh within, which strives
to incite us to folly and vanity; and it assists the soul in his quarrel to the two former,
which tends much to the reviving and recovering of decayed graces.
Now, suppose afflictions and troubles attend the ways of holiness, yet seeing that they
all work for the great profit and singular advantage of the saints, let no soul be so mad
as to leave an afflicted way of holiness, to walk in a smooth path of wickedness.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
that all the afflictions which befall the saints, only reach their worse part; they reach
not, they hurt not, their noble part, their best part. 'And who shall harm you, if you be
followers of that which is good,' says the apostle (1 Peter 3:13). That is, none shall
harm you. They may thus and thus afflict you—but they shall never harm you. The
Christian soldier shall ever be master of the day. He may suffer death—but never
conquest.
It was the speech of an heathen, when as by a tyrant he was commanded to be put into
a mortar, and to be beaten to pieces with an iron pestle, he cries out to his persecutors:
50

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
'You do but beat the vessel, the case, the husk; you do not beat me.' His body was to
him but as a case, a husk; he counted his soul himself, which they could not reach. You
are wise, and know how to apply it.
Socrates said of his enemies, 'They may kill me—but they cannot hurt me.' So afflictions
may kill us—but they cannot hurt us; they may take away my life—but they cannot take
away my God, my Christ, my crown.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That the afflictions which attend the saints in the ways of holiness, are but short and
momentary. 'Sorrow may abide for a night—but joy comes in the morning' (Psalm
30:5). This short storm will end in an everlasting calm, this short night will end in a
glorious day, that shall never have end. It is but a very short time between grace and
glory, between our title to the crown and our wearing the crown, between our right to
the heavenly inheritance and our possession of the heavenly inheritance. What is our
life but a shadow, a bubble, a flower, a runner, a span, a dream? Yes, so small a while
does the hand of the Lord rest upon us, that Luther cannot get diminutives enough to
extenuate it, for he calls it a very little cross that we bear. The prophet in Isaiah 26:20,
says the indignation does not pass—but overpass. The sharpness, shortness, and
suddenness of it is set forth by the travail of a woman (John 16:21). And that is a sweet
scripture: 'For you have need of patience, that after you have done the will of God, you
might receive the promise.' 'For yet a little while, he who shall come will come, and will
not tarry' (Heb. 10:36, 37). 'A little, little, little while.'
There are none of God's afflicted ones that have not their intermissions and respites
whiles under their short and momentary afflictions. When God's hand is on your back,
let your hand be on your mouth, for though the affliction be sharp, it shall be but short.
When Athanasius's friends came to bewail him, because of his misery and banishment,
he said, 'It is but a little cloud, and will quickly be gone.' It will be but as a day before
God will give his afflicted ones beauty for ashes, the oil of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness; before he will turn all your sighing into singing, all your lamentations into
consolations, your sackcloth into silks, ashes into ointments, and your fasts into
everlasting feasts!
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan, is seriously to consider,
That the afflictions which befall the saints are such as proceed from God's dearest love.
'As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten' (Rev. 3:19). Saints, says God, think not that I
hate you, because I thus chide you. He who escapes discipline may suspect his
adoption. God had one Son without corruption—but no son without correction. A
gracious soul may look through the darkest cloud, and see God smiling on him. We
must look through the anger of his correction to the sweetness of his countenance; even
as by the rainbow we see the beautiful image of the sun's light in the midst of a dark
and watery cloud.
Augustine asks—If he were beloved, how came he to be sick? So are wicked men apt to
say, because they know not that corrections are pledges of our adoption, and badges of
our sonship. God had one Son without sin—but none without sorrow.

51

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
When Munster lay sick, and his friends asked him how he did and how he felt himself,
he pointed to his sores and ulcers, whereof he was full, and said, 'These are God's gems
and jewels, with which he decks his best friends, and to me they are more precious than
all the gold and silver in the world.' A soul at first conversion is but rough cast; but God
by afflictions does square and fit, and fashion it for that glory above, which shows that
discipline flows from precious love; therefore the afflictions which attend the people of
God should be no bar to holiness, nor no motive to draw the soul to ways of
wickedness.
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
it is our duty and glory not to measure afflictions by the smart—but by the end. When
Israel was dismissed out of Egypt, it was with gold and ear-rings (Exod. 11:3); so the
Jews were dismissed out of Babylon with gifts, jewels, and all necessary utensils (Ezra
1:7-11). Look more at the latter end of a Christian—than the beginning of his affliction.
Consider the patience of Job, and what end the Lord made with him. Look not upon
Lazarus lying at Dives's door—but lying in Abraham's bosom. Look not to the beginning
of Joseph, who was so far from his dream that the sun and moon should reverence him,
that for two years he was cast where he could see neither sun, moon, nor stars; but
behold him at last made ruler over Egypt. Look not upon David as there was but a step
between him and death, nor as he was envied by some, and slighted and despised by
others; but behold him seated in his royal throne, and dying in his bed of honor, and his
son Solomon and all his glistering nobles about him.
Afflictions, they are but as a dark entry into your Father's house; they are but as a dirty
lane to a royal palace. Now, tell me, souls, whether it be not very great madness to
shun the ways of holiness, and to walk in the ways of wickedness, because of those
afflictions which attend the ways of holiness.
Afflictions, they are but our Father's goldsmiths, who are working to add pearls to our
crowns. Tiberius saw paradise when he walked upon hot burning coals. Herodotus said
of the Assyrians, Let them drink nothing but wormwood all their life long; when they
die, they shall swim in honey. You are wise, and know how to apply it.
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That the design of God in all the afflictions which befall them, is only to try them; it is
not to wrong them, nor to ruin them, as ignorant souls are apt to think. 'He knows the
way that I take: and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold,' says patient Job,
33:10. So in Deut. 8:2, 'And you shall remember all the way which the Lord your God
led you these forty years in the wilderness, to humble you, and to prove you, to know
what was in your heart, whether you would keep his commandments or not.' God
afflicted them thus, that he might make known to themselves and others what was in
their hearts. When fire is put to green wood, there comes out abundance of watery stuff
that before appeared not; when the pond is empty, the mud, filth, and toads come to
light. The snow covers many a ash-heap, so does prosperity many a rotten heart. It is
easy to wade in a warm bath, and every bird can sing in a sunshine day. Hard weather
tries what health we have; afflictions try what sap we have, what grace we have.
Withered leaves soon fall off in windy weather, rotten boughs quickly break with heavy
weights. You are wise, and know how to apply it.

52

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Afflictions are like pinching frosts, which will search us; where we are most unsound, we
shall soonest complain, and where most corruptions lie, we shall most shrink. We try
metal by knocking; if it sound well, then we like it. So God tries his by knocking, and if
under knocks they yield a pleasant sound, God will turn their night into day, and their
bitter into sweet, and their cross into a crown; and they shall hear that voice, 'Arise,
and shine; for the glory of the Lord is risen upon you, and favors of the Lord are flowing
in on you' (Is. 60:1).
Dunghills raked send out a filthy stream; ointments crushed send out a sweet perfume.
This is applicable to sinners and saints under the rod.
Remedy (7). The seventh remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That the afflictions, wrath, and misery which attend the ways of wickedness, are far
greater and heavier than those which attend the ways of holiness. Oh, the galling,
girding, lashing, and gnawing of conscience, which attend souls in a way of wickedness!
'The wicked,' says Isaiah, 'are like the troubled sea, which cannot rest, whose waters
cast up mire and dirt.' 'There is no peace to the wicked, says my God.'
There are snares in all their mercies, and curses and crosses attend all their comforts,
both at home and abroad. What is a fine suit of clothes with the plague in it? and what
is a golden cup when there is poison at the bottom? or what is a silken stocking with a
broken leg in it? The curse of God, the wrath of God, the hatred of God, and the fierce
indignation of God—always attend sinners walking in a way of wickedness. Turn to
Deuteronomy 28, and read from ver. 15 to the end of the chapter; and turn to Leviticus
26, and read from ver. 14 to the end of the chapter, and then you shall see how the
curse of God haunts the wicked, as it were a fury, in all his ways. In the city it attends
him, in the country hovers over him; coming in, it accompanies him; going forth, it
follows him, and in travel it is his comrade. It fills his heart with strife, and mingles the
wrath of God with his sweetest morsels. It is a moth in his wardrobe, disease among his
cattle, mildew in the field, rot among sheep, and ofttimes makes his children, his
greatest vexation and confusion. There is no solid joy, nor lasting peace, nor pure
comfort, which attends sinners in their sinful ways. There is a sword of vengeance that
every moment hang over their heads by a small thread! And what joy and contentment
can attend such souls, if the eye of conscience be but so far open as to see the sword?
Ah! the horrors and terrors, the tremblings and shakings, that attend their souls!
Sin brings in sorrow and sickness. The Rabbis say, that when Adam tasted the forbidden
fruit, his head ached. Sirens are said to sing curiously while they live—but to roar
horribly when they die. So do the wicked.
(Sin oftentimes makes men insensible of the wrath of the Almighty. Sin transforms
many a man, as it were, into those bears in Pliny, that could not be stirred with the
sharpest prickles; or those fish in Aristotle, that though they have spears thrust into
their sides, yet they awake not.)
DEVICE 10: By working them to be frequent in comparing themselves and their ways,
with those who are reputed or reported to be worse than themselves.
By this device the devil drew the proud pharisee to bless himself in a cursed condition,
'God, I thank you that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
53

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
even as this tax-collector' (Luke 18:11). Why, says Satan—you are now and then a little
lustful—but such and such do daily defile and pollute themselves by actual immorality
and filthiness; you deceive and take advantage your neighbors in things that are but as
toys and trifles—but such and such deceive and take advantage of others in things of
greatest concernment, even to their ruin and undoing; you do but sit, and chat, and sip
with the drunkard—but such and such sit and drink and are drunk with the drunkard;
you are only a little proud in heart and habit, in looks and words.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider this,
That there is not a greater nor a clearer argument to prove a man a hypocrite, than to
be quick-sighted abroad—and blind at home, than to see 'a mote in another man's eye,
and not a beam in his own eye' (Matt. 7:3, 4); than to use spectacles to behold other
men's sins rather than looking-glasses to behold his own; rather to be always holding
his finger upon other men's sores, and to be amplifying and aggravating other men's
sins—and mitigating of his own.
History speaks of a kind of witches that, stirring abroad, would put on their eyes—but
returning home they boxed them up again. So do hypocrites.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, To spend more time in
comparing of your internal and external actions with the Rule, with the Word, by which
you must be judged at last—than in comparing of yourselves with those who are worse
than yourselves. That man who, comparing his self with others that are worse than
himself, may seem, to himself and others, to be an angel. Yet comparing himself with
the word of God, may see himself to be like the devil, yes, a very devil. 'Have not I
chosen twelve, and one of you is a devil?' (John 6:70). Such men are like him, as if they
were spit out of his mouth.
The nearer we draw to God and his Word the more rottenness we shall find in our
bones. The more any man looks into the body of the sun, the less he sees when he
looks down again. It is said of the basilisk, that if he looks into a mirror he presently
dies; so will sin, and a sinner (in a spiritual sense), when the soul looks into the Word,
which is God's mirror.
Satan is called 'the god of this world' (2 Cor. 4:4), because, as God at first did but
speak the word, and it was done, so, if the devil does but hold up his finger, give the
least hint—they will obey his will, though they undo their souls forever. Ah, what
monsters would these men appear to be, did they but compare themselves with a
righteous rule, and not with the most unrighteous men; they would appear to be as
black as hell itself.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That though your sins be not as great as those of others, yet without sound repentance
on your side, and pardoning mercy on God's side—you will be as certainly damned as
others, though not equally tormented with others. What though hell shall not be so hot
to you as to others, yet you must as certainly go to hell as others—unless the glorious
grace of God shines forth upon you in the face of Christ. God will suit men's
punishments to their sins; the greatest sins shall be attended with the greatest
punishments, and lesser sins with lesser punishments. (As in heaven one is more
glorious than another, so in hell one shall be more miserable than another—Augustine.)
54

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Alas, what a poor comfort will this be to you when you come to die, to consider that you
shall not be equally tormented with others, yet must be forever shut out from the
glorious presence of God, Christ, angels, and saints, and from those good things of
eternal life, that are so many that they exceed number, so great that they exceed
measure, so precious that they exceed estimation! Sure it is, that the tears of hell are
not sufficient to bewail the loss of heaven; the worm of grief gnaws as painful as the fire
burns. If those souls (Acts 20:37) wept because they should see Paul's face no more,
how deplorable is the eternal deprivation of the beautific vision! The gate of
blessedness, the gate of hope, the gate of mercy, the gate of glory, the gate of
consolation, and the gate of salvation—will be forever shut against them (Matt. 25:10).
But this is not all: you shall not be only shut out of heaven—but shut up in hell forever;
not only shut out from the presence of God and angels—but shut up with devils and
damned spirits for ever; not only shut out from those sweet, surpassing, unexpressible,
and everlasting pleasures that are at God's right hand—but shut up forever under those
torments that are ceaseless, remediless and endless. Ah, souls, were it not ten
thousand times better for you to break off your sins by repentance, than to go on in
your sins until you feel the truth of what now you hear? It was a good saying of
Chrysostom, speaking of hell: 'Let us not seek to figure out where it is—but how we
shall escape it!'
God is very merciful. Ah, that you would repent and return, that your souls might live
forever! Remember this, grievous is the torment of the damned for the bitterness of the
punishments—but most grievous for the eternity of the punishments! For to be
tormented without end—this is that which goes beyond the bounds of all desperation.
Ah, how do the thoughts of this make the damned to roar and cry out for unquietness of
heart, and tear their hair, and gnash their teeth, and rage for madness, that they must
dwell in 'everlasting burnings' forever!
Surely one good means to escape hell is to take a turn or two in hell by our daily
meditations.
DEVICE 11: By polluting and defiling the souls and judgments of men with such
dangerous errors, which in their proper tendency tend to carry the souls of men to all
looseness and wickedness, as woeful experience does abundantly evidence.
Ah, how many are there filled with these and suchlike Christ-dishonoring and soulundoing opinions, that is—that the Scriptures are full of fallacies and uncertainties, and
no further to be heeded, than they agree with their own carnal thoughts; that it is a
poor, low thing, if not idolatry too, to worship God in a Mediator; that the resurrection is
already past; that there was never any such man or person as Jesus Christ—but that all
is an allegory; that there is no God nor devil, heaven nor hell—but what is within us;
that sin and grace are equally good—with a hundred other horrid opinions, which have
caused wickedness to break in as a flood among us.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
an erroneous, vain MIND is as odious to God as a wicked LIFE. He who had the leprosy
in his head was to be pronounced utterly unclean (Levit. 13:44). Gross errors make the
heart foolish, and render the life loose. Error spreads and frets like a gangrene, and
55

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
renders the soul a leper in the sight of God. The breath of the erroneous is infectious,
and, like the dogs of Congo—they bite though they bark not.
It was God's heavy and dreadful plague upon the Gentiles, to be given up to a mind
void of judgment, or an injudicious mind, or a mind rejected, disallowed, abhorred of
God, or a mind that none have cause to glory in—but rather to be ashamed of (Rom.
1:28). I think that in these days God punishes many men's former wickednesses, by
giving them up to soul-ruining errors. Ah, Lord, this mercy I humbly beg, that you
would rather take me into your own hand, and do anything with me, than give me up to
those sad errors to which thousands have married their souls and are in the way of
perishing forever. It were best that we never erred; next to that, that we amended our
error. To persist in error is diabolical.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, To receive the truth
affectionately, and let it dwell in your souls plenteously. When men stand out against
the truth, when truth would enter, and men bar the door of their souls against the truth,
God in justice gives up such souls to be deluded and deceived by error, to their eternal
undoing (2 Thess. 2:10-12): 'Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved, God shall send them strong delusions (or, as the Greek has it, "the
efficacy of error,") that they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who
believed not the truth—but had pleasure in unrighteousness.'
Ah, sirs, as you love your souls, do not tempt God, do not provoke God, by your
withstanding truth—to give you up to believe a lie, that you may be damned. There are
no men on earth so fenced against error as those are that receive the truth in the love
of it. Such souls are not 'easily tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness, wherein they lie in wait to
deceive' (The Greek, signifies such sleights as cheaters and false gamesters use at
dice.) It is not he who receives most of the truth unto his head—but he who receives
most of the truth affectionately into his heart—who shall enjoy the happiness of having
his judgment sound and clear, when others shall be deluded and deceived by them, who
make it their business to infect the judgments and to undo the souls of men. The
greatest sinners are sure to be the greatest sufferers.
Ah, souls, as you would not have your judgments polluted and defiled with error, 'Let
the word of the Lord,' which is more precious than gold, yes than fine gold, 'dwell
plenteously in you' (Col. 3:16). Let it well in you as an ingrafted word incorporated into
your souls, so digested by you, as that you turn it into a part of yourselves. It is not the
hearing of truth, nor the knowing of truth, nor the commending of truth, nor the talking
of truth—but the indwelling of truth in your souls—which will keep your judgments
chaste and sound, in the midst of all those glittering errors that betray many souls into
his hands, who can easily 'transform himself into an angel of light' (2 Cor. 11:14), that
he may draw others to lie in chains of darkness with him forever. Oh, let not the Word
be a stranger—but make it your choicest familiar! Then will you be able to stand in the
day wherein many shall fall on your right hand, and on your left, by the subtlety of
those who shall say, 'Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there is Christ.'
Ah, souls, if truth dwell plenteously in you, you are happy; if not, you are unhappy
under all your greatest felicity. Truth at last triumphs.
