PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 14
Christ Will Not Quench the Smoking Flax

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 4. Christ Will Not Quench the Smoking Flax.

4. Christ Will Not Quench the Smoking Flax
The second observation concerning the weak and small beginnings of
grace is that Christ will not quench the smoking flax. This is so for two
principal reasons. First, because this spark is from heaven: it is his own, it
is kindled by his own Spirit. And secondly, it tends to the glory of his
powerful grace in his children that he preserves light in the midst of
darkness, a spark in the midst of the swelling waters of corruption.
THE LEAST SPARK OF GRACE IS PRECIOUS
There is an especial blessing in that little spark. `As the new wine is
found in the cluster, and one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so
will I do for my servants' sakes' (Isa. 65:8). We see how our Saviour
Christ bore with Thomas in his doubting (John 20:27), and with the two
disciples that went to Emmaus, who wavered as to whether he came to
redeem Israel or not (Luke 24:21). He quenched not that little light in
Peter, which was smothered: Peter denied him, but he denied not Peter
(Luke 22:61). `If thou wilt, thou canst,' said one poor man in the Gospel
(Matt. 8:2). `If thou canst do anything,' said another (Mark 9:22). Both
were smoking flax. Neither of them was quenched. If Christ had stood
upon his own greatness, he would have rejected him that came with his
`if'. But Christ answers his `if' with a gracious and absolute grant, `I will,
be thou clean.' The woman that was diseased with an issue did but touch,
with a trembling hand, and but the hem of his garment, and yet she went
away both healed and comforted. In the seven churches (Rev. 2 and 3),
we see that Christ acknowledges and cherishes anything that was good in
them. Because the disciples slept due to infirmity, being oppressed with
grief, our Saviour Christ frames a comfortable excuse for them, `The
spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak' (Matt. 26:41).

If Christ should not be merciful, he would miss of his own ends: `There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared' (Psa. 130:4). Now all
are welcome to come under that banner of love which he spreads over his
own: `Unto thee shall all flesh come' (Psa. 65:2). He uses moderation and
care, `lest the spirit should fail before him, and the souls which he hath
made' (Isa. 57:16). Christ's heart yearned, the text says, when he saw the
people without meat, `lest they faint in the way' (Matt. 15:32); much
more will he have regard for the preventing of our spiritual faintings.
SUPPORT THE WEAK
Here see the opposite dispositions in the holy nature of Christ and the
impure nature of man. Man for a little smoke will quench the light.
Christ, we see, ever cherishes even the least beginnings. How he bore with
the many imperfections of his poor disciples! If he did sharply check
them, it was in love, and that they might shine the brighter. Can we have
a better pattern to follow than this from him by whom we hope to be
saved? `We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak'
(Rom. 15:1). `I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means
save some' (1 Cor. 9:22). Oh, that this gaining and winning disposition
were more in many! Many, so far as in us lies, are lost for want of
encouragement. See how that faithful fisher of men, the Apostle Paul,
labors to catch his judge: `I know that thou believest the prophets' (Acts
26:27), and then wishes him all saving good, but not bonds. He might
have added them too, but he would not discourage one that responded.
He would therefore wish Agrippa only that which was good in religion.
How careful was our blessed Saviour of little ones, that they might not be
offended! How he defends his disciples from malicious imputations of the
Pharisees! How careful not to put new wine into old vessels (Matt. 9:17),
not to alienate new beginners with the austerities of religion (as some do
indiscreetly). Oh, says he, they shall have time to fast when I am gone,
and strength to fast when the Holy Ghost is come upon them.
It is not the best way, to assail young beginners with minor matters, but
to show them a more excellent way and train them in fundamental points.
Then other things will not gain credence with them. It is not amiss to
conceal their defects, to excuse some failings, to commend their
performances, to encourage their progress, to remove all difficulties out

of their way, to help them in every way to bear the yoke of religion with
greater ease, to bring them to love God and his service, lest they acquire a
distaste for it before they know it. For the most part we see that Christ
plants in young beginners a love which we call their `first love' (Rev. 2:4),
to carry them through their profession with more delight, and does not
expose them to crosses before they have gathered strength; as we bring
on young plants and fence them from the weather until they be rooted.
Mercy to others should move us to deny ourselves in our liberties
oftentimes, in case of offending weak ones. It is the `little ones' that are
offended (Matt. 18:6). The weakest are most ready to think themselves
despised; therefore we should be most careful to give them satisfaction.
It would be a good contest amongst Christians, one to labour to give no
offence, and the other to labour to take none. The best men are severe to
themselves, tender over others. Yet people should not tire and wear out
the patience of others: nor should the weaker so far demand moderation
from others as to rely upon their indulgence and so to rest in their own
infirmities, with danger to their own souls and scandal to the church.
Neither must they despise the gifts of God in others, which grace teaches
to honor wheresoever they are found, but know their parts and place, and
not undertake anything above their measure, which may make their
persons and their case obnoxious to scorn. When blindness and boldness,
ignorance and arrogance, weakness and willfulness, meet together in
men, it renders them odious to God, burdensome in society, dangerous in
their counsels, disturbers of better purposes, intractable and incapable of
better direction, miserable in the issue. Where Christ shows his gracious
power in weakness, he does it by letting men understand themselves so
far as to breed humility, and magnify God's love to such as they are. He
does it as a preservative against discouragements from weakness, to bring
men into a less distance from grace, as an advantage to poverty of spirit,
rather than greatness of condition and parts, which yield to corrupt
nature fuel for pride. Christ refuses none for weakness of parts, that none
should be discouraged, but accepts none for greatness, that none should
be lifted up with that which is of so little reckoning with God. It is no
great matter how dull the scholar be when Christ takes upon him to be
the teacher, who, as he prescribes what to understand, so he gives

understanding itself, even to the simplest.
The church suffers much from weak ones, therefore we may assert our
liberty to deal with them, though mildly, yet oftentimes directly. The
scope of true love is to make the party better, which concealment
oftentimes hinders. With some a spirit of meekness prevails most, but
with some a rod. Some must be `pulled out of the fire' (Jude 23) with
violence, and they will bless God for us in the day of their visitation. We
see that our Saviour multiplies woe upon woe when he has to deal with
hard hearted hypocrites (Matt. 23:13), for hypocrites need stronger
conviction than gross sinners, because their will is bad, and therefore
usually their conversion is violent. A hard knot must have an answerable
wedge, else, in a cruel pity, we betray their souls. A sharp reproof
sometimes is a precious pearl and a sweet balm. The wounds of secure
sinners will not be healed with sweet words. The Holy Ghost came as well
in fiery tongues as in the likeness of a dove, and the same Holy Spirit will
vouchsafe a spirit of prudence and discretion, which is the salt to season
all our words and actions. And such wisdom will teach us `to speak a
word in season' (Isa. 50:4), both to the weary, and likewise to the secure
soul. And, indeed, he has need of `the tongue of the learned' that shall
either raise up or cast down, though in this place I speak of mildness
towards those that are weak and are sensible of it. These we must bring
on gently, and drive softly, as Jacob did his cattle (Gen. 33:14), according
to their pace, and as his children were able to endure.
Weak Christians are like glasses which are hurt with the least violent
usage, but if gently handled will continue a long time. This honor of
gentle use we are to give to the weaker vessels (1 Pet. 3:7), by which we
shall both preserve them and likewise make them useful to the church
and ourselves.
In diseased bodies, if all ill humours be purged out, you shall purge life
and all away. Therefore, though God says that he will `refine them as
silver is refined' (Zech. 13:9), yet he said he had `refined thee, but not
with silver' (Isa. 48:10), that is, not so exactly as that no dross remains,
for he has respect to our weakness. Perfect refining is for another world,
for the world of the souls of perfect men.