PURITAN GOLD -- Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices by Thomas Brooks: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 12
Satan Presents God as All Mercy


Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. By Thomas Brooks.

Chapter 6. Satan Presents God as All Mercy.

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
sanctuary' (Psalm 63:2). Oh, the sweet looks, the sweet words, the sweet hints, the
sweet joggings, the sweet influences, the sweet love-letters, which gracious souls have
from heaven, when they wait upon God in holy and heavenly services, the least of which
will darken and outweigh all the finery and glory of this world, and richly recompense
the soul for all the troubles, afflictions, and dangers that have attended it in the service
of God. Tertullian, in his book to the martyrs, had an apt saying. 'That is right and good
merchandise, when something is parted with to gain more.' He applies it to their
sufferings, wherein, though the flesh lost something, yet their soul got much more.
Oh, the saints can say under all their troubles and afflictions, that they have food to eat,
and drink to drink, that the world knows not of; that they have such incomes, such
refreshments, such warmings, that they would not exchange for all the honors, riches,
and dainties of this world. Ah, let but a Christian compare his external losses with his
spiritual, internal, and eternal gain—and he shall find, that for every penny that he loses
in the service of God, he gains a pound; and for every pound that he loses, he gains a
hundred; for every hundred lost, he gains a thousand. We lose pins in his service, and
find pearls! We lose the favor of the creature, and peace with the creature, and perhaps
the comforts and contentments of the creature—and we gain the favor of God, peace of
conscience, and the comforts and contentments of a better life. Ah, did the men of this
world know the sweet that saints enjoy in afflictions, they would rather choose
Manasseh's iron chain—than his golden crown! They would rather be Paul a prisoner,
than Paul enrapt up in the third heaven. For 'light afflictions,' they shall have 'a weight
of glory!' For a few afflictions, they shall have these joys, pleasures, and contentments,
that are as numerous as the stars of heaven, or as the sands of the sea! For momentary
afflictions, they shall have an eternal crown of glory. 'It is but winking, and you shall be
in heaven presently,' said the martyr. Oh, therefore, let not afflictions or troubles cause
you to shun the ways of God, or to leave that service that should be dearer to you than
a world, yes, than your very life.
When the noble General Zedislaus had lost his hand in the war, the king sent him a
golden hand for it. What we lose in Christ's service he will make up, by giving us some
golden mercies. Though the cross be bitter, yet it is but short; a little storm, as one said
of Julian's persecution, and an eternal calm follows!
DEVICE 3: By presenting to the soul the difficulty of performing them.
Says Satan, it is so hard and difficult a thing to pray as you should, and to wait on God
as you should, and to walk with God as you should, and to be lively, warm, and active in
the communion of saints as you should, that you were better ten thousand times to
neglect them, than to meddle with them. Doubtless by this device Satan has and does
keep off thousands from waiting on God and from giving to him that service that is due
to his name.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell more upon the
necessity of the service and duty, than on the difficulty that attends the duty. You
should reason thus with your souls: O our souls, though such and such services be hard
and difficult, yet are they exceeding necessary for the honor of God, and the keeping up
his name in the world, and the keeping under of sin, and the strengthening of weak
graces, and so the reviving of languishing comforts, and for the keeping clear and bright
your blessed evidences, and for the scattering of your fears, and for the raising of your
71

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
hopes, and for the gladdening the hearts of the righteous, and stopping the mouths of
the ungodly, who are ready to take all advantages to blaspheme the name of God, and
throw dirt and contempt upon his people and ways. Oh, never leave thinking on the
necessity of this and that duty, until your souls be lifted up far above all the difficulties
which attend religious duties.
The necessity of doing your duty appears by this, that you are his servants by a
threefold right; you are his servants by right of creation, and by right of sustenation,
and by right of redemption.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That the Lord Jesus will make his services easy to you, by the sweet discovery of
himself to your souls, while you are in his service. 'You meet him who rejoices and
works righteousness,' as the prophet Isaiah says (Is. 64:5). The word in the Hebrew is
diversely taken; but most take the word here to signify 'to meet a soul with those
affections of love and tenderness as the father of the prodigal met the prodigal with.'
God is Pater miserationum, he is all affections; he is swift to show mercy, as he is slow
to anger. If meeting with God, who is goodness itself, beauty itself, strength itself, glory
itself—will not sweeten his service to your soul, nothing in heaven or earth will.
Jacob's meeting with Rachel, and enjoying of Rachel, made his hard service to be easy
and delightful to him; and will not the soul's enjoying of God, and meeting with God,
render his service to be much more easy and delightful? Doubtless it will. The Lord will
give that sweet assistance by his Spirit and grace, as shall make his service joyous and
not grievous, a delight and not a burden, a heaven and not a hell, to believing souls.
The confidence of this divine assistance raised up Nehemiah's spirit far above all those
difficulties and discouragements that did attend him in the work and service of the Lord,
as you may see in Nehemiah 2:19, 20: 'But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah
the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to
scorn, and despised us, and said, 'What is this thing that you do? will you rebel against
the king? Then answered I them, and said unto them, The God of heaven, he will
prosper us; therefore we his servants will arise and build: but you have no right, nor
portion, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.' Ah, souls, while you are in the very service of the
Lord, you shall find by experience, that the God of heaven will prosper you, and support
you, and encourage and strengthen you, and carry you through the hardest service,
with the greatest sweetness and cheerfulness which can be. Remember this, that God
will suit your strength to your work, and in the hardest service you shall have the
choicest assistance.
Luther speaks excellently to Melancthon, who was apt to be discouraged with doubts
and difficulties, and fear from foes, and to cease the service they had undertaken. 'If
the work is not good, why did we ever own it? If it is good, why should we ever give it
up?' Why, should we, who have Christ the conqueror on our side—fear the conquered
world?
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell upon the hard
and difficult things that the Lord Jesus has passed through for your temporal, spiritual,
and eternal good. Ah, what a sea of blood, of wrath, of sin, of sorrow and misery, did
the Lord Jesus wade through for your internal and eternal good! Christ did not plead,
72

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
'This cross is too heavy for me to bear; this wrath is too great for me to lie under; this
cup of suffering, which has in it all the ingredients of divine wrath, is too bitter for me to
sip of—how much more to drink the very dregs of it? No! Christ pleads not the difficulty
of the service—but resolutely and bravely wades through all, as the prophet Isaiah
shows: 'I gave My back to those who beat Me, and My cheeks to those who tore out My
beard. I did not hide My face from scorn and spitting.' (Chap. 50:6).
Christ bears his Father's wrath, the burden of your sins, the malice of Satan, and the
rage of the world—and sweetly and triumphantly passes through all. Ah, souls! if this
consideration will not raise up your spirits above all the discouragements that you meet
with, to own Christ and his service, and to stick and cleave to Christ and his service, I
am afraid nothing will. A soul not stirred by this, not raised and lifted up by this, to be
resolute and brave in the service of God, notwithstanding all dangers and difficulties—is
a soul left by God to much blindness and hardness.
'It is not fit, since the Head was crowned with thorns, that he members should be
crowned with rosebuds' says Zanchius.
Godfrey Bouillon, Crusader King of Jerusalem (1099), refused to be crowned with a
crown of gold, saying, 'it was not fitting for a Christian to wear a crown of gold, where
Christ for our salvation had once worn a crown of thorns!'
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is to consider, That
religious duties, holy and heavenly exercises, are only difficult to the worse, to the
ignoble, part of a saint. They are not to the noble and better part of a saint—the soul,
and the renewed affections of a saint. Holy exercises are a heavenly pleasure and
recreation, as the apostle speaks: 'I delight in the law of God, after the inward man'
(Rom. 7:22). To the noble part of a saint, Christ's 'yoke is easy, and his burden is light
(Matt. 11:30). The Greek signifies that Christ's yoke is a kind, a gracious, a pleasant, a
good, and a gainful yoke—as opposed to that which is painful and tedious.
All the commands and ways of Christ (even those who tend to the pulling out of right
eyes and cutting off of right hands) are joyous, and not grievous, to the noble part of a
saint. All the ways and services of Christ are pleasantness, in the abstract, to the better
part of a saint. A saint, so far as he is renewed, is always best when he sees most of
God, when he tastes most of God, when he is highest in his enjoyments of God, and
most warm and lively in the service of God. Oh, says the noble part of a saint, that it
might be always thus! Oh that my strength were the strength of stones, and my flesh as
brass, that my worse part might be more serviceable to my noble part, that I might act
by an untired power in that service, which is a pleasure, a paradise, to me. As every
flower has its sweet savor, so every good duty carries sweet and comfort in the
performance of it.
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
great reward and glorious recompense that attends those who cleave to the service of
the Lord in the face of all difficulties and discouragements. Though the work is hard—yet
the wages are great. Heaven will make amends for all! Yes, one hour's being in heaven
will abundantly recompense you for cleaving to the Lord and his ways in the face of all
difficulties. This carried the apostle through the greatest difficulties. He had an eye 'to
the recompense of reward.' He looked for 'a house that had foundations, whose builder
73

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
and maker was God,' and for 'a heavenly country.' Yes, this bore up the spirit of Christ
in the face of all difficulties and discouragements: 'Looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross,
despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God' (Heb.
12:2).
Basil speaks of some martyrs who were cast out all night naked in the frigid weather,
and were to be burned the next day, how they comforted themselves in this manner:
The winter is sharp—but paradise is sweet; here we shiver for cold—but the bosom of
Abraham will make amends for all.
Christians who would hold on in the service of the Lord, must look more upon the future
crown than upon the present cross; more upon their future glory than their present
misery; more upon their encouragements than upon their discouragements. God's very
service is wages; his ways are strewed with roses, and paved 'with joy which is
unspeakable and full of glory,' and with 'peace which passes understanding.' Some
degree of comfort follows every good action, as heat accompanies fire, as beams and
warmth issue from the sun: 'Moreover, by them is your servant warned, and in keeping
of them there is great reward,' Psalm 19:2. Not only for keeping—but in keeping of
them, there is great reward. This is a reward before the reward, a sure reward of well
doing; in doing thereof, not only for doing thereof, there is great reward (Psalm 19:11).
The joy, the rest, the refreshing, the comforts, the contents, the smiles—which saints
now enjoy in the ways of God, are so precious and glorious in their eyes, that they
would not exchange them for ten thousand worlds! Ah! if the gratuities be thus sweet
and glorious before pay-day comes, what will be that glory that Christ will crown his
saints with, for cleaving to his service in the face of all difficulties; when he shall say to
his Father, 'Lo, here am I, and the children whom you have given me' (Is. 8:18). If
there be so much to be had in a wilderness, what then shall be had in paradise.
DEVICE 4: By working them to make false inferences from those blessed and glorious
things that Christ has done.
As that Jesus Christ has done all for us, therefore there is nothing for us to do but to joy
and rejoice. He has perfectly justified us, and fulfilled the law, and satisfied divine
justice, and pacified his Father's wrath, and has gone to heaven to prepare a place for
us, and in the mean time to intercede for us; and therefore away with praying, and
mourning, and hearing. Ah! what a world of professors has Satan drawn in these days
from religious services, by working them to make such sad, wild, and strange inferences
from the sweet and excellent things that the Lord Jesus has done for his beloved ones.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell as much on those
scriptures that show you the duties and services that Christ requires of you, as upon
those scriptures that declare to you the precious and glorious things that Christ has
done for you.
Tertullian has this expression of the Scriptures: 'I adore the fullness of the Scripture.'
Gregory calls the Scripture 'the heart and soul of God'—who would not then dwell in it?

74

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
It is a sad and dangerous thing to have two eyes to behold our dignity and privileges,
and not one to see our duties and services. I should look with one eye upon the choice
and excellent things that Christ has done for me, to raise up my heart to love Christ
with the purest love, and to rejoice in Christ with the strongest joy, and to lift up Christ
above all, who has made himself to be my all. And I should look with the other eye upon
those services and duties that the Scriptures require of those for whom Christ has done
such blessed things, as upon that of the apostle: "Do you not know that your body is a
sanctuary of the Holy Spirit who is in you, whom you have from God? You are not your
own, for you were bought at a price; therefore glorify God in your body" (1 Cor. 6:19,
20). 'Therefore, my beloved brethren, be you steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not in vain in the Lord' (1 Cor.
15:58). 'And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap if we
faint not' (Gal 6:9). And that of the apostle 'Rejoice always' (1 Thess. 5:16), and 'Pray
without ceasing' (1 Thess. 5:17). And that in the Philippians: 'Work out your own
salvation with fear and trembling' (2:12); and that, 'This do until I come' (1 Tim. 4:13);
and that, 'Let us consider one another, to provoke one another to love, and to good
works, not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is—
but exhorting one another, and so much the more as you see the day approaching'
(Heb. 10:24, 25).
Now, a soul that would not be drawn away by this device of Satan, he must not look
with a squint eye upon these blessed scriptures, and abundance more of like import—
but he must dwell upon them; he must make these scriptures to be his chief and his
choicest companions, and this will be a happy means to keep him close to Christ and his
service in these times, wherein many turn their backs upon Christ, under pretense of
being interested in the great glorious things that have been accomplished by Christ. The
Jews were much in turning over the leaves of the Scripture—but they did not weigh the
matter of them (John 5:39): 'You search the Scriptures.'
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That the
great and glorious things that Jesus Christ has done, and is doing for us, should be so
far from taking us off from religious services and pious performances, that they should
be the greatest motives and encouragements to the performance of them that may be,
as the Scriptures do abundantly evidence. I will only instance in some, as that, 'That
we, being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life' (1 Peter 2:9, Luke 1:74,
75). Christ has freed you from all your enemies, from the curse of the law, the
predominant damnatory power of sin, the wrath of God, the sting of death, and the
torments of hell. But what is the end and design of Christ in doing these great and
marvelous things for his people? It is not that we should throw off duties of
righteousness and holiness—but that their hearts may be the more free and sweet in all
holy duties and heavenly services. This I am sure of, that all man's happiness here is his
holiness, and his holiness shall hereafter be his happiness. Christ has therefore broke
the devil's yoke from off our necks, that his Father might have better service from our
hearts.
So the apostle says, 'I will be their God, and they shall be my people.' 'And I will be a
Father unto you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.'
Mark what follows: 'Since we have these promises, dear friends, let us purify ourselves
from everything that contaminates body and spirit, perfecting holiness out of reverence
75

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
for God.' (2 Cor. 6:17-7:1). And again: 'The grace of God that brings salvation has
appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works' (Titus 2:12-14). Ah, souls! I know no
such arguments to work you to a lively and constant performance of all heavenly
services, like those who are drawn from the consideration of the great and glorious
things that Christ has done for you; and if such arguments will not take you and win
upon you, I do think the throwing of hell fire in your faces will never do it!
Talk not of a godly life—but let your life speak. Your actions in passing pass not away;
for every good work is a grain of seed for eternal life.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That those precious souls which Jesus Christ has done and suffered as much for as he
has for you—have been exceedingly active and lively in all religious services and
heavenly performances. He did as much and suffered as much for David as for you, and
yet who more in praying and praising God than David? 'Seven times a day will I praise
the Lord' (Psalm 119:164). Who more in the studying and meditating on the word than
David? 'Your law is my meditation all the day' (Psalm 119:97). The same truth you may
run and read in Jacob, Moses, Job, Daniel, and in the rest of the holy prophets and
apostles, whom Christ has done as much for as for you. Ah, how have all those worthies
abounded in works of righteousness and holiness, to the praise of free grace!
Certainly Satan has got the upper hand of those souls which argue thus—Christ has
done such and such glorious things for us, therefore we need not make any care and
conscience of doing such and such religious services as men say the Word calls for. If
this logic be not from hell, what is? Ah, were the holy prophets and apostles alive to
hear such logic come out of the mouths of such as profess themselves to be interested
in the great and glorious things that Jesus Christ has done for his chosen ones, how
would they blush to look upon such souls! and how would their hearts grieve and break
within them to hear the language and to observe the actings of such souls!
The saints' motto in all ages has been 'Laboremus'—let us be doing.
'God loves the runner, not the questioner or disputer', says Luther.
He who talks of heaven—but does not the will of God, is like him who gazed upon the
moon—but fell into the pit.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider
this, That those who do not walk in the ways of righteousness and holiness, who not
wait upon God in the several duties and services that are commanded by him; cannot
have that evidence to their own souls of their righteousness before God, of their
fellowship and communion with God, of their blessedness here, and their happiness
hereafter, as those souls have, who love and delight in the ways of the Lord, that are
always best when they are most in the works and service of the Lord. Certainly it is one
thing to judge by our graces, another thing to rest or put our trust in them. There is a
great deal of difference between declaring and deserving. As David's daughters were
76

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
known by their garments of diverse colors, so are God's children by their piety and
sanctity. A Christian's emblem should be a house walking towards heaven. High words
surely make a man neither holy nor just; but a virtuous life, a circumspect walking,
makes him dear to God. A tree that is not fruitful is fit only for the fire. Christianity is
not a talking—but a walking with God, who will not be put off with words. If he sees no
fruit, he will take up his axe, and then the soul is cut off forever.
'Little children,' says the apostle, 'let no man deceive you: he who does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous' (1 John 3:7). 'In this,' says the same apostle, 'the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil; whoever does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he who loves not his brother' (ver. 10). 'If you
know that he is righteous,' says the same apostle, 'you know that everyone who
practices righteousness, is born of him.' "This is how we are sure that we have come to
know Him: by keeping His commands. The one who says, 'I have come to know Him,'
without keeping His commands, is a liar, and the truth is not in him. But whoever keeps
His word, truly in him the love of God is perfected. This is how we know we are in Him:
the one who says he remains in Him should walk just as He walked." 'If we say that we
have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth; but if we
walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another; and the
blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin,' says the same apostle (1 John
2:3-6, and 1:6, 7).
So (James 2:14, 20): 'What does it profit, my brethren, though a man say he has faith,
and have no works; can faith save him?' that is, it cannot. 'For as the body without the
spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also.' To look after holy and heavenly
works, is the best way to preserve the soul from being deceived and deluded by Satan's
delusions, and by sudden flashes of joy and comfort; holy works being a more conscious
and constant pledge of the precious Spirit, begetting and maintaining in the soul more
solid, pure, clear, strong, and lasting joy. Ah souls! As you would have in yourselves a
constant and a blessed evidence of your fellowship with the Father and the Son, and of
the truth of grace, and of your future happiness, look that you cleave close to holy
services; and that you turn not your backs upon religious duties.
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
there are other choice and glorious ends for the saint's performance of religious duties,
than for the justifying of their persons before God, or for their satisfying of the law or
justice of God, or for the purchasing of the pardon of sin; that is, to testify their
justification. 'A good tree cannot but bring forth good fruits' (Matt. 7:17), to testify their
love to God, and their sincere obedience to the commands of God; to testify their
deliverance from spiritual bondage, to evidence the indwelling of the Spirit, to stop the
mouths of the worst of men, and to gladden those righteous souls, whom God would not
have saddened. These, and abundance of other choice ends there are, why those who
have a saving interest in the glorious doings of Christ, should, notwithstanding that,
keep close to the holy duties and religious services that are commanded by Christ. And
if these considerations will not prevail with you, to wait upon God in holy and heavenly
duties, I am afraid if one should rise from the dead, his arguments would not win upon
you—but you would hold on in your sins, and neglect his service, though you lost your
souls forever.

77

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
The end in view moves to action. Keep yourself within compass, and have an eye always
to the end of your life and actions.
DEVICE 5: By presenting to them the fewness and poverty of those who walk in the
ways of God—who continue in religious practices.
Says Satan, Do not you see that those who walk in such and such religious ways are the
poorest, the lowest, and the most despicable people in the world? This took with them
in John 7:47-49: 'Then answered the pharisees, Are you also deceived? Have any of the
rulers, or of the pharisees, believed on him? But these ignorant crowds do, but what do
they know about it? A curse is on them anyway!'
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That though
they are outwardly poor, yet they are inwardly rich. Though they are poor in temporals,
yet they are rich in spirituals. The worth and riches of the saints is inward. 'The King's
daughter is all glorious within' (Psalm 45:13). 'Hearken, my beloved brethren, has not
God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he has
promised to them that love him?' says James 2:5. 'I know your poverty—but you are
rich,' says John to the church of Smyrna (Rev. 2:9). What though they have little in
possession, yet they have a glorious kingdom in future promise. 'Fear not, little flock, it
is your Father's pleasure to give you a kingdom' (Luke 12:32). Though saints have little
in hand, yet they have much in hope. You count those happy, in a worldly sense, that
have much in future promise, though they have little in possession: and will you count
the saints miserable because they have little in hand, little in possession, though they
have a glorious kingdom in future promise? I am sure the poorest saint who breathes,
will not exchange, were it in his power, that which he has in hope and in future promise,
for the possession of as many worlds as there be stars in heaven, or sands in the sea.
'Do not you see,' says Chrysostom, 'the places where treasures are hid are rough and
overgrown with thorns? Do not the naturalists tell you, that the mountains that are big
with gold within, are bare of grass without? Saints have, as scholars, poor daily fare
here, because they must study hard to go to heaven.'
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That in all
ages God has had some who have been great, rich, wise, and honorable—who have
chosen his ways, and cleaved to his service in the face of all difficulties. Though not
many wise men, yet some wise men; and though not many mighty, yet some mighty
have; and though not many noble, yet some noble have. Witness Abraham, and Jacob,
and Job, and several kings, and others that the Scriptures speak of. And ah! how many
have we among ourselves, whose souls have cleaved to the Lord, and who have swum
to his service through the blood of the slain, and who have not counted their lives dear
unto them, that they and others might enjoy the holy things of Christ, according to the
mind and heart of Christ.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That the spiritual riches of the poorest saints infinitely transcend the temporal riches of
all the wicked men in the world; their spiritual riches satisfy them; they can sit down
satisfied with the riches of grace that are in Christ, without earthly honors or riches. 'He
who drinks of that water that I shall give him, shall thirst no more' (John 4:13).
Alexander's vast mind inquired if there were any more worlds to conquer.
78

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

The riches of poor saints are durable; they will bed and board with them; they will go to
the prison, to a sickbed, to a grave, yes, to heaven with them. The spiritual riches of
poor saints are as wine to cheer them, and as bread to strengthen them, and as clothes
to warm them, and as armor to protect them. Now, we all know that the riches of this
world cannot satisfy the souls of men—for they are as fading as a flower, or as the
owners of them are.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device, is seriously to consider, That
though the saints, considered comparatively, are few; though they be 'a little, little
flock,' 'a remnant,' 'a garden enclosed,' 'a spring shut up, a fountain sealed'; though
they are as 'the summer gleanings'; though they are 'one from a city, and two from a
tribe'; though they are but a handful to a houseful, a spark to a flame, a drop to the
ocean—yet considered altogether, are an innumerable number that cannot be
numbered. As John speaks: 'After this I saw a vast crowd, too great to count, from
every nation and tribe and people and language, standing in front of the throne and
before the Lamb. They were clothed in white and held palm branches in their hands.'
(Rev. 7:9). So Matthew speaks: 'And I say unto you, that many shall come from the
east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of
heaven' (Matt. 8:11). So Paul: 'But you have come unto mount Zion, and unto the city
of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to
the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect' (Heb. 12:22).
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider, That
it will be only a short time, before these poor despised saints shall shine brighter than
the sun in his glory. It will not be long before you will wish, Oh! that we were now
among the poor, mean despised ones, in the day that God comes to make up his jewels!
It will not be long before these poor few saints shall be lifted up upon their thrones to
judge the multitude, the world, as the apostle speaks: 'Don't you know, that the saints
shall judge the world?' (1 Cor. 6:2). And in that day, oh! how will the great and the rich,
the learned and the noble, wish that they had lived and spent their days with these few
poor contemptible creatures in the service of the Lord! Oh! how will this wicked world
curse the day that ever they had such base thoughts of the poor despised saints, and
that their poverty became a stumbling-block to keep them off from the ways of sanctity.
John Foxe being once asked whether he knew a certain poor man answered, I
remember him well. I tell you I forget lords and ladies to remember such. So will God
deal by his poor saints. He will forget the great and mighty ones of the world to
remember his few poor despised ones. Though John the Baptist was poor in the world,
yet the Holy Spirit calls him the greatest that was born of woman. Ah, poor saints, men
that know not your worth, have such low thoughts of you. "My thoughts are completely
different from yours," says the Lord. "And my ways are far beyond anything you could
imagine. For just as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than
your ways and my thoughts higher than your thoughts." Isaiah 55:8-9
I have read of Ingo, an ancient king of the Draves, who, making a stately feast,
appointed his nobles, at that time pagans, to sit in the hall below, and commanded
certain poor Christians to be brought up into his presence-chamber, to sit with him at
his table, to eat and drink of his kingly cheer; at which many wondering, he said, 'He
79

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
accounted Christians, though ever so poor, a greater ornament to his table, and more
worthy of his company, than the greatest unconverted nobles; for when these might be
thrust down to hell, those might be his consorts and fellow-princes in heaven.' You know
how to apply it.
Although you see the stars sometimes by their reflections in a puddle, or in the bottom
of a well, yes, in a stinking ditch; yet the stars have their situation in heaven. So,
though you see a godly man in a poor, miserable, low, despised condition for the things
of this world, yet he is fixed in heaven, in the region of heaven: 'Who has raised us up,'
says the apostle, 'and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.' Oh!
therefore, say to your own souls, when they begin to decline in the ways of Zion,
because of the poverty and fewness of those who walk in them, The day is at hand
when those few, poor, despised saints shall shine in glory, when they shall judge this
world, and when all the wicked of this world will wish that they were in their condition,
and would give ten thousand worlds, were it in their power, that they might but have
the honor and happiness to wait upon those whom, for their poverty and fewness, they
have neglected and despised in this world.
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That there will come a time, even in this life, in this world—when the reproach and
contempt that is now cast upon the ways of God, by reason of the poverty and fewness
of those who walk in those ways, shall be quite taken away, by his making them the
head—who have days without number been the tail; and by his raising them up to much
outward riches, prosperity, and glory—who have been as the outcast because of their
poverty and fewness. John, speaking of the glory of the church, the new Jerusalem that
came down from heaven (Rev. 21:24), tells us, 'The nations of the earth will walk in its
light, and the rulers of the world will come and bring their glory to it.' So the prophet
Isaiah: 'I will exchange your bronze for gold, your iron for silver, your wood for bronze,
and your stones for iron.' (chap. 60:17). And so the prophet Zechariah speaks (chap.
14:14): 'And the wealth of all the heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold,
and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.' The Lord has promised that 'the meek
shall inherit the earth' (Matt. 5:5); and 'heaven and earth shall pass away, before one
jot or one tittle of his word shall pass unfulfilled' (ver. 18). Ah, poor saints! now some
thrust sore at you, others look a-squint upon you, others shut the door against you,
others turn their backs upon you, and most of men (except it be a few who live much in
God, and are filled with the riches of Christ) do either neglect you or despise you
because of your poverty; but the day is coming when you shall be lifted up above the
ash-heap, when you shall change poverty for riches, your rags for robes, your reproach
for a crown of honor, your infamy for glory, even in this world.
These following scriptures do abundantly confirm this truth: Jer. 31:12; Is. 30:23; 62:8,
9; Joel 2:23, 24; Micah 4:6; Amos 9:13, 14; Zech 8:12; Isa. 41:18, 19; 55:13; 66:6,
7; 65:21, 22; 61:4; 60:10 Ezek. 36:10. Only take these two cautions: 1. That in these
times the saints' chief comforts, delights, and contents with consist in their more clear,
full, and constant enjoyment of God. 2. That they shall have such abundant measure of
the Spirit poured out upon them, that their riches and outward glory shall not be snares
unto them—but golden steps to a richer living in God.
And this is not all—but God will also mightily increase the number of his chosen ones,
multitudes shall be converted to him: 'Who has ever seen or heard of anything as
80

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
strange as this? Has a nation ever been born in a single day? Has a country ever come
forth in a mere moment? But by the time Jerusalems' birth pains begin, the baby will be
born; the nation will come forth. They will bring the remnant of your people back from
every nation. They will bring them to my holy mountain in Jerusalem as an offering to
the Lord. They will ride on horses, in chariots and wagons, and on mules and camels'
(Isa. 66:8, 20). Does not the Scripture say, that 'the kingdoms of this world must
become the kingdoms of our Lord'? (Rev. 11:15). Has not God given to Christ 'the
heathen, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession'? (Psalm 2:8). Has not
the Lord said, that in 'the last days the mountain of the Lord's house shall be lifted up
above the hills, and shall be established in the top of the mountains, and all nations
shall flow unto it,' (Isa. 2:2 and 54:14 and 61:9).
Pray, read, and meditate upon Isaiah 60 and 66 and 2:1-5, and there you shall find the
multitudes that shall be converted to Christ. And oh! that you would be mighty in
believing and in wrestling with God, that he would hasten the day of his glory, that the
reproach that is now upon his people and ways may cease.
DEVICE 6: By presenting before them the examples of the greatest part of the world—
who walk in the ways of their own hearts, and that make light and slight of the ways of
the Lord.
Why, says Satan, do not you see that the great and the rich, the noble and the
honorable, the learned and the wise, even the greatest number of men, never trouble
themselves about such and such ways—and why then should you be singular and odd?
You had better do as the most do. (John 7:48, 49; 1 Cor. 1:26, 28; Micah 7:2-4.)
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, Of
those scriptures which are directly opposed to following the sinful examples of men. As
that in Exodus, 'You shall not follow a multitude to do evil' (chap. 23:2). The multitude
generally are ignorant, and know not the way of the Lord, therefore they speak evil of
that they know not. They are envious and maliciously bent against the service and way
of God, and therefore they cannot speak well of the ways of God: 'This way is
everywhere spoken against,' say they (Acts 28:22). So in Num. 16:21, 'Separate from
them, and come out from among them.' So the apostle: 'Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness' (Eph. 5:11). So Solomon: 'Enter not into the way of the
wicked; forsake the foolish, and live' (Prov. 4:14 and 9:6). Those who walk with the
many—shall perish with the many. Those who do as the most, shall before long suffer
with the most. Those who live as the many, must die with the many, and go to hell with
the many. The way to hell is broad and well beaten. The way to be undone forever is to
do as the most do. 'The multitude' is the weakest and worst argument. "Enter through
the narrow gate. For wide is the gate and broad is the road that leads to destruction,
and many enter through it. But small is the gate and narrow the road that leads to life,
and only a few find it." Matthew 7:13-14
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That if you will sin with the multitude, all the angels in heaven and men on earth cannot
keep you from suffering with the multitude. If you will be wicked with them, you must
unavoidably be miserable with them. Say to your soul, O my soul! if you will sin with the
multitude, you must be shut out of heaven with the multitude, you must be cast down
to hell with the multitude: 'And I heard a voice from heaven saying, Come out of her,
81

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, and that you receive not of her
plagues' (Rev. 18:4). Come out in affection, in action, and in habitation, or else the
infection of sin will bring upon you the infliction of punishment. So says the wise man,
'He who walks with wise men shall be wise—but a companion of fools shall be
destroyed,' (Prov. 13:20). Multitudes may help you into sin, yes, one may draw you into
sin—but it is not multitudes who can help you to escape punishments; as you may see
in Moses and Aaron, that were provoked to sin by the multitude—but were shut out of
the pleasant land, and fell by a hand of justice as well as others.
Sin and punishment are linked together with chains of adamant. Of sin we may say, as
Isidore does of the serpent, 'So many colors, so many dolours.'
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, The
worth and excellency of your immortal soul. Your soul is a jewel more worth than
heaven and earth. The loss of your soul is incomparable, irreparable, and irrecoverable.
If your soul is lost—all is lost, and you are undone forever. Is it madness and folly in a
man to kill himself for company, and is it not greater madness or folly to break the neck
of your soul, and to damn it for company? Be suspect of that way wherein you see
multitudes to walk; the multitude being a stream that you must row hard against, or
you will be carried into that gulf out of which angels cannot deliver you. Is it not better
to walk in a straight way alone, than to wander into crooked ways with company?
Surely, it is better to go to heaven alone—than to hell with company!
I might add other things—but these may suffice for the present; and I am afraid, if
these arguments do not stir you, other arguments will work but little upon you. What
wise man would fetch gold out of a fiery crucible; that is, hazard his immortal soul, to
gain the world, by following a multitude in those steps that led to the chambers of death
and darkness?
DEVICE 7: By casting in a multitude of vain thoughts, while the soul is in seeking of
God, or in waiting on God; and by this device he has cooled some men's spirits in
heavenly services, and taken off, at least for a time, many precious souls from religious
performances.
"I have no heart to hear, nor no heart to pray, nor no delight in reading, nor in the
society of the saints. Satan does so dog and follow my soul, and is still a-casting in such
a multitude of vain thoughts concerning God, the world, and my own soul, that I even
tremble to think of waiting upon God in any religious service. Oh! the vain thoughts that
Satan casts in, do so distaste my soul, and so grieve, vex, perplex, and distract my
soul, that they even make me weary of holy duties, yes, of my very life. Oh! I cannot be
so raised and ravished, so heated and melted, so quickened and enlarged, so comforted
and refreshed—as I should be, as I might be, and as I would be in religious services—by
reason of that multitude of vain thoughts, which Satan is injecting or casting into my
soul. Lord, now how gladly would I serve you, and vain thoughts will not allow me!"
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, To have your hearts
strongly affected with the greatness, holiness, majesty, and glory of that God before
whom you stand, and with whom your souls converse in religious services. Oh! let your
souls be greatly affected with the presence, purity, and majesty of that God before
whom you stand. A man would be afraid of playing with a feather, when he is speaking
82
