PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 7 of 10
The Book of the Luminaries — Chapters 72 through 82

---

This section containeth the astronomical teachings revealed to Enoch by the angel Uriel — the laws governing the sun, moon, stars, and winds. Here the ancient author declareth that all creation obeyeth the ordinances of God with perfect order.

CHAPTER 72

Verse 1. The book of the courses of the luminaries of the heaven, the relations of each, according to their classes, their dominion and their seasons, according to their names and places of origin, and according to their months, which Uriel, the holy angel who was with me and who is their guide, showed me.
Verse 2. And he showed me all their laws exactly as they are, and how it is with regard to all the years of the world, and unto eternity, till the new creation is accomplished which dureth till eternity.
Verse 3. And this is the first law of the luminaries: the luminary the sun hath its rising in the eastern portals of the heaven, and its setting in the western portals of the heaven.
Verse 4. And I saw six portals in which the sun riseth, and six portals in which the sun setteth, and the moon riseth and setteth in these portals, and the leaders of the stars and those whom they lead.
Verse 5. Six portals on the east and six on the west, and all following each other in accurately corresponding order; also many windows to the right and left of these portals.
Verse 6. And first there goeth forth the great luminary, named the sun, and his circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and he is quite filled with illuminating and heating fire.
Verse 7. His chariot, in which he ascendeth, the wind driveth, and the sun goeth down from the heaven and returneth through the north in order to reach the east, and is so guided that he cometh to the appropriate portal and shineth in the face of the heaven.
Verse 8. In this way he riseth in the first month in the great portal, and he goeth forth through the fourth of those six portals which are in the east.
Verse 9. And in that fourth portal from which the sun riseth in the first month are twelve window-openings, from which proceed a flame when they are opened in their season.

CHAPTER 73

Verse 1. And after this law I saw another law dealing with the smaller luminary, which is named the moon.
Verse 2. And her circumference is like the circumference of the heaven, and her chariot in which she rideth is driven by the wind, and light is given to her in definite measure.
Verse 3. And her rising and setting change every month, and her days are like the days of the sun, and when her light is uniformly full it amounts to the seventh part of the light of the sun.
Verse 4. And thus she riseth. And her first phase in the east cometh forth on the thirtieth morning, and on that day she becometh visible, and constituteth for you the first phase of the moon on the thirtieth day, together with the sun in the portal where the sun riseth.
Verse 5. And the one half of her goeth forth by a seventh part, and her whole circumference is empty, without light, with the exception of one seventh part of it, and the fourteenth part of her light.
Verse 6. And when she receiveth one seventh part of the half of her light, her light amounts to one seventh part and the half thereof.

CHAPTER 74

Verse 1. And I saw another course, a law for her, and how according to that law she performeth her monthly revolution.
Verse 2. And all these the holy angel Uriel showed me, and I observed. And he wrote them down for me, and also wrote down their positions for me, and their times, and he wrote down for me their months.

CHAPTER 75

Verse 1. And the leaders of the heads of the thousands, who are placed over the whole creation and over all the stars, have also to do with the four intercalary days, being inseparable from their office, according to the reckoning of the year.
Verse 2. And these render service on the four days which are not reckoned in the reckoning of the year.
Verse 3. And owing to them men go wrong therein, for those luminaries truly render service on the world-stations, one in the first portal, one in the third portal of the heaven, one in the fourth portal, and one in the sixth portal.
Verse 4. And the exactness of the year is accomplished through its separate three hundred and sixty-four stations.

CHAPTER 76

Verse 1. And the names of the twelve winds: the first from the east is called the eastern; the second is the north wind, and it is called Orphanee; the third after these two winds is the south wind, and it is called Notioa.
Verse 2. And the first wind is the east wind, and it cometh from the first quarter; and the second is the north wind, and the third is the south wind.
Verse 3. And the twelve portals of the four quarters of the heaven are divided, and all their directions I showed thee in tablets.

CHAPTER 77

Verse 1. The first quarter is called the east, because it is the first; and the second, the south, because the Most High will descend there.
Verse 2. The west is called the diminished, because there all the luminaries of the heaven wane and go down.
Verse 3. And the fourth quarter, named the north, is divided into three parts: the first of them is for the dwelling of men; and the second containeth seas of water and the abysses and forests and rivers and darkness and clouds; and the third part containeth the garden of righteousness.

CHAPTER 78

Verse 1. I saw the names of the sun and moon: the name of the sun is Oryares, and the name of the moon is Asonya.
Verse 2. And I saw their paths and the paths of all the stars, and how the stars lead the smaller luminary and the smaller leadeth the greater on its appointed course.
Verse 3. And when the moon riseth, one fourteenth part appeareth in the heaven, and on the fourteenth day she accomplisheth her light, and on the fifteenth the light is accomplished in the heaven.
Verse 4. And she waneth on the first day to fourteen parts of her light, on the second to thirteen parts, on the third to twelve, on the fourth to eleven, on the fifth to ten, on the sixth to nine, on the seventh to eight, on the eighth to seven, on the ninth to six, on the tenth to five, on the eleventh to four, on the twelfth to three, on the thirteenth to two, on the fourteenth to half of a seventh, and all her remaining light disappeareth wholly on the fifteenth.

CHAPTER 79

Verse 1. And now, my son Methuselah, I have shown thee everything, and the law of all the stars of the heaven is completed.
Verse 2. And he showed me all the laws of these for every day, and for every season of bearing rule, and for every year, and for its going forth, and for the order prescribed to it every month and every week.
Verse 3. And the waning of the moon, which taketh place in the sixth portal, in the sixth portal also her light is accomplished, and after that there is the beginning of the waning.

CHAPTER 80

Verse 1. And in the days of the sinners the years shall be shortened, and their seed shall be tardy on their lands and fields.
Verse 2. And all things on the earth shall alter, and shall not appear in their time. The rain shall be kept back, and the heaven shall withhold it.
Verse 3. And in those times the fruits of the earth shall be backward, and shall not grow in their time, and the fruits of the trees shall be withheld in their time.
Verse 4. And the moon shall alter her order, and not appear at her appointed time.
Verse 5. And in those days the sun shall be seen, and he shall journey in the evening in the extremity of the great chariot in the west, and shall shine more brightly than accords with the order of light.
Verse 6. And many chiefs of the stars shall transgress the order prescribed. And these shall alter their orbits and tasks, and not appear at the seasons prescribed to them.
Verse 7. And the whole order of the stars shall be concealed from the sinners, and the thoughts of those on the earth shall err concerning them, and they shall be altered from all their ways.

CHAPTER 81

Verse 1. And he said unto me: Observe, Enoch, these heavenly tablets, and read what is written thereon, and mark every individual fact.
Verse 2. And I observed the heavenly tablets, and read everything which was written thereon, and understood everything, and read the book of all the deeds of mankind, and of all the children of flesh that shall be upon the earth, to the remotest generations.
Verse 3. And forthwith I blessed the great Lord, the King of glory for ever, in that He hath made all the works of the world, and I extolled the Lord because of His patience, and blessed Him because of the children of men.

CHAPTER 82

Verse 1. And now, my son Methuselah, all these things I am recounting to thee and writing down for thee. And I have revealed to thee everything, and given thee books concerning all these.
Verse 2. So preserve, my son Methuselah, the books from thy father's hand, and see that thou deliver them to the generations of the world.
Verse 3. I have given wisdom to thee and to thy children, and thy children that shall be to thee, that they may give it to their children for generations: this wisdom, namely, that passeth their thought.
Verse 4. And those who understand it shall not sleep, but shall listen with the ear that they may learn this wisdom, and it shall please those that eat thereof better than good food.
Verse 5. Blessed are all the righteous, blessed are all those who walk in the way of righteousness and sin not as the sinners, in the reckoning of all their days in which the sun traverseth the heaven.

Thus endeth the Book of the Luminaries. In Part 8, we turn to the Dream Visions, wherein Enoch beholdeth the history of the world revealed in symbols of animals and shepherds.