PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 14
The Glory of Christ in the Constitution of His Person

---

The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 3. The Glory of Christ in the Constitution of His Person.

obscure representation of the glory of God in Christ. How much more should we prize that view of it which we may have with open
face, though yet “as in a glass!” 2 Cor. 3: 18.
Moses, when he had seen the works of God, which were great and marvellous, yet found not himself satisfied therewith; wherefore,
after all, he prays that God “would show him his glory”, Exod. 33: 18. He knew that the ultimate rest, blessedness, and satisfaction of
the soul, is not in seeing the works of God, but the glory of God himself. Therefore did he desire some immediate dawnings of it upon
him in this world: “I beseech thee, show me thy glory.” And if we have right apprehensions of the future state of blessedness, we
cannot but have the same desire of seeing more of his glory in this life. But the question is, How we may attain it? If we are left unto
ourselves in this inquiry, if we have no other way for it but the immediate rising of our thoughts on the immensity of the divine
nature, we must come every one to the conclusion that Augur makes on the like consideration, “Surely I am more brutish than any
man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. Who has ascended up
into heaven, or descended? who has gathered the wind in his fists? who has bound the waters in a garment? who has established all
the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son’s name, if thou canst tell?” Prov. 30: 2-4.
It is in Christ alone that we may have a clear, distinct view of the glory of God and his excellencies. For him, and him alone, has he
appointed the representative of himself unto us; and we shall take an account hereof in one or two especial instances. See John 1: 18,
14: 7-10; 2 Cor. 4: 6; Col. 1: 15; Eph. 3: 4-10; Heb. 1: 3.
1 . Infinite wisdom is one of the most glorious properties of the divine nature; it is that which is directive of all the external works of
God, wherein the glory of all the other excellencies of God is manifested: wherefore the manifestation of the whole glory of God
proceeds originally from infinite wisdom. But, as Job speaks, “Where shall [this] wisdom be found; and what is the place of
understanding? chap. 28: 12. “Can we by searching find out God? can we find out the Almighty unto perfection?” chap. 11: 7. As it is
in itself an essential, eternal property of the divine nature, we can have no comprehension of it, – we can but adore it in that infinite
distance wherein we stand from God; but in its operations and effects it may be discerned, for they are designed of God for its
manifestation. Among these, the most excellent is the contrivance of the great work of the salvation of the church. So it is celebrated
by the apostle, Eph 3: 9, 10, “To make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world has
been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ: to the intent that now, unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places,
might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God.”
If we have any interest in God, if we have any hopes of blessedness in beholding of his glory unto eternity, we cannot but desire a view
(such as is attainable) of this infinite, manifold wisdom of God in this life. But it is in Christ alone that we can discern anything of it;
for him has the Father chosen and sealed to represent it unto us. All the treasures of this wisdom are hid, laid up, and laid out in him;
– herein lies the essence and form of faith. Believers by it do see the wisdom of God in Christ, in his person and office, – Christ the
wisdom of God. Unbelievers see it not, as the apostle argues, 1 Cor. 1: 22-24.
In beholding the glory of this infinite wisdom of God in Christ, we behold his own glory also, – the glory given him of his Father; for
this is his glory, that in and by him, and him alone, the wisdom of God is manifested and represented unto us. When God appointed
him as the great and only means of this end, he gave him honour and glory above the whole creation; for it is but little of divine
wisdom which the works of it declare, in comparison of what is manifested in Christ Jesus. We no way deny or extenuate the
manifestation that is made of the wisdom of God in the works of creation and providence. It is sufficient to detect the folly of atheism
and idolatry; and was designed of God unto that end. But its comparative insufficiency with respect unto the representation of it in
Christ as to the ends of knowing God aright and living unto him – the Scripture does abundantly attest. And the abuse of it was
catholic [i. e., universal], as the apostle declares, Rom. 1: 20, &c. To see this wisdom clearly is our wisdom; and a due apprehension of
it fills the souls of believers “with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.”
2. We may also instance in the love of God. The apostle tells us that “God is love,” 1 John 4: 8. Divine love is not to be considered only
in its effects, but in its nature and essence; and be it is God himself, for “God is love.” And a blessed revelation this is of the divine
nature; it casts out envy, hatred, malice, revenge, with all their fruits, in rage, fierceness, implacability, persecution, murder, into the
territories of Satan. They belong not unto God in his nature or acting; for “God is love.” So the same apostle tells us, that he who “slew
his brother was of the wicked one,” 1 John 3: 12. He was of the devil, his father, and his works did he do.
But the inquiry is as before, – How shall we have a view of this love, of God as love? by what way or means shall we behold the glory
of it? It is hidden from all living, in God himself. The wise philosophers, who discoursed so much of the love of God, knew nothing of
this, that “God is love.” The most of the natural notions of men about it are corrupt, and the best of them weak and imperfect.
Generally, the thoughts of men about it are, that he is of a facile and easy nature, one that they may make bold withal in all their
occasions; as the Psalmist declares, Ps. 50: 21. And whereas it must be learned in its effects, operations, and divine ways of its
manifestation, those who know not Christ know nothing of them. And many things in providence do interpose to hinder our views of
this love; – for although, indeed, “God is love,” yet “his wrath is revealed from heaven against the ungodliness of men;” as all things at
this day are filled with evidences of his anger and displeasure. How, then, shall we know, wherein shall we behold, the glory of God in
this, that he is love? The apostle declares it in the next words, 1 John 4: 9, “In this was manifested the love of God towards us, because
that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him.” This is the only evidence given us that “God is
love.” Hereby alone is the divine nature as such made known unto us, – namely, in the mission, person, and office of the Son of God;
without this, all is in darkness as unto the true nature and supreme operation of this divine love.
Herein do we behold the glory of Christ himself, even in this life. This glory was given him of the Father, – namely, that he now
should declare and evidence that “God is love; “ and he did so, “that in all things he might have the pre-eminence.” Herein we may see
how excellent, how beautiful, how glorious and desirable he is, seeing in him alone we have a due representation of God as he is love;
which is the most joyful sight of God that any creature can obtain. He who beholds not the glory of Christ herein is utterly ignorant of
those heavenly mysteries; – he knoweth neither God nor Christ, – he has neither the Father nor the Son. He knows not God, because
he knows not the holy properties of his nature in the principal way designed by infinite wisdom for their manifestation; he knows not
Christ, because he sees not the glory of God in him. Wherefore, whatever notions men may have from the light of nature, or from the
works of Providence, that there is love in God, – however they may adorn them in elegant, affecting expressions, – yet from them no
man can know that “God is love.” In the revelation hereof Christ has the pre-eminence; nor can any man comprehend anything of it
aright but in him. It is that which the whole light of the creation cannot discover; for it is the spring and centre of the mystery of

aright but in him. It is that which the whole light of the creation cannot discover; for it is the spring and centre of the mystery of
godliness.
These things are of the deep things of God, such as belong unto that wisdom of God in a mystery which they that are carnal cannot
receive, as the apostle testifies, 1 Cor. 2: 14. But the meanest believer who lives in the exercise of faith, may have an understanding of
them so far as is needful unto his love and obedience. The sum of the whole is this: If you would behold the glory of Christ as the great
means of your sanctification and consolation, as the only preparation for the beholding of his glory in eternal blessedness, consider
what of God is made known and represented unto you in him, wherein God purposed and designed to glorify himself in him. Now,
this is all that may be known of God in a saving manner, especially his wisdom, his love, his goodness, grace, and mercy, whereon the
life of our souls does depend; – and the Lord Christ being appointed the only way and means hereof, how exceeding glorious must he
be in the eyes of them that do believe! These things being premised, I shall close this first consideration of that glory of Christ which
we behold by faith in this world, with some such observations as may excite us unto the practice of this great duty, and improvement
of this great privilege, – the greatest which on this side heaven we can be made partakers of.
There are some who regard not these things at all, but rather despise them. They never entertain any serious thoughts of obtaining a
view of the glory of God in Christ, – which is to be unbelievers. They look on him as a teacher that came forth from God to reveal his
will, and to teach us his worship; and so indeed he was. But this they say was the sole use of his person in religion, – which is
Mohammedanism. The manifestation of all the holy properties of the divine nature, with the representation of them unto angels
above and the church in this world, as he is the image of the invisible God, in the constitution of his person and the discharge of his
office, are things they regard not; yea, they despise and scorn what is professed concerning them: for pride and contempt of others
were always the safest covert of ignorance; otherwise it would seem strange that men should openly boast of their own blindness. But
these conceptions of men’s minds are influenced by that unbelief of his divine person which maketh havoc of Christianity at this day
in the world.
I speak of them whose minds are better disposed towards heavenly things; and unto them I say, Wherefore do you love Jesus Christ?
for so you profess to do. Wherefore do you trust in him? wherefore do you honour him? wherefore do you desire to be in heaven with
him? Can you give a reason of this hope that is in you, – an account why you do all or any of these things? If you cannot, all that you
pretend towards him is but fancy and imagination; you fight uncertainly, as men beating the air. Or is one of your reasons hereof,
that in him you do by faith behold that glory of God, with the holy properties of his nature, and their principal operations, in order
unto your own salvation and blessedness, which otherwise would have been eternally hid from you? Herein is he “precious unto them
that do believe.”
Let us, therefore, as many as are spiritual, be thus minded. Let us make use of this privilege with rejoicing, and be found in the
discharge of this duty with diligence. For thus to behold the glory of God is both our privilege and our duty. The duties of the Law
were a burden and a yoke; but those of the gospel are privileges and advantages.
It is a promise concerning the days of the New Testament, that our “eyes shall see the King in his beauty,” Isa. 33: 17! We shall behold
the glory of Christ in its lustre and excellency. What is this beauty of the King of saints? Is it not that God is in him, and he is the great
representative of his glory unto us? Wherefore, in the contemplation of this glory consists the principal exercise of faith. And who can
declare the glory of this privilege, that we who are born in darkness, and deserved to be cast out into utter darkness, should be
translated into this marvellous “light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ?” What are all the stained
glories, the fading beauties of this world? of all that the devil showed our Saviour from the mount? what are they in comparison of
one view of the glory of God represented in Christ, and of the glory of Christ as his great representative? The most pernicious effect of
unbelief under the preaching of the gospel is, that, together with an influence of power from Satan, “it blinds the eyes of men’s minds,
that they should not see this glory of Christ;” whereon they perish eternally, 2 Cor. 4: 3, 4.
But the most of those who at this day are called Christians are strangers unto this duty. Our Lord Jesus Christ told the Pharisees, that
notwithstanding all their boasting of the knowledge of God, they had not “heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape;” that is, as
Moses did. They had no real acquaintance with him, – they had no spiritual view of his glory. And so it is amongst ourselves;
notwithstanding the general profession that is of the knowledge of Christ, they are but few who thus behold his glory; and therefore
few who are transformed into his image and likeness.
Some men speak much of the imitation of Christ, and following of his example; and it were well if we could see more of it really in
effect. But no man shall ever become “like unto him” by bare imitation of his actions, without that view or intuition of his glory which
alone is accompanied with a transforming power to change them into the same image.
The truth is, the best of us all are woefully defective in this duty, and many are discouraged from it because a pretence of it in some
has degenerated into superstition; but we are loath at any time seriously to engage in it, and come with an unwilling kind of
willingness unto the exercise of our minds in it.
Thoughts of this glory of Christ are too high for us, or too hard for us, such as we cannot long delight in; we turn away from them
with a kind of weariness: yet are they of the same nature in general with our beholding of the glory of Christ in heaven, wherein there
shall be no weariness, or satiety, unto eternity. Is not the cause of it, that we are unspiritual or carnal, having our thoughts and
affections wonted to give entertainment unto other things? For this is the principal cause of our unreadiness and incapacity to exercise
our minds in and about the great mysteries of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 3: 1-3. And it is so with us, moreover, because we do not stir up
ourselves with watchfulness and diligence in continual acting of faith on this blessed object. This is that which keeps many of us at so
low an ebb, as unto the powers of a heavenly life and spiritual joys.
Did we abound in this duty, in this exercise of faith, our life in walking before God would be more sweet and pleasant unto us, – our
spiritual light and strength would have a daily increase, – we should more represent the glory of Christ in our ways and walking than
usually we do, and death itself would be most welcome unto us.
The angels themselves desire to look into the things of the glory of Christ, 1 Peter 1: 12. There is in them matter of inquiry and
instruction for the most high and holy spirits in heaven. The manifold wisdom of God in them is made known unto “principalities and
powers in heavenly places by the church,” Eph 3: 10. And shall we neglect that which is the object of angelical diligence to inquire

into; especially considering that we are more than they concerned in it? Is Christ, then, thus glorious in our eyes? Do we see the
Father in him, or by seeing of him? Do we sedulously daily contemplate on the wisdom, love, grace, goodness, holiness, and
righteousness of God, as revealing and manifesting themselves in him? Do we sufficiently consider that the immediate vision of this
glory in heaven will be our everlasting blessedness? Does the imperfect view which we have of it here increase our desires after the
perfect sight of it above? With respect unto these inquiries I shall briefly speak unto sundry sorts of men.
Some will say they understand not these things, nor any concernment of their own in them. If they are true, yet are they notions
which they may safely be without the knowledge of; for, so far as they can discern, they have no influence of Christian practice, or
duties of morality; and the preaching of them does but take off the minds of men from more necessary duties. But “if the gospel be
hid, it is hid unto them that perish”. And unto the objection I say, – 1. Nothing is more fully and clearly revealed in the gospel, than
that unto us Jesus Christ is “the image of the invisible God;” that he is the character of the person of the Father, so as that in seeing
him we see the Father also; that we have “the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in his face alone,” as has been proved. This is
the principal fundamental mystery and truth of the Gospel; and which if it be not received, believed, owned, all other truths are
useless unto our souls. To refer all the testimonies that are given hereunto to the doctrine which he taught, in contradistinction unto
his person as acting in the discharge of his office, is anti-evangelical, antichristian, – turning the whole Gospel into a fable.
2. It is so, that the light of faith is given unto us principally to enable us to behold the glory of God in Christ, – to contemplate on it, as
unto all the ends of its manifestation. So is it expressly affirmed, 2 Cor. 4: 6. If we have not this light, as it is communicated by the
power of God unto them that do believe, Eph 1: 17-19, we must be strangers unto the whole mystery of the gospel, 2 Cor. 4: 3, 4.
3. That in the beholding of the glory of God in Christ, we behold his glory also. For herein is he infinitely glorious above the whole
creation, in that in and by him alone the glory of the invisible God is represented unto us. Herein do our souls live. This is that
whereby the image of God is renewed in us, and we are made like unto the first-born.
4 . This is so far from being unnecessary unto Christian practice, and the sanctified duties of morality, that he knows not Christ, he
knows not the Gospel, he knows not the faith of the catholic church, who imagines that they can be performed acceptably without it.
Y ea, this is the root whence all other Christian duties do spring, and whereon their grow, whereby they are distinguished from the
works of heathens. He is no Christian who believes not that faith in the person of Christ is the spring of all evangelical obedience; or
who knows not that faith respects the revelation of the glory of God in him.
If these things are so, as they are the most important truths of the Gospel, and whose denial overthrows the foundation of faith, and is
ruinous to Christian religion, certainly it is our duty to live in the constant exercise of faith with respect unto this glory of Christ. And
we have sufficient experience of what kind of morality the ignorance of it has produced.
Others there are who may be some way strangers, but are no way enemies, unto this mystery, and to the practical exercise of faith
therein. To such I shall tender the ensuing directions: – 1. Reckon in your minds, that this beholding of the glory of Christ by
beholding the glory of God, and all his holy properties in him, is the greatest privilege whereof in this life we can be made partakers.
The dawning of heaven is in it, and the first-fruits of glory; for this is life eternal, to know the Father, and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, John 17: 3. Unless you value it, unless you esteem it as such a privilege, you will not enjoy it; and that which is not valued
according unto its worth is despised. It is not enough to think it a privilege, an advantage; but it is to be valued above other things,
according unto its greatness and excellency. “Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with our ears,” Job 28: 22.
And if we do no more, we shall die strangers unto it; we are to “cry after this knowledge, and lift up our voice for this understanding,”
if we design to attain it.
2. As it i6 a great privilege, which requires a due valuation; so it is a great mystery, which requires much spiritual wisdom to the right
understanding of it, and to direct in its practice, 1 Cor. 2: 4, 5. Flesh and blood will not reveal it unto us, but we must be taught of God
to apprehend it, John 1: 12, 13; Matt. 16: 16,17. Mere unsanctified reason will never enable us unto, nor guide us in, the discovery of
this duty. Men are not so vain as to hope for skill and understanding in the mystery of a secular art or trade, without the diligent use
of those means whereby it may be attained; and shall we suppose that we may be furnished with spiritual skill and wisdom in this
sacred mystery, without diligence in the use of the means appointed of God for the attaining of it? The principal of them is fervent
prayer. Pray, then, with Moses, that God would show you this his glory; pray with the apostle, that “the eyes of your understanding
may be enlightened to behold it;” pray that the “God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of
wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him.” Fill your minds with spiritual thoughts and contrivances about them. Slothful and
lazy souls never obtain one view of this glory; the “lion in the way” deters them from attempting it. Being carnal, they abhor all
diligence in the use of spiritual means, such as prayer and meditation on things unto them uneasy, unpleasing, and difficult. Unto
others the way partakes of the nature of the end; the means of obtaining a view of the glory of Christ are of the same kind, of the
same pleasantness, with that view itself in their proportion.
3. Learn the use hereof from the acting of contrary vicious habits. When the minds of men are vehemently fixed on the pursuit of
their lusts, they will be continually ruminating on the objects of them, and have a thousand contrivances about them, until their “eyes
become full of adulteries, and they cannot cease from sinning,” as the apostle speaks. The objects of their lusts have framed and raised
an image of themselves in their minds, and transformed them into their own likeness. Is this the way of them who “go down to the
chambers of death?” Do they thus frame their souls, and make them meet for destruction, until their words, gestures, actions,
proclaim the frame of their minds unto all that look upon them? And shall we be slothful and negligent in the contemplation of that
glory which transforms our minds into its own likeness, so as that the eyes of our understandings shall be continually filled with it,
until we see him and behold him continually, so as never to cease from the holy acts of delight in him end love to him? 4. Would we,
then, behold the glory of God as he manifesteth it in and by the holy properties of his nature, with their blessed operations and effects?
– without which we have nothing of the power of religion in us, whatever we pretend: this alone is the way of it. so to the whole
creation, and all things contained in it; they can say no more, but, “We have heard the fame and report of these things,” and what we
have heard we declare; but it is but a little portion of them that we are acquainted withal. “The heavens,” indeed, “declare the glory of
God, and the firmament showeth his handy-work.” “The invisible things of God are understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead.” But, comparatively, it is but little that we can hence learn of these things, as to that we may behold of
them in Christ Jesus. How blind herein was the best philosopher in comparison of the meanest of the apostles; yea, of him who is least
in the kingdom of heaven! But herein it is required that we rest not in the notion of this truth, and a bare assent unto the doctrine of

in the kingdom of heaven! But herein it is required that we rest not in the notion of this truth, and a bare assent unto the doctrine of
it. The affecting power of it upon our hearts is that which we should aim at. Wherein does the blessedness of the saints above consist?
Is it not herein, that they behold and see the glory of God in Christ? And what is the effect of it upon those blessed souls? Does it not
change them into the same image, or make them like unto Christ? Does it not fill and satiate them with joy, rest, delight,
complacency, and ineffable satisfaction? Do we expect, do we desire, the same state of blessedness? It is our present view of the glory
of Christ which is our initiation thereinto, if we are exercised in it, until we have an experience of its transforming power in our souls.
These things are, it may be, of little use unto some. Such as are babes in spiritual knowledge and understanding, – either because they
are carnal, 1 Cor. 3: 1, 2, or slothful in hearing, Heb. 5: 12-14, – are not capable of these divine mysteries. And therefore the apostle
did, in an especial manner, declare this wisdom of God in a mystery unto them that were perfect, 1 Cor. 2: 6, 7; – that is, who were
more grown in spiritual knowledge, and had their “senses exercised to discern good and evil.” It is unto them who are exercised in the
contemplation of invisible things, who delight to walk in the more retired paths of faith and love, that they are precious.
Some few inferences from the whole of what has been declared shall put a close to this part of our Discourse.
1. The holy properties of the divine nature are not only represented unto our faith in Christ, as to their own essential glory, but as they
are in the exercise of their powers for the salvation of the church. In him do we behold the wisdom, goodness, love, grace, mercy, and
power of God, acting themselves in the contrivance, constitution, and efficacious accomplishment of the great work of our redemption
and salvation. This gives, as unto us, an unutterable lustre unto the native amiableness of the divine excellencies. The wisdom and
love of God are in themselves infinitely glorious, – infinitely amiable; – nothing can be added unto them, – there can be no increase
of their essential glory. Howbeit, as they are eternally resident in the divine nature, and absolutely the same with it, we cannot so
comprehend them as to have an endearing, satiating view of their glory, but as they are exerted in the work of the redemption and
salvation of the church, as they are expressed, communicating their blessed effects unto the souls of them that do believe, – which is
done only in Christ; so the beams of their glory shine unto us with unspeakable refreshment and joy, 2 Cor. 4: 6. Hence the apostle, on
the consideration of the acting of the holy properties of God in this blessed work, falls into that contemplation, “O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgements, and his ways past finding out! For who has
known the mind of the Lord? or who has been his counsellor? or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto him
again? For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen,” Rom. 11: 33-36.
2. In and through Christ we do believe in God, 1 Pet. 1: 21. This is the life of our souls. God himself, in the infinite perfections of his
divine nature, is the ultimate object of our faith. But he is not here the immediate object of it; but the divine way and means of the
manifestation of himself and them unto us, are so. Through Christ we believe in God. By our belief in him we come to place our faith
ultimately in God himself; and this we can no otherwise do but by beholding the glory of God in him, as has been declared.
3. This is the only way whereby we may attain the saving, sanctifying knowledge of God. Without this, every beam of divine light that
shines on us, or gleams from without (as the light shineth into darkness when the darkness comprehendeth it not, John 1: 5), every
spark that ariseth from the remainders of the light of nature within, does rather amaze the minds of men than lead them into the
saving knowledge of God. So a glance of light in a dark night, giving a transient view of various objects, and passing away, does rather
amaze than direct a traveller, and leave him more exposed unto wandering than before. Such were all those notions of the Divine
Being and his excellencies, which those who boasted themselves to be wise among the heathen embraced and improved. They did but
fluctuate in their minds; they did not transform them into the image and likeness of God, as the saving knowledge of him does, Col. 3:
10.
So the apostle expresseth this truth, “Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of this world? has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that, in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: but we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God,” 1 Cor. 1: 20-24.
After it was evident unto all, that the world, the wise, the studious, the contemplative part of it, in the wisdom of God, disposing them
into that condition wherein they were left unto themselves, in their own wisdom, their natural light and reason, did not, could not,
come to the saving knowledge of God, but were puffed up into a contempt of the only way of the revelation of himself as weakness
and folly; – it pleased God then to manifest all their wisdom to be folly, and to establish the only means of the knowledge of himself in
Christ Jesus.

The Glory of Christ in the mysterious Constitution of his Person.
The second thing wherein we may behold the glory of Christ, given him of his Father, is in the mysterious constitution of his Person,
as he is God and man in one and the same person. There are in him, in his one single individual person, two distinct natures; the one,
eternal, infinite, immense, almighty, – the form and silence of God; the other, having a beginning in time, finite, limited, confined
unto a certain peace, – which is our nature, which he took on him when he was “made flesh, and dwelt among us.” The declaration of
the nature of this glory is a part of my discourse of the Person of Christ, whereunto I refer the reader: – my present design is of
another nature.
This is that glory whose beams are so illustrious, as that the blind world cannot bear the light and beauty of them. Multitudes begin
openly to deny this incarnation of the Son of God, – this personal union of God and man in their distinct natures. They deny that
there is either glory or truth in it; and it will ere long appear (it begins already to evidence itself) what greater multitudes there are,
who yet do not, who yet dare not, openly reject the doctrine of it, who in truth believe it not, nor see any glory in it. Howbeit, this glory
is the glory of our religion, – the glory of the church, – the sole Rock whereon it is built, – the only spring of present grace and future

glory.
This is that glory which the angels themselves desire to behold, the mystery whereof they “bow down to look into,” 1 Peter 1: 12. So
was their desire represented by the cherubim in the most holy place of the tabernacle; for they were a shadow of the minister of angels
in the church. The ark and the mercy seat were a type of Christ in the discharge of his office; and these cherubim were made standing
over them, as being in heaven above; but earnestly looking down upon them in a posture of reverence and adoration. So they did of
old; and in their present contemplation of it consists no small part of their eternal blessedness.
Hereon depends the ruin of Satan and his kingdom. His sin, so far as we can conceive, consisted of two parts. 1. His pride against the
person of the Son of God, by whom he was created. “For by him were all things created that are” (or were when first created) “in
heaven, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or power,” Col. 1: 16. against him he lifted up himself; – which was
the beginning of his transgression. 2. Envy against mankind, made in the image of God, of the Son of God the first born. This
completed his sin; nothing was now left whereon to act his pride and malice. Unto his eternal confusion and ruin, God, in infinite
wisdom, unites both the natures he had sinned against in the one person of the Son; who was the first object of his pride and malice.
Hereby his destruction is attended with everlasting shame in the discovery of his folly, wherein he would have contended with infinite
wisdom, as well as misery, by the powers of the two natures united in one person.
Here lies the foundation of the church. The foundation of the whole old creation was laid in an act of absolute sovereign power.
Hereby God “hanged the earth upon nothing.” But the foundation of the church is on this mysterious, immovable rock, “Thou art the
Christ, the Son of the living God;” – on the most intimate conjunction of the two natures, the divine and human, in themselves
infinitely distant, in the same person.
We may name one place wherein it is gloriously represented unto us, Isa. 9: 6, “For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and
the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting
Father, The Prince of Peace.” Here must the whole church fall down and worship the Author of this wonderful contrivance; and,
captivating their understandings unto the obedience of faith, humbly adore what they cannot comprehend.
This was obscurely represented unto the church of old, Exod. 3: 2- 6, “And the Angel of the LORD appeared unto him in a flame of
fire out of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed. And Moses
said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt. And when the Lord saw that he turned aside to see, God
called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here am I. And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put
off thy shoes from off thy feet; for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the
God of Abraham,” &c.
This fire was a type or declaration of the presence of God in the person of the Son. For with respect unto the Father he is called an
Angel, the Angel of the covenant; but absolutely in himself, he was Jehovah, the “God of Abraham,” &c. And of his presence the fire
was a proper representation. For in his nature he is as a “consuming fire;” and his present work was the delivery of the church out of a
fiery trial. This fire placed itself in a bush, where it burned; but the bush was not consumed. And although the continuance of the fire
in the bush was but for a short season, a present appearance, yet thence was God said to dwell in the bush: “The good-will of him that
dwelt in the bush,” Deut. 33: 16. And this is so spoken, because the being of the fire in the bush for a season was a type of him in
whom “the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily,” and that for ever, Col. 2: 9, – of him who was “made flesh, and dwelt among us,”
John 1: 14. The eternal fire of the divine nature dwells in the bush of our frail nature, yet is it not consumed thereby. God thus dwells
in this bush, with all his good-will towards sinners.
Moses looked on this sight as a marvellous and wondrous thing. And if it were so in the type, what is it in the truth, substance, and
reality of it? And by direction given unto him to “put off his shoes,” we are taught to cast away all fleshly imaginations and carnal
affections, that by pure acts of faith we may behold this glory, – the glory of the only begotten of the Father.
I design not here to insist on the explication or confirmation of this glorious truth, concerning the constitution of the person of Christ
in and by his incarnation. What I can comprehend, what I do believe concerning it, I have fully declared in a large peculiar treatise.
Here I take the truth itself as known, or as it may be thence ]earned. My present business is only to stir up the minds of believers unto
a due contemplations of the glory of Christ in the sacred, mysterious constitution of his person, as God and man in one. So much as
we abide herein, so much do “we live by the faith of the Son of God;” – and God can, by a spirit of wisdom and revelation, open the
eyes of our understandings, that we may behold this glory unto our ineffable consolation and joy. And unto the diligent discharge of
our duty herein I shall offer the ensuing directions: – 1. Let us get it fixed on our souls and in our minds, that this glory of Christ in
the divine constitution of his person is the best, the most noble, useful, beneficial object that we can be conversant about in our
thoughts, or cleave unto in our affections.
What are all other things in comparison of the “knowledge of Christ?” In the judgement of the great apostle, they are but “loss and
dung,” Phil. 3: 8-10. So they were to him; and if they are not so to us we are carnal.
What is the world, and what are the things thereof, which most men spend their thoughts about, and fix their affections on? The
Psalmist gives his judgement about them, in comparison of a view of this glory of Christ, Ps. 4: 6, “Many say, Who will show us any
good?” – Who will give and help us to attain so much in and of this world as will give rest and satisfaction unto our minds? That is the
good inquired after. But, saith he, “Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.” The light of the glory of God in the face of
Christ Jesus is that satisfactory good alone which I desire and seek after.
The Scripture reproacheth the vanity and folly of the minds of men, in that “they spend their money for that which is not bread, and
their labour for that which profiteth not.” They engage the vigour of their spirits about perishing things, when they have durable
substance and riches proposed unto them.
How do men for the most part exercise their minds what are they conversant about in their thoughts? Some by them “make
provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof;” as Rom. 13: 14. They search about continually in their thoughts for objects suited
unto their lusts and carnal affections, coining, framing, and stamping of them in their imaginations. They fix their eyes with delight
on toads and serpents, with all noisome, filthy objects, – refusing, in the meantime, to behold the beauty and glory of the light of the