PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 1 of 10
Chapters: Prologue through Chapter 5

---

We begin the Book of Sirach, also called Ecclesiasticus, with the Prologue of the translator, the grandson of Yeshua Ben Sira, followed by the opening chapters on the nature of wisdom, the fear of God, patience through trials, honor toward parents, and the virtue of humility.

THE PROLOGUE OF YESHUA BEN SIRA

Many and great things have been delivered unto us by the law and the prophets, and by others that have followed in their steps, for which things Israel ought to be commended for learning and wisdom. And not only ought the readers themselves to become skillful, but also those that are disposed to learn should be able to profit those who are without, both by speaking and by writing.

My grandfather Yeshua, when he had much given himself to the reading of the law and the prophets and other books of our fathers, and had gotten therein good judgment, was drawn on also himself to write something pertaining to learning and wisdom, so that those who are desirous to learn, and are addicted to these things, might profit much more in living according to the law.

Wherefore let me entreat you to read it with favor and attention, and to pardon us wherein we may seem to come short of some words which we have labored to interpret. For the same things uttered in Hebrew and translated into another tongue have not the same force in them. And not only these things, but the law itself, and the prophets, and the rest of the books, have no small difference when they are spoken in their own language.

For in the eight and thirtieth year, coming into Egypt when Euergetes was king, and continuing there some time, I found a book of no small learning. Therefore I thought it most necessary for me to bestow some diligence and travail to interpret it. Using great watchfulness and skill in that space, I brought the book to an end, and set it forth for them also which in a strange country are willing to learn, being prepared before in manners to live after the law.

CHAPTER 1

Verse 1. All wisdom cometh from the Lord, and is with Him forever.

Verse 2. Who can number the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, and the days of eternity?

Verse 3. Who can find out the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the deep, and wisdom?

Verse 4. Wisdom hath been created before all things, and the understanding of prudence from everlasting.

Verse 5. The word of God Most High is the fountain of wisdom, and her ways are everlasting commandments.

Verse 6. To whom hath the root of wisdom been revealed? Or who hath known her wise counsels?

Verse 7. Unto whom hath the knowledge of wisdom been made manifest? And who hath understood her great experience?

Verse 8. There is one wise and greatly to be feared, the Lord sitting upon His throne.

Verse 9. He created her, and saw her, and numbered her, and poured her out upon all His works.

Verse 10. She is with all flesh according to His gift, and He hath given her to them that love Him.

Verse 11. The fear of the Lord is honor, and glory, and gladness, and a crown of rejoicing.

Verse 12. The fear of the Lord maketh a merry heart, and giveth joy, and gladness, and a long life.

Verse 13. Whoso feareth the Lord, it shall go well with him at the last, and he shall find favor in the day of his death.

Verse 14. To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and it was created with the faithful in the womb.

Verse 15. She hath built an everlasting foundation with men, and she shall be trusted among their seed.

Verse 16. To fear the Lord is the fullness of wisdom, and filleth men with her fruits.

Verse 17. She filleth all their house with things desirable, and their garners with her increase.

Verse 18. The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom, making peace and perfect health to flourish.

Verse 19. Wisdom raineth down skill and knowledge of understanding, and exalteth them to honor that hold her fast.

Verse 20. The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and the branches thereof are long life.

Verse 21. The fear of the Lord driveth away sins, and where it is present, it turneth away wrath.

Verse 22. A furious man cannot be justified, for the sway of his fury shall be his destruction.

Verse 23. A patient man will bear for a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto him.

Verse 24. He will hide his words for a time, and the lips of many shall declare his wisdom.

Verse 25. The parables of knowledge are in the treasures of wisdom, but godliness is an abomination to a sinner.

Verse 26. If thou desire wisdom, keep the commandments, and the Lord shall give her unto thee.

Verse 27. For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and instruction, and faith and meekness are His delight.

Verse 28. Distrust not the fear of the Lord when thou art poor, and come not unto Him with a double heart.

Verse 29. Be not a hypocrite in the sight of men, and take good heed what thou speakest.

Verse 30. Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall and bring dishonor upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets and cast thee down in the midst of the congregation, because thou camest not in truth to the fear of the Lord, but thy heart was full of deceit.

CHAPTER 2

Verse 1. My son, if thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul for temptation.

Verse 2. Set thy heart aright, and constantly endure, and make not haste in time of trouble.

Verse 3. Cleave unto Him, and depart not away, that thou mayest be increased at thy last end.

Verse 4. Whatsoever is brought upon thee, take cheerfully, and be patient when thou art changed to a low estate.

Verse 5. For gold is tried in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of adversity.

Verse 6. Believe in Him, and He will help thee. Order thy way aright, and trust in Him.

Verse 7. Ye that fear the Lord, wait for His mercy, and go not aside, lest ye fall.

Verse 8. Ye that fear the Lord, believe Him, and your reward shall not fail.

Verse 9. Ye that fear the Lord, hope for good, and for everlasting joy and mercy.

Verse 10. Look at the generations of old, and see: did ever any trust in the Lord and was confounded? Or did any abide in His fear and was forsaken? Or whom did He ever despise that called upon Him?

Verse 11. For the Lord is full of compassion and mercy, longsuffering, and very pitiful, and forgiveth sins, and saveth in time of affliction.

Verse 12. Woe be to fearful hearts, and faint hands, and the sinner that goeth two ways.

Verse 13. Woe unto him that is fainthearted, for he believeth not, and therefore shall he not be defended.

Verse 14. Woe unto you that have lost patience, and what will ye do when the Lord shall visit you?

Verse 15. They that fear the Lord will not disobey His word, and they that love Him will keep His ways.

Verse 16. They that fear the Lord will seek that which is well-pleasing unto Him, and they that love Him shall be filled with the law.

Verse 17. They that fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, and humble their souls in His sight.

Verse 18. We will fall into the hands of the Lord, and not into the hands of men; for as His majesty is, so is His mercy.

CHAPTER 3

Verse 1. Hear me your father, O children, and do thereafter, that ye may be safe.

Verse 2. For the Lord hath given the father honor over the children, and hath confirmed the authority of the mother over the sons.

Verse 3. Whoso honoreth his father maketh an atonement for his sins.

Verse 4. And he that honoreth his mother is as one that layeth up treasure.

Verse 5. Whoso honoreth his father shall have joy of his own children, and when he maketh his prayer, he shall be heard.

Verse 6. He that honoreth his father shall have a long life, and he that is obedient unto the Lord shall be a comfort to his mother.

Verse 7. He that feareth the Lord will honor his father, and will serve his parents as his masters.

Verse 8. Honor thy father and mother both in word and deed, that a blessing may come upon thee from them.

Verse 9. For the blessing of the father establisheth the houses of children, but the curse of the mother rooteth out foundations.

Verse 10. Glory not in the dishonor of thy father, for thy father's dishonor is no glory unto thee.

Verse 11. For the glory of a man is from the honor of his father, and a mother in dishonor is a reproach to the children.

Verse 12. My son, help thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he liveth.

Verse 13. And if his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength.

Verse 14. For the relieving of thy father shall not be forgotten, and instead of sins it shall be added to build thee up.

Verse 15. In the day of thine affliction it shall be remembered; thy sins also shall melt away, as the ice in the fair warm weather.

Verse 16. He that forsaketh his father is as a blasphemer, and he that angereth his mother is cursed of God.

Verse 17. My son, go on with thy business in meekness, so shalt thou be beloved of him that is approved.

Verse 18. The greater thou art, the more humble thyself, and thou shalt find favor before the Lord.

Verse 19. Many are in high place and of renown, but mysteries are revealed unto the meek.

Verse 20. For the power of the Lord is great, and He is honored of the lowly.

Verse 21. Seek not out the things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength.

Verse 22. But what is commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence; for it is not needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret.

Verse 23. Be not curious in unnecessary matters, for more things are shown unto thee than men can understand.

Verse 24. For many are deceived by their own vain opinion, and an evil suspicion hath overthrown their judgment.

Verse 25. Without eyes thou shalt want light; profess not the knowledge therefore that thou hast not.

Verse 26. A stubborn heart shall fare evil at the last, and he that loveth danger shall perish therein.

Verse 27. An obstinate heart shall be laden with sorrows, and the wicked man shall heap sin upon sin.

Verse 28. In the punishment of the proud there is no remedy, for the plant of wickedness hath taken root in him.

Verse 29. The heart of the prudent will understand a parable, and an attentive ear is the desire of a wise man.

Verse 30. Water will quench a flaming fire, and alms maketh an atonement for sins.

CHAPTER 4

Verse 1. My son, defraud not the poor of his living, and make not the needy eyes to wait long.

Verse 2. Make not a hungry soul sorrowful, neither provoke a man in his distress.

Verse 3. Add not more trouble to a heart that is vexed, and defer not to give to him that is in need.

Verse 4. Reject not the supplication of the afflicted, neither turn away thy face from a poor man.

Verse 5. Turn not away thine eye from the needy, and give him none occasion to curse thee.

Verse 6. For if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard of Him that made him.

Verse 7. Get thyself the love of the congregation, and bow thy head to a great man.

Verse 8. Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a friendly answer with meekness.

Verse 9. Deliver him that suffereth wrong from the hand of the oppressor, and be not fainthearted when thou sittest in judgment.

Verse 10. Be as a father unto the fatherless, and as a husband unto their mother; so shalt thou be as the son of the Most High, and He shall love thee more than thy mother doth.

Verse 11. Wisdom exalteth her children, and layeth hold of them that seek her.

Verse 12. He that loveth her loveth life, and they that seek her early shall be filled with joy.

Verse 13. He that holdeth her fast shall inherit glory, and wheresoever she entereth, the Lord will bless.

Verse 14. They that serve her shall minister to the Holy One, and them that love her the Lord doth love.

Verse 15. Whoso giveth ear unto her shall judge the nations, and he that attendeth unto her shall dwell securely.

Verse 16. If a man commit himself unto her, he shall inherit her, and his generation shall hold her in possession.

Verse 17. For at the first she will walk with him by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his soul and try him by her laws.

Verse 18. Then will she return the straight way unto him, and comfort him, and show him her secrets.

Verse 19. But if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his own ruin.

Verse 20. Observe the opportunity, and beware of evil, and be not ashamed when it concerneth thy soul.

Verse 21. For there is a shame that bringeth sin, and there is a shame which is glory and grace.

Verse 22. Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause thee to fall.

Verse 23. Refrain not to speak when there is occasion to do good, and hide not thy wisdom in her beauty.

Verse 24. For by speech wisdom shall be known, and learning by the word of the tongue.

Verse 25. In no wise speak against the truth, but be abashed of the error of thine ignorance.

Verse 26. Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, and force not the course of the river.

Verse 27. Make not thyself an underling to a foolish man, neither accept the person of the mighty.

Verse 28. Strive for the truth unto death, and the Lord shall fight for thee.

Verse 29. Be not hasty in thy tongue, and in thy deeds slack and remiss.

Verse 30. Be not as a lion in thy house, nor frantic among thy servants.

Verse 31. Let not thine hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou shouldest repay.

CHAPTER 5

Verse 1. Set not thy heart upon thy goods, and say not, I have enough for my life.

Verse 2. Follow not thine own mind and thy strength, to walk in the ways of thy heart.

Verse 3. Say not, Who shall control me for my works? For the Lord will surely revenge thy pride.

Verse 4. Say not, I have sinned, and what harm hath happened unto me? For the Lord is longsuffering, He will in no wise let thee go.

Verse 5. Concerning propitiation, be not without fear to add sin unto sin.

Verse 6. And say not, His mercy is great; He will be pacified for the multitude of my sins. For mercy and wrath come from Him, and His indignation resteth upon sinners.

Verse 7. Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance.

Verse 8. Set not thine heart upon goods unjustly gotten, for they shall not profit thee in the day of calamity.

Verse 9. Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way; for so doth the sinner that hath a double tongue.

Verse 10. Be steadfast in thy understanding, and let thy word be the same.

Verse 11. Be swift to hear, and let thy life be sincere, and with patience give answer.

Verse 12. If thou hast understanding, answer thy neighbor; if not, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.

Verse 13. Honor and shame is in talk, and the tongue of man is his fall.

Verse 14. Be not called a whisperer, and lie not in wait with thy tongue; for a foul shame is upon the thief, and an evil condemnation upon the double-tongued.

Verse 15. Be not ignorant of anything in a great matter or a small.

---

This concludes Part 1 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 6 through Chapter 10, covering true friendship, the pursuit of wisdom, duties of children, and the dangers of pride.