PURITAN GOLD -- Institutes of the Christian Religion by John Calvin: Full Audiobook, Book I Chapter 13 of 18
One Divine Essence, Containing Three Persons; Taught In The Scriptures From The Beginning


Chapter XIII. One Divine Essence, Containing Three Persons; Taught In The
Scriptures From The Beginning.


What is taught in the Scriptures concerning the immensity and spirituality
of the essence of God, should serve not only to overthrow the foolish
notions of the vulgar, but also to refute the subtleties of profane
philosophy. One of the ancients,(191) in his own conception very shrewdly,
said, that whatever we see, and whatever we do not see, is God. But he
imagined that the Deity was diffused through every part of the world. But,
although God, to keep us within the bounds of sobriety, speaks but rarely
of his essence, yet, by those two attributes, which I have mentioned, he
supersedes all gross imaginations, and represses the presumption of the
human mind. For, surely, his immensity ought to inspire us with awe, that
we may not attempt to measure him with our senses; and the spirituality of
his nature prohibits us from entertaining any earthly or carnal
speculations concerning him. For the same reason, he represents his
residence to be “in heaven;” for though, as he is incomprehensible, he
fills the earth also; yet, seeing that our minds, from their dulness, are
continually dwelling on the earth, in order to shake off our sloth and
inactivity, he properly raises us above the world. And here is demolished
the error of the Manichees, who, by maintaining the existence of two
original principles, made the devil, as it were, equal to God. This
certainly was both dividing the unity of God, and limiting his immensity.
For their daring to abuse certain testimonies of Scripture betrayed a
shameful ignorance; as the error itself evidenced an execrable madness.
The Anthropomorphites also, who imagined God to be corporeal, because the
Scripture frequently ascribes to him a mouth, ears, eyes, hands, and feet,
are easily refuted. For who, even of the meanest capacity, understands
not, that God lisps, as it were, with us, just as nurses are accustomed to
speak to infants? Wherefore, such forms of expression do not clearly
explain the nature of God, but accommodate the knowledge of him to our
narrow capacity; to accomplish which, the Scripture must necessarily
descend far below the height of his majesty.

II. But he also designates himself by another peculiar character, by which
he may be yet more clearly distinguished; for, while he declares himself
to be but One, he proposes himself to be distinctly considered in Three
Persons, without apprehending which, we have only a bare and empty name of
God floating in our brains, without any idea of the true God. Now, that no
one may vainly dream of three gods, or suppose that the simple essence of
God is divided among the three Persons, we must seek for a short and easy
definition, which will preserve us from all error. But since some
violently object to the word Person, as of human invention, we must first
examine the reasonableness of this objection. When the Apostle denominates
the Son the express image of the hypostasis of the Father, he undoubtedly
ascribes to the Father some subsistence, in which he differs from the Son.
For to understand this word as synonymous with Essence, (as some
interpreters have done, as though Christ, like wax impressed with a seal,
represented in himself the substance of the Father,) were not only harsh,
but also absurd. For the essence of God being simple and indivisible, he
who contains all in himself, not in part, or by derivation, but in
complete perfection, could not, without impropriety, and even absurdity,
be called the express image of it. But since the Father, although
distinguished by his own peculiar property, hath expressed himself
entirely in his Son, it is with the greatest reason asserted that he hath
made his hypostasis conspicuous in him; with which the other appellation,
given him in the same passage, of “the brightness of his glory,” exactly
corresponds. From the words of the Apostle, we certainly conclude, that
there is in the Father a proper hypostasis, which is conspicuous in the
Son. And thence also we easily infer the hypostasis of the Son, which
distinguishes him from the Father. The same reasoning is applicable to the
Holy Spirit; for we shall soon prove him also to be God; and yet he must,
of necessity, be considered as distinct from the Father. But this is not a
distinction of the essence, which it is unlawful to represent as any other
than simple and undivided. It follows, therefore, if the testimony of the
Apostle be credited, that there are in God three _hypostases_. And, as the
Latins have expressed the same thing by the word _person_, it is too
fastidious and obstinate to contend about so clear a matter. If we wish to
translate word for word, we may call it _subsistence_. Many, in the same
sense, have called it _substance_. Nor has the word _person_ been used by
the Latins only; but the Greeks also, for the sake of testifying their
consent to this doctrine, taught the existence of three προσωπα (persons)
in God. But both Greeks and Latins, notwithstanding any verbal difference,
are in perfect harmony respecting the doctrine itself.

III. Now, though heretics rail at the word _person_, or some morose and
obstinate men clamorously refuse to admit a name of human invention; since
they cannot make us assert that there are three, each of whom is entirely
God, nor yet that there are more gods than one, how very unreasonable is
it to reprobate words which express nothing but what is testified and
recorded in the Scriptures! It were better, say they, to restrain not only
our thoughts, but our expressions also, within the limits of the
Scripture, than to introduce exotic words, which may generate future
dissensions and disputes; for thus we weary ourselves with verbal
controversies; thus the truth is lost in altercation; thus charity expires
in odious contention. If they call every word exotic, which cannot be
found in the Scriptures in so many syllables, they impose on us a law
which is very unreasonable, and which condemns all interpretation, but
what is composed of detached texts of Scripture connected together. But if
by exotic they mean that which is curiously contrived, and superstitiously
defended, which tends to contention more than to edification, the use of
which is either unseasonable or unprofitable, which offends pious ears
with its harshness, and seduces persons from the simplicity of the Divine
word, I most cordially embrace their modest opinion. For I think that we
ought to speak of God with the same religious caution, which should govern
our thoughts of him; since all the thoughts that we entertain concerning
him merely from ourselves, are foolish, and all our expressions absurd.
But there is a proper medium to be observed: we should seek in the
Scriptures a certain rule, both for thinking and for speaking; by which we
may regulate all the thoughts of our minds, and all the words of our
mouths. But what forbids our expressing, in plainer words, those things
which, in the Scriptures, are, to our understanding, intricate and
obscure, provided our expressions religiously and faithfully convey the
true sense of the Scripture, and are used with modest caution, and not
without sufficient occasion? Of this, examples sufficiently numerous are
not wanting. But, when it shall have been proved, that the Church was
absolutely necessitated to use the terms Trinity and Persons, if any one
then censures the novelty of the words, may he not be justly considered as
offended at the light of the truth? as having no other cause of censure,
but that the truth is explained and elucidated?

IV. But such verbal novelty (if it must have this appellation) is
principally used, when the truth is to be asserted in opposition to
malicious cavillers, who elude it by crafty evasions; of which we have too
much experience in the present day, who find great difficulty in refuting
the enemies of pure and sound doctrine: possessed of serpentine lubricity,
they escape by the most artful expedients, unless they are vigorously
pursued, and held fast when once caught. Thus the ancients, pestered with
various controversies against erroneous dogmas, were constrained to
express their sentiments with the utmost perspicuity, that they might
leave no subterfuges to the impious, who availed themselves of obscure
expressions, for the concealment of their errors. Unable to resist the
clear testimonies of the Scriptures, Arius confessed Christ to be God, and
the Son of God; and, as though this were all that was necessary, he
pretended to agree with the Church at large. But, at the same time, he
continued to maintain that Christ was created, and had a beginning like
other creatures. To draw the versatile subtlety of this man from its
concealment, the ancient Fathers proceeded further, and declared Christ to
be the eternal Son of the Father, and consubstantial with the Father. Here
impiety openly discovered itself, when the Arians began inveterately to
hate and execrate the name ὁμοούσιος, (consubstantial.) But if, in the
first instance, they had sincerely and cordially confessed Christ to be
God, they would not have denied him to be consubstantial with the Father.
Who can dare to censure those good men, as quarrelsome and contentious,
for having kindled such a flame of controversy, and disturbed the peace of
the Church on account of one little word? That little word distinguished
Christians, who held the pure faith, from sacrilegious Arians. Afterwards
arose Sabellius, who considered the names of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
as little more than empty sounds; arguing, that they were not used on
account of any real distinction, but were different attributes of God,
whose attributes of this kind are numerous. If the point came to be
controverted, he confessed, that he believed the Father to be God, the Son
God, and the Holy Spirit God; but he would readily evade all the force of
this confession, by adding, that he had said no other than if he had
called God potent, and just, and wise. And thus he came to another
conclusion, that the Father is the Son, and that the Holy Spirit is the
Father, without any order or distinction. The good doctors of that age,
who had the interest of religion at heart, in order to counteract the
wickedness of this man, maintained, on the contrary, that they ought
really to acknowledge three peculiar properties in one God. And, to defend
themselves against his intricate subtleties, by the plain and simple
truth, they affirmed, that they truly subsisted in the one God; or, what
is the same, that in the unity of God there subsisted a trinity of
Persons.

V. If, then, the words have not been rashly invented, we should beware
lest we be convicted of fastidious temerity in rejecting them. I could
wish them, indeed, to be buried in oblivion, provided this faith were
universally received, that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are the one
God; and that nevertheless the Son is not the Father, nor the Spirit the
Son, but that they are distinguished from each other by some peculiar
property. I am not so rigidly precise as to be fond of contending for mere
words. For I observe that the ancients, who otherwise speak on these
subjects with great piety, are not consistent with each other, nor, in all
cases, with themselves. For what forms of expression, adopted by councils,
does Hilary excuse! To what extremes does Augustine sometimes proceed! How
different are the Greeks from the Latins! But of this variation, let one
example suffice: when the Latins would translate the word ὁμοούσιος, they
called it _consubstantial_, signifying the _substance_ of the Father and
the Son to be one, and thus using _substance_ for _essence_. Whence also
Jerome, writing to Damasus, pronounces it to be sacrilege to say that
there are three _substances_ in God. Yet, that there are three
_substances_ in God, you will find asserted in Hilary more than a hundred
times. But how perplexed is Jerome on the word _hypostasis_! For he
suspects some latent poison in the assertion, that there are three
_hypostases_ in God. And if any one uses this word in a pious sense, he
refrains not from calling it an improper expression; if, indeed, he was
sincere in this declaration, and did not rather knowingly and wilfully
endeavour to asperse, with a groundless calumny, the bishops of the East,
whom he hated. He certainly discovers not much ingenuousness in affirming
that, in all the profane schools, οὐσία (essence) is the same as
ὑπόστασις, (hypostasis,) which the trite and common use of the words
universally contradicts. More modesty and liberality are discovered by
Augustine, who, though he asserts that the word _hypostasis_, in this
sense, is new to Latin ears, yet leaves the Greeks their usual
phraseology, and even peaceably tolerates the Latins, who had imitated
their language; and the account of Socrates, in the sixth book of his
Tripartite History, seems to imply, that it was by ignorant men that it
had first been improperly applied to this subject. The same Hilary accuses
the heretics of a great crime, in constraining him, by their wickedness,
to expose to the danger of human language those things which ought to be
confined within the religion of the mind; plainly avowing that this is to
do things unlawful, to express things inexpressible, to assume things not
conceded. A little after, he largely excuses himself for his boldness in
bringing forward new terms; for, when he has used the names of nature,
Father, Son, and Spirit, he immediately adds, that whatever is sought
further, is beyond the signification of language, beyond the reach of our
senses, beyond the conception of our understanding. And, in another place,
he pronounces that happy were the bishops of Gaul, who had neither
composed, nor received, nor even known, any other confession but that
ancient and very simple one, which had been received in all the churches
from the days of the Apostles. Very similar is the excuse of Augustine,
that this word was extorted by necessity, on account of the poverty of
human language on so great a subject, not for the sake of expressing what
God is, but to avoid passing it over in total silence, that the Father,
Son, and Spirit are three. This moderation of those holy men should teach
us, not to pass such severe censures on those who are unwilling to
subscribe to expressions adopted by us, provided they are not actuated by
pride, perverseness, or disingenuous subtlety. But let them also, on the
other hand, consider the great necessity which constrains us to use such
language, that, by degrees, they may at length be accustomed to a useful
phraseology. Let them also learn to beware, since we have to oppose the
Arians on one side, and the Sabellians on the other, lest, while they take
offence at both these parties being deprived of all opportunity of
evasion, they cause some suspicion that they are themselves the disciples
either of Arius or of Sabellius. Arius confesses, “that Christ is God;”
but maintains also, “that he was created, and had a beginning.” He
acknowledges that Christ is “one with the Father;” but secretly whispers
in the ears of his disciples, that he is “united to him,” like the rest of
the faithful, though by a singular privilege. Say that he is
_consubstantial_, you tear off the mask from the hypocrite, and yet you
add nothing to the Scriptures. Sabellius asserts, “that the names Father,
Son, and Spirit, are expressive of no distinction in the Godhead.” Say
that they are three, and he will exclaim, that you are talking of “three
gods.” Say, “that in the one essence of God there is a trinity of
Persons,” and you will at once express what the Scriptures declare, and
will restrain such frivolous loquacity. Now, if any persons are prevented,
by such excessive scrupulousness, from admitting these terms, yet not one
of them can deny, that, when the Scripture speaks of one God, it should be
understood of a unity of substance; and that, when it speaks of three in
one essence, it denotes the Persons in this trinity. When this is honestly
confessed, we have no further concern about words. But I have found, by
long and frequent experience, that those who pertinaciously contend about
words, cherish some latent poison; so that it were better designedly to
provoke their resentment, than to use obscure language for the sake of
obtaining their favour.

VI. But, leaving the dispute about terms, I shall now enter on the
discussion of the subject itself. What I denominate a Person, is a
subsistence in the Divine essence, which is related to the others, and yet
distinguished from them by an incommunicable property. By the word
_subsistence_ we mean something different from the word _essence_. For, if
the _Word_ were simply God, and had no peculiar property, John had been
guilty of impropriety in saying that he was always _with God_.(192) When
he immediately adds, that _the Word_ also _was God_, he reminds us of the
unity of the essence. But because he could not be _with God_, without
subsisting in the Father, hence arises that subsistence, which, although
inseparably connected with the essence, has a peculiar mark, by which it
is distinguished from it. Now, I say that each of the three subsistences
has a relation to the others, but is distinguished from them by a peculiar
property. We particularly use the word _relation_, (or _comparison_,)
here, because, when mention is made simply and indefinitely of God, this
name pertains no less to the Son and Spirit, than to the Father. But
whenever the Father is compared with the Son, the property peculiar to
each distinguishes him from the other. Thirdly, whatever is proper to each
of them, I assert to be incommunicable, because whatever is ascribed to
the Father as a character of distinction, cannot be applied or transferred
to the Son. Nor, indeed, do I disapprove of the definition of Tertullian,
if rightly understood: “That there is in God a certain distribution or
economy, which makes no change in the unity of the essence.”

VII. But before I proceed any further, I must prove the Deity of the Son
and of the Holy Spirit; after which we shall see how they differ from each
other. When the Scripture speaks of _the Word of God_, it certainly were
very absurd to imagine it to be only a transient and momentary sound,
emitted into the air, and coming forth from God himself; of which nature
were the oracles, given to the fathers, and all the prophecies. It is
rather to be understood of the eternal wisdom residing in God, whence the
oracles, and all the prophecies, proceeded. For, according to the
testimony of Peter,(193) the ancient Prophets spake by the Spirit of
Christ no less than the Apostles and all the succeeding ministers of the
heavenly doctrine. But, as Christ had not yet been manifested, we must
necessarily understand that the Word was begotten of the Father before the
world began. And if the Spirit that inspired the Prophets was the Spirit
of the Word, we conclude, beyond all doubt, that the Word was truly God.
And this is taught by Moses, with sufficient perspicuity, in the creation
of the world, in which he represents the Word as acting such a conspicuous
part. For why does he relate that God, in the creation of each of his
works, said, Let this or that be done, but that the unsearchable glory of
God may resplendently appear in his image? Captious and loquacious men
would readily evade this argument, by saying, that the _Word_ imports an
order or command; but the Apostles are better interpreters, who declare,
that the worlds were created by the Son, and that he “upholds all things
by the word of his power.”(194) For here we see that the _Word_ intends
the nod or mandate of the Son, who is himself the eternal and essential
Son of the Father. Nor, to the wise and sober, is there any obscurity in
that passage of Solomon, where he introduces Wisdom as begotten of the
Father before time began, and presiding at the creation of the world, and
over all the works of God. For, to pretend that this denotes some
temporary expression of the will of God, were foolish and frivolous;
whereas God then intended to discover his fixed and eternal counsel, and
even something more secret. To the same purpose also is that assertion of
Christ, “My Father worketh hitherto, and I work.”(195) For, by affirming
that, from the beginning of the world, he had continually coöperated with
the Father, he makes a more explicit declaration of what had been briefly
glanced at by Moses. We conclude, therefore, that God spake thus at the
creation, that the Word might have his part in the work, and so that
operation be common to both. But John speaks more clearly than all others,
when he represents _the Word_, who from the beginning _was God with God_,
as in union with the Father, the original cause of all things. For to the
Word he both attributes a real and permanent essence, and assigns some
peculiar property; and plainly shows how God, by speaking, created the
world. Therefore, as all Divine revelations are justly entitled _the word
of God_, so we ought chiefly to esteem that substantial Word the source of
all revelations, who is liable to no variation, who remains with God
perpetually one and the same, and who is God himself.

VIII. Here we are interrupted by some clamorous objectors, who, since they
cannot openly rob him of his divinity, secretly steal from him his
eternity. For they say, that the Word only began to exist, when God opened
his sacred mouth in the creation of the world. But they are too
inconsiderate in imagining something new in the substance of God. For, as
those names of God, which relate to his external works, began to be
ascribed to him after the existence of those works, as when he is called
the Creator of heaven and earth, so piety neither acknowledges nor admits
any name, signifying that God has found any thing new to happen to
himself. For, could any thing, from any quarter, effect a change in him,
it would contradict the assertion of James, that “every good gift and
every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of
lights, with whom is no variableness or shadow of turning.”(196) Nothing,
then, is more intolerable, than to suppose a beginning of that Word, which
was always God, and afterwards the Creator of the world. But they argue,
in their own apprehension most acutely, that Moses, by representing God as
having then spoken for the first time, implies also, that there was no
Word in him before; than which nothing is more absurd. For it is not to be
concluded, because any thing begins to be manifested at a certain time,
that it had no prior existence. I form a very different conclusion; that,
since, in the very instant when God said, “Let there be light,”(197) the
power of the Word was clearly manifested, the Word must have existed long
before. But if any one inquires, how long, he will find no beginning. For
he limits no certain period of time, when he himself says, “O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the world was.”(198) Nor is this omitted by John; for, before he
descends to the creation of the world, he declares that the Word “was in
the beginning with God.”(199) We therefore conclude again, that the Word,
conceived of God before time began, perpetually remained with him, which
proves his eternity, his true essence, and his divinity.

IX. Though I advert not yet to the person of the Mediator, but defer it to
that part of the work which will relate to redemption, yet, since it
ought, without controversy, to be believed by all, that Christ is the very
same Word clothed in flesh, any testimonies which assert the Deity of
Christ, will be very properly introduced here. When it is said, in the
forty‐fifth Psalm, “Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever,” the Jews
endeavour to evade its force, by pleading that the name Elohim is
applicable also to angels, and to men of dignity and power. But there
cannot be found in the Scripture a similar passage, which erects an
eternal throne for a creature; for he is not merely called God, but is
also declared to possess an eternal dominion. Besides, this title is never
given to a creature, without some addition, as when it is said that Moses
should be “a god to Pharaoh.”(200) Some read it in the genitive case, “Thy
throne is of God,” which is extremely insipid. I confess, indeed, that
what is eminently and singularly excellent, is frequently called Divine;
but it sufficiently appears from the context, that such a meaning would be
uncouth and forced, and totally inapplicable here. But, if their
perverseness refuse to yield this point, there certainly is no obscurity
in Isaiah, where he introduces Christ as God, and as crowned with supreme
power, which is the prerogative of God alone. “His name,” says he, “shall
be called the Mighty God, the Father of eternity,” &c.(201) Here also the
Jews object, and invert the reading of the passage in this manner: “This
is the name by which the mighty God, the Father of eternity, shall call
him,” &c.; so that they would leave the Son only the title of Prince of
peace. But to what purpose would so many epithets be accumulated in this
passage on God the Father, when the design of the prophet is to
distinguish Christ by such eminent characters as may establish our faith
in him? Wherefore, there can be no doubt that he is there denominated the
Mighty God, just as, a little before, he is called Immanuel. But nothing
can be required plainer than a passage in Jeremiah, that this should be
the name whereby the Branch of David shall be called “Jehovah our
righteousness.”(202) For since the Jews themselves teach, that all other
names of God are mere epithets, but that this alone, which they call
ineffable, is a proper name expressive of his Essence, we conclude, that
the Son is the one eternal God, who declares, in another place, that he
“will not give his glory to another.”(203) This also they endeavour to
evade, because Moses imposed this name on an altar which he built, and
Ezekiel on the city of the new Jerusalem. But who does not perceive, that
the altar was erected as a monument of Moses having been exalted by God,
and that Jerusalem is honoured with the name of God, only as a testimony
of the Divine presence? For thus speaks the prophet: “The name of the city
shall be, Jehovah is there.”(204) But Moses expresses himself thus: He
“built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah‐nissi,” (my
exaltation.)(205) But there is more contention about another passage of
Jeremiah, where the same title is given to Jerusalem in these words: “This
is the name wherewith she shall be called, Jehovah our
righteousness.”(206) But this testimony is so far from opposing the truth
which we are defending, that it rather confirms it. For, having before
testified that Christ is the true Jehovah, from whom righteousness
proceeds, he now pronounces that the church will have such a clear
apprehension of it, as to be able to glory in the same name. In the former
place, then, is shown the original cause of righteousness, in the latter
the effect.

X. Now, if these things do not satisfy the Jews, I see not by what cavils
they can evade the accounts of Jehovah having so frequently appeared in
the character of an angel. An angel is said to have appeared to the holy
fathers. He claims for himself the name of the eternal God. If it be
objected, that this is spoken with regard to the character which he
sustains, this by no means removes the difficulty. For a servant would
never rob God of his honour, by permitting sacrifice to be offered to
himself. But the angel, refusing to eat bread, commands a sacrifice to be
offered to Jehovah. He afterwards demonstrates that he is really Jehovah
himself. Therefore Manoah and his wife conclude, from this evidence, that
they have seen, not a mere angel, but God himself. Hence he says, “We
shall surely die, because we have seen God.” When his wife replies, “If
the Lord were pleased to kill us, he would not have received” a sacrifice
“at our hands,”(207) she clearly acknowledges him to be God, who before is
called an angel. Moreover, the reply of the angel himself removes every
doubt: “Why askest thou after my name, seeing it is wonderful?” So much
the more detestable is the impiety of Servetus, in asserting that God
never appeared to Abraham and the other patriarchs, but that they
worshipped an angel in his stead. But the orthodox doctors of the church
have truly and wisely understood and taught, that the same chief angel was
the Word of God, who even then began to perform some services introductory
to his execution of the office of Mediator. For though he was not yet
incarnate, he descended, as it were, in a mediatorial capacity, that he
might approach the faithful with greater familiarity. His familiar
intercourse with men gave him the name of an angel; yet he still retained
what properly belonged to him, and continued the ineffably glorious God.
The same truth is attested by Hosea, who, after relating the wrestling of
Jacob with an angel, says, “The Lord (Jehovah) God of hosts; Jehovah is
his memorial.”(208) Servetus again cavils, that God employed the person of
an angel; as though the prophet did not confirm what had been delivered by
Moses,—“Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?” And the
confession of the holy patriarch, when he says, “I have seen God face to
face,”(209) sufficiently declares, that he was not a created angel, but
one in whom resided the fulness of Deity. Hence, also, the representation
of Paul, that Christ was the conductor of the people in the wilderness;
because, though the time of his humiliation was not yet arrived, the
eternal Word then exhibited a type of the office to which he was
appointed. Now, if the second chapter of Zechariah be strictly and coolly
examined, the angel who sends another angel is immediately pronounced the
God of hosts, and supreme power is ascribed to him. I omit testimonies
innumerable on which our faith safely rests, although they have little
influence on the Jews. For when it is said in Isaiah, “Lo, this is our
God; we have waited for him, and he will save us; this is Jehovah;”(210)
all who have eyes may perceive that this is God, who arises for the
salvation of his people. And the emphatical repetition of these pointed
expressions forbids an application of this passage to any other than to
Christ. But still more plain and decisive is a passage of Malachi, where
he prophesies, that “the Lord, who was then sought, should come into his
temple.”(211) The temple was exclusively consecrated to the one Most High
God; yet the prophet claims it as belonging to Christ. Whence it follows,
that he is the same God that was always worshipped among the Jews.

XI. The New Testament abounds with innumerable testimonies. We must,
therefore, endeavour briefly to select a few, rather than to collect them
all. Though the Apostles spake of him after he had appeared in flesh as
the Mediator, yet all that I shall adduce will be adapted to prove his
eternal Deity. In the first place, it is worthy of particular observation,
that the apostle represents those things which were predicted concerning
the eternal God, as either already exhibited in Christ, or to be
accomplished in him at some future period. The prediction of Isaiah, that
the Lord of Hosts would be “for a stone of stumbling, and for a rock of
offence to both the houses of Israel,”(212) Paul asserts to have been
fulfilled in Christ.(213) Therefore he declares, that Christ is the Lord
of Hosts. There is a similar instance in another place: “We shall all
stand,” says he, “before the judgment‐seat of Christ. For it is written,
As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue
shall confess to God.”(214) Since God, in Isaiah,(215) declares this
concerning himself, and Christ actually exhibits it in his own person, it
follows, that he is that very God, whose glory cannot be transferred to
another. The apostle’s quotation from the Psalms also, in his Epistle to
the Ephesians, is evidently applicable to none but God: “When he ascended
up on high, he led captivity captive:”(216) understanding that ascension
to have been prefigured by the exertions of the Divine power in the signal
victories of David over the heathen nations, he signifies, that the text
was more fully accomplished in Christ. Thus John attests that it was the
glory of the Son which was revealed in a vision to Isaiah; whereas the
prophet himself records that he saw the majesty of God.(217) And those
praises which the Apostle, in the Epistle to the Hebrews, ascribes to the
Son, beyond all doubt most evidently belong to God: “Thou, Lord, in the
beginning, hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the
works of thine hands,” &c. Again, “Let all the angels of God worship
him.”(218) Nor is it any misapplication of them, when he refers them to
Christ; since all that is predicted in those Psalms has been accomplished
only by him. For it was He who arose and had mercy upon Zion; it was He
who claimed as his own the dominion over all nations and islands. And why
should John, after having affirmed, at the commencement of his
Gospel,(219) that the Word was always God, have hesitated to attribute to
Christ the majesty of God? And why should Paul have been afraid to place
Christ on the tribunal of God,(220) after having so publicly preached his
Divinity, when he called him “God blessed for ever?”(221) And, to show how
consistent he is with himself on this subject, he says, also, that “God
was manifest in the flesh.”(222) If he is “God blessed for ever,” he is
the same to whom this apostle, in another place, affirms all glory and
honour to be due. And he conceals not, but openly proclaims, that, “being
in the form of God,” he “thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but
made himself of no reputation.”(223) And, lest the impious might object,
that he is a sort of artificial God, John goes further, and affirms, that
“This is the true God, and eternal life;”(224) although we ought to be
fully satisfied by his being called God, especially by a witness who
expressly avers that there are no more gods than one; I mean Paul, who
says, “though there be that are called gods, whether in heaven or in
earth; to us there is but one God, of whom are all things.”(225) When we
hear, from the same mouth, that “God was manifested in the flesh,” that
“God hath purchased the Church with his own blood,”—why do we imagine a
second God, whom he by no means acknowledges? And there is no doubt that
all the pious were of the same opinion. Thomas, likewise, by publicly
confessing him to be “his Lord and God,” declares him to be the same true
God whom he had always worshipped.(226)

XII. If we judge of his Divinity from the works which the Scriptures
attribute to him, it will thence appear with increasing evidence. For when
he said, that he had, from the beginning, continually coöperated with the
Father, the Jews, stupid as they were about his other declarations, yet
perceived, that he assumed to himself Divine power; and, therefore, as
John informs us, they “sought the more to kill him; because he not only
had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making
himself equal with God.”(227) How great, then, must be our stupidity, if
we perceive not this passage to be a plain assertion of his Divinity! To
preside over the world by his almighty providence, and to govern all
things by the rod of his own power, (which the Apostle attributes to
him,)(228) belongs exclusively to the Creator. And he participates with
the Father, not only in the government of the world, but also in all other
offices, which cannot be communicated to creatures. The Lord proclaims, by
the prophet, “I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for
mine own sake.”(229) According to this declaration, when the Jews thought
that Christ committed an injury against God, by undertaking to forgive
sins,(230) he not only asserted in express terms, that this power belonged
to him, but proved it by a miracle. We see, therefore, that he hath not
the ministry, but the power of remission of sins, which the Lord declares
shall never be transferred from himself to another. Is it not the
prerogative of God alone to examine and penetrate the secret thoughts of
the heart? Yet Christ possessed that power; which is a proof of his
Divinity.

XIII. But with what perspicuity of evidence does it appear in his
miracles! Though I grant that the Prophets and Apostles performed miracles
similar and equal to his, yet there is a considerable difference in this
respect, that they, in their ministry, dispensed the favours of God,
whereas his miracles were performed by his exertions of his own power. He
sometimes, indeed, used prayer, that he might glorify the Father; but, in
most instances, we perceive the manifest displays of his own power. And
how should not he be the true author of miracles, who, by his own
authority, committed the dispensation of them to others? For the
Evangelists relate, that he gave his Apostles power to raise the dead, to
heal the leprous, to cast out devils, &c.(231) And they performed that
ministry in such a manner, as plainly to discover, that the power
proceeded solely from Christ. “In the name of Jesus Christ,” says Peter,
“arise and walk.”(232) It is no wonder, therefore, that Christ should
bring forward his miracles,(233) to convince the incredulity of the Jews,
since, being performed by his own power, they afforded most ample evidence
of his Divinity. Besides, if out of God there be no salvation, no
righteousness, no life, but Christ contains all these things in himself,
it certainly demonstrates him to be God. Let it not be objected, that life
and salvation are infused into him by God; for he is not said to have
received salvation, but to be himself salvation. And if no one be good but
God alone,(234) how can he be a mere man who is, I will not say good and
righteous, but goodness and righteousness itself? Even from the beginning
of the creation, according to the testimony of an Evangelist, “in him was
life; and the life” then existed as “the light of men.” Supported by such
proofs, therefore, we venture to repose our faith and hope on him; whereas
we know that it is impious and sacrilegious for any man to place his
confidence in creatures. He says, “Ye believe in God, believe also in
me.”(235) And in this sense Paul interprets two passages of
Isaiah—“Whosoever believeth on him shall not be ashamed.” Again, “There
shall be a root of Jesse, that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles; in
him shall the Gentiles trust.”(236) And why should we search for more
testimonies from Scripture, when this declaration occurs so frequently,
“He that believeth on me hath everlasting life”?(237) The invocation,
arising from faith, is also directed to him; which, nevertheless,
peculiarly belongs, if any thing peculiarly belongs, to the Divine
majesty. For a prophet says, “Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord
(Jehovah) shall be delivered.”(238) And Solomon, “The name of the Lord is
a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe.”(239) But the
name of Christ is invoked for salvation: it follows, therefore, that he is
Jehovah. Moreover, we have an example of such invocation in Stephen, when
he says, “Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.”(240) And afterwards in the whole
Church, as Ananias testifies in the same book: “Lord, I have heard by many
of this man, how much evil he hath done to thy saints—that call on thy
name.”(241) And to make it more clearly understood, that “all the fulness
of the Godhead dwelleth bodily in Christ,” the Apostle confesses that he
had introduced among the Corinthians no other doctrine than the knowledge
of him, and that this had been the only subject of his preaching.(242)
What a remarkable and important consideration is it, that the name of the
Son only is preached to us, whereas God commands us to glory in the
knowledge of himself alone!(243) Who can dare to assert that he is a mere
creature, the knowledge of whom is our only glory? It must also be
remarked, that the salutations prefixed to the epistles of Paul implore
the same blessings from the Son as from the Father; whence we learn, not
only that those things, which our heavenly Father bestows, are obtained
for us by his intercession, but that the Son, by a communion of power, is
himself the author of them. This practical knowledge is unquestionably
more certain and solid than any idle speculation. For then the pious mind
has the nearest view of the Divine presence, and almost touches it, when
it experiences itself to be quickened, illuminated, saved, justified, and
sanctified.

XIV. Wherefore the proof of the Deity of the Spirit must be derived
principally from the same sources. There is no obscurity in the testimony
of Moses, in the history of the creation, that the Spirit of God was
expanded on the abyss or chaos;(244) for it signifies, not only that the
beautiful state of the world which we now behold owes its preservation to
the power of the Spirit, but that, previously to its being thus adorned,
the Spirit was engaged in brooding over the confused mass. The declaration
of Isaiah bids defiance to all cavils: “And now the Lord God, and his
Spirit, hath sent me.”(245) For the Holy Spirit is united in the exercise
of supreme power in the mission of Prophets, which is a proof of his
Divine majesty. But the best confirmation, as I have remarked, we shall
derive from familiar experience. For what the Scriptures ascribe to him,
and what we ourselves learn by the certain experience of piety, is not at
all applicable to any creature. For it is he who, being universally
diffused, sustains and animates all things in heaven and in earth. And
this very thing excludes him from the number of creatures, that he is
circumscribed by no limits, but transfuses through all his own vigorous
influence, to inspire them with being, life, and motion: this is clearly a
work of Deity. Again, if regeneration to an incorruptible life be more
important and excellent than any present life, what must we think of him
from whose power it proceeds? But the Scripture teaches, in various
places, that he is the author of regeneration by a power not derived, but
properly his own; and not of regeneration only, but likewise of the future
immortality. Finally, to him, as well as to the Son, are applied all those
offices which are peculiar to Deity. For he “searcheth even the deep
things of God,”(246) who admits no creature to a share in his councils. He
bestows wisdom and the faculty of speech;(247) whereas the Lord declares
to Moses, that this can only be done by himself.(248) So through him we
attain to a participation of God, to feel his vivifying energy upon us.
Our justification is his work. From him proceed power, sanctification,
truth, grace, and every other blessing we can conceive; since there is but
one Spirit, from whom every kind of gifts descends. For this passage of
Paul is worthy of particular attention: “There are diversities of gifts,
and there are differences of administrations, but the same Spirit;”(249)
because it represents him, not only as the principle and source of them,
but also as the author; which is yet more clearly expressed a little after
in these words: “All these worketh that only and the self‐same Spirit,
dividing to every man severally as he will.” For if he were not a
subsistence in the Deity, judgment and voluntary determination would never
be ascribed to him. Paul, therefore, very clearly attributes to the Spirit
Divine power, and thereby demonstrates him to be an hypostasis or
subsistence in God.

XV. Nor does the Scripture, when it speaks of him, refrain from giving him
the appellation of God. For Paul concludes that we are the temple of God,
because his Spirit dwelleth in us.(250) This must not be passed over
without particular notice; for the frequent promises of God, that he will
choose us for a temple for himself, receive no other accomplishment, than
by the inhabitation of his Spirit in us. Certainly, as Augustine
excellently observes, “If we were commanded to erect to the Spirit a
temple of wood and stone, forasmuch as God is the sole object of worship,
it would be a clear proof of his Divinity; how much clearer, then, is the
proof, now that we are commanded, not to erect one, but to be ourselves
his temples!” And the Apostle calls us sometimes the temple of God, and
sometimes the temple of the Holy Spirit, both in the same signification.
Peter, reprehending Ananias for having “lied to the Holy Ghost,” told him
that he had “not lied unto men, but unto God.”(251) And where Isaiah(252)
introduces the Lord of hosts as the speaker, Paul(253) informs us that it
is the Holy Spirit who speaks. Indeed, while the Prophets invariably
declare, that the words which they utter are those of the Lord of hosts,
Christ and the Apostles refer them to the Holy Spirit; whence it follows,
that he is the true Jehovah, who is the primary author of the prophecies.
Again, God complains that his anger was provoked by the perverseness of
the people; Isaiah, in reference to the same conduct, says, that “they
vexed his Holy Spirit.”(254) Lastly, if blasphemy against the Spirit be
not forgiven, either in this world or in that which is to come,(255)
whilst a man may obtain pardon who has been guilty of blasphemy against
the Son, this is an open declaration of his Divine majesty, to defame or
degrade which is an inexpiable crime. I intentionally pass over many
testimonies which were used by the fathers. To them there appeared much
plausibility in citing this passage from David, “By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth;”(256) to prove that the creation of the world was the work of the
Holy Spirit, as well as of the Son. But since a repetition of the same
thing twice is common in the Psalms, and in Isaiah “the spirit of his
mouth” means the same as “his word,” this is but a weak argument.
Therefore I have determined to confine myself to a sober statement of
those evidences on which pious minds may satisfactorily rest.

XVI. As God afforded a clearer manifestation of himself at the advent of
Christ, the three Persons also then became better known. Among many
testimonies, let us be satisfied with this one: Paul connects together
these three, Lord, Faith, and Baptism,(257) in such a manner as to reason
from one to another. Since there is but one faith, hence he proves that
there is but one Lord; since there is but one baptism, he shows that there
is also but one faith. Therefore, if we are initiated by baptism into the
faith and religion of one God, we must necessarily suppose him to be the
true God, into whose name we are baptized. Nor can it be doubted but that
in this solemn commission, “Baptize them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,” Christ intended to testify, that the
perfect light of faith was now exhibited. For this is equivalent to being
baptized into the name of the one God, who hath clearly manifested himself
in the Father, Son, and Spirit; whence it evidently appears, that in the
Divine Essence there exist three Persons, in whom is known the one God.
And truly, since faith ought not to be looking about hither and thither,
or to be wandering through the varieties of inconstancy, but to direct its
views towards the one God, to be fixed on him, and to adhere to him,—it
may easily be proved from these premises, that, if there be various kinds
of faith, there must also be a plurality of gods. Baptism, being a
sacrament of faith, confirms to us the unity of God, because it is but
one. Hence, also, we conclude, that it is not lawful to be baptized,
except into the name of the one God; because we embrace the faith of him,
into whose name we are baptized. What, then, was intended by Christ, when
he commanded baptism to be administered in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, but that one faith ought to be exercised
in the Father, Son, and Spirit? and what is that but a clear testimony,
that the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, are the one God? Therefore,
since it is an undeniable truth, that there is one God, and only one, we
conclude the Word and Spirit to be no other than the very Essence of the
Deity. The greatest degree of folly was betrayed by the Arians, who
confessed the Divinity of the Son, but denied him to possess the substance
of God. Nor were the Macedonians free from a similar delusion, who would
explain the term “Spirit” to mean only the gifts of grace conferred upon
man. For as wisdom, understanding, prudence, fortitude, and the fear of
the Lord, proceed from him, so he alone is the Spirit of wisdom, prudence,
fortitude, and piety. Nor is he himself divided according to the
distribution of his graces; but, as the Apostle declares, how variously
soever they are divided, he always remains one and the same.(258)

XVII. On the other hand, also, we find in the Scriptures a distinction
between the Father and the Word, between the Word and the Spirit; in the
discussion of which the magnitude of the mystery reminds us that we ought
to proceed with the utmost reverence and sobriety. I am exceedingly
pleased with this observation of Gregory Nazianzen: “I cannot think of the
_one_, but I am immediately surrounded with the splendour of the _three_;
nor can I clearly discover the _three_, but I am suddenly carried back to
the _one_.” Wherefore let us not imagine such a trinity of Persons, as
includes an idea of separation, or does not immediately recall us to the
unity. The names of Father, Son, and Spirit, certainly imply a real
distinction; let no one suppose them to be mere epithets, by which God is
variously designated from his works; but it is a distinction, not a
division. The passages already cited show, that the Son has a property, by
which he is distinguished from the Father; because the Word had not been
with God, or had his glory with the Father, unless he had been distinct
from him. He likewise distinguishes the Father from himself, when he says,
“that there is another that beareth witness of him.”(259) And to the same
effect is what is declared in another place, that the Father created all
things by the Word; which he could not have done, unless he had been in
some sense distinct from him. Besides, the Father descended not to the
earth, but he who came forth from the Father. The Father neither died nor
rose again, but he who was sent by the Father. Nor did this distinction
commence at the incarnation, but it is evident, that, before that period,
he was the only begotten in the bosom of the Father.(260) For who can
undertake to assert, that the Son first entered into the bosom of the
Father, when he descended from heaven to assume a human nature? He,
therefore, was in the bosom of the Father before, and possessed his glory
with the Father. The distinction between the Holy Spirit and the Father is
announced by Christ, when he says, that he “proceedeth from the
Father.”(261) But how often does he represent him as another, distinct
from himself! as when he promises that “another Comforter”(262) should be
sent, and in many other places.

XVIII. I doubt the propriety of borrowing similitudes from human things,
to express the force of this distinction. The fathers sometimes practise
this method; but they likewise confess the great disproportion of all the
similitudes which they introduce. Wherefore I greatly dread, in this
instance, every degree of presumption; lest the introduction of any thing
unseasonable should afford an occasion of calumny to the malicious, or of
error to the ignorant. Yet it is not right to be silent on the distinction
which we find expressed in the Scriptures; which is this—that to the
Father is attributed the principle of action, the fountain and source of
all things; to the Son, wisdom, counsel, and the arrangement of all
operations; and the power and efficacy of the action is assigned to the
Spirit. Moreover, though eternity belongs to the Father, and to the Son
and Spirit also, since God can never have been destitute of his wisdom or
his power, and in eternity we must not inquire after any thing prior or
posterior,—yet the observation of order is not vain or superfluous, while
the Father is mentioned as first; in the next place the Son, as from him;
and then the Spirit, as from both. For the mind of every man naturally
inclines to the consideration, first, of God; secondly, of the wisdom
emanating from him; and lastly, of the power by which he executes the
decrees of his wisdom. For this reason the Son is said to be from the
Father, and the Spirit from both the Father and the Son; and that in
various places, but nowhere more clearly than in the eighth chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, where the same Spirit is indifferently denominated
“the Spirit of Christ,” and “the Spirit of him that raised up Christ from
the dead,” and that without any impropriety. For Peter also testifies that
it was the Spirit of Christ by whom the prophets prophesied;(263) whereas
the Scripture so frequently declares that it was the Spirit of God the
Father.

XIX. This distinction is so far from opposing the most absolute simplicity
and unity of the Divine Being, that it affords a proof that the Son is one
God with the Father, because he has the same Spirit with him; and that the
Spirit is not a different substance from the Father and the Son, because
he is the Spirit of the Father and of the Son. For the whole nature is in
each hypostasis, and each has something peculiar to himself. The Father is
entirely in the Son, and the Son entirely in the Father, according to his
own declaration, “I am in the Father, and the Father in me;”(264) nor do
ecclesiastical writers allow that one is divided from the other by any
difference of essence. “These distinctive appellations,” says Augustine,
“denote their reciprocal relations to each other, and not the substance
itself, which is but one.” This explanation may serve to reconcile the
opinions of the fathers, which would otherwise appear totally repugnant to
each other. For sometimes they state that the Son originates from the
Father, and at other times assert that he has essential Divinity from
himself, and so is, together with the Father, the one first cause of all.
Augustine, in another place, admirably and perspicuously explains the
cause of this diversity, in the following manner: “Christ, considered in
himself, is called God; but with relation to the Father, he is called the
Son.” And again, “The Father, considered in himself, is called God; but
with relation to the Son, he is called the Father. He who, with relation
to the Son, is called the Father, is not the Son; he who, with relation to
the Father, is called the Son, is not the Father; they who are severally
called the Father and the Son, are the same God.” Therefore, when we speak
simply of the Son, without reference to the Father, we truly and properly
assert him to be self‐existent, and therefore call him the sole first
cause; but, when we distinctly treat of the relation between him and the
Father, we justly represent him as originating from the Father. The first
book of Augustine on the Trinity is entirely occupied with the explication
of this subject; and it is far more safe to rest satisfied with that
relation which he states, than by curiously penetrating into the sublime
mystery, to wander through a multitude of vain speculations.

XX. Therefore, let such as love sobriety, and will be contented with the
measure of faith, briefly attend to what is useful to be known; which is,
that, when we profess to believe in one God, the word _God_ denotes a
single and simple essence, in which we comprehend three Persons, or
hypostases; and that, therefore, whenever the word _God_ is used
indefinitely, the Son and Spirit are intended as much as the Father; but
when the Son is associated with the Father, that introduces the reciprocal
relation of one to the other; and thus we distinguish between the Persons.
But, since the peculiar properties of the Persons produce a certain order,
so that the original cause is in the Father, whenever the Father and the
Son or Spirit are mentioned together, the name of God is peculiarly
ascribed to the Father: by this method the unity of the essence is
preserved, and the order is retained; which, however, derogates nothing
from the Deity of the Son and Spirit. And indeed, as we have already seen
that the Apostles assert him to be the Son of God, whom Moses and the
Prophets have represented as Jehovah, it is always necessary to recur to
the unity of the essence. Wherefore it would be a detestable sacrilege for
us to call the Son another God different from the Father; because the
simple name of God admits of no relation; nor can God, with respect to
himself, be denominated either the one or the other. Now, that the name
“Jehovah,” in an indefinite sense, is applicable to Christ, appears even
from the words of Paul: “for this thing I besought the Lord thrice;”(265)
because, after relating the answer of Christ, “My grace is sufficient for
thee,” he immediately subjoins, “That the power of Christ may rest upon
me.” For it is certain that the word “Lord” is there used for “Jehovah;”
and to restrict it to the person of the Mediator, would be frivolous and
puerile, since it is an absolute declaration, containing no comparison
between the Son and the Father. And we know that the Apostles, following
the custom of the Greek translators, invariably use the word Κυριος,
(Lord,) instead of Jehovah. And, not to seek far for an example of this,
Paul prayed to the Lord in no other sense than is intended in a passage of
Joel, cited by Peter: “Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall
be saved.”(266) But for the peculiar ascription of this name to the Son,
another reason will be given in its proper place; suffice it at present to
observe that, when Paul had prayed to God absolutely, he immediately
subjoins the name of Christ. Thus also the whole Deity is by Christ
himself denominated “a Spirit.” For nothing opposes the spirituality of
the whole Divine essence, in which are comprehended the Father, the Son,
and the Spirit; which is plain from the Scripture. For as we there find
God denominated a Spirit, so we find also the Holy Spirit, forasmuch as he
is an hypostasis of the whole essence, represented both as the Spirit of
God, and as proceeding from God.

XXI. But since Satan, in order to subvert the very foundations of our
faith, has always been exciting great contentions concerning the Divine
essence of the Son and Spirit, and the distinction of the Persons; and in
almost all ages has instigated impious spirits to vex the orthodox
teachers on this account; and is also endeavouring, in the present day,
with the old embers, to kindle a new flame; it becomes necessary here to
refute the perverse and fanciful notions which some persons have imbibed.
Hitherto it has been our principal design to instruct the docile, and not
to combat the obstinate and contentious: but now, having calmly explained
and proved the truth, we must vindicate it from all the cavils of the
wicked; although I shall make it my principal study, that those who
readily and implicitly attend to the Divine word, may have stable ground
on which they may confidently rest. On this, indeed, if on any of the
secret mysteries of the Scripture, we ought to philosophize with great
sobriety and moderation; and also with extreme caution, lest either our
ideas or our language should proceed beyond the limits of the Divine word.
For how can the infinite essence of God be defined by the narrow capacity
of the human mind, which could never yet certainly determine the nature of
the body of the sun, though the object of our daily contemplation? How can
the human mind, by its own efforts, penetrate into an examination of the
essence of God, when it is totally ignorant of its own? Wherefore let us
freely leave to God the knowledge of himself. For “he alone,” as Hilary
says, “is a competent witness for himself, being only known by himself.”
And we shall certainly leave it to him, if our conceptions of him
correspond to the manifestations which he has given us of himself, and our
inquiries concerning him are confined to his word. There are extant on
this argument five homilies of Chrysostom against the Anomœi; which,
however, were not sufficient to restrain the presumptuous garrulity of
those sophists. For they discovered no greater modesty in this instance
than in every other. The very unhappy consequences of this temerity should
warn us to study this question with more docility than subtlety, and not
allow ourselves to investigate God any where but in his sacred word, or to
form any ideas of him but such as are agreeable to his word, or to speak
any thing concerning him but what is derived from the same word. But if
the distinction of Father, Son, and Spirit, in the one Deity, as it is not
easy to be comprehended, occasions some understandings more labour and
trouble than is desirable, let them remember that the mind of man, when it
indulges its curiosity, enters into a labyrinth; and let them submit to be
guided by the heavenly oracles, however they may not comprehend the height
of this mystery.

XXII. To compose a catalogue of the errors, by which the purity of the
faith has been attacked on this point of doctrine, would be too prolix and
tedious, without being profitable; and most of the heretics so strenuously
exerted themselves to effect the total extinction of the Divine glory by
their gross reveries, that they thought it sufficient to unsettle and
disturb the inexperienced. From a few men there soon arose numerous sects,
of whom some would divide the Divine essence, and others would confound
the distinction which subsists between the Persons. But if we maintain,
what has already been sufficiently demonstrated from the Scripture, that
the essence of the one God, which pertains to the Father, to the Son, and
to the Spirit, is simple and undivided, and, on the other hand, that the
Father is, by some property, distinguished from the Son, and likewise the
Son from the Spirit, the gate will be shut, not only against Arius and
Sabellius, but also against all the other ancient heresiarchs. But since
our own times have witnessed some madmen, as Servetus and his followers,
who have involved every thing in new subtleties, a brief exposure of their
fallacies will not be unuseful. The word _Trinity_ was so odious and even
detestable to Servetus, that he asserted all Trinitarians, as he called
them, to be Atheists. I omit his impertinent and scurrilous language, but
this was the substance of his speculations: That it is representing God as
consisting of three parts, when three Persons are said to subsist in his
essence, and that this triad is merely imaginary, being repugnant to the
Divine unity. At the same time, he maintained the Persons to be certain
external ideas, which have no real subsistence in the Divine essence, but
give us a figurative representation of God, under this or the other form;
and that in the beginning there was no distinction in God, because the
Word was once the same as the Spirit; but that, after Christ appeared God
of God, there emanated from him another God, even the Spirit. Though he
sometimes glosses over his impertinencies with allegories, as when he
says, that the eternal Word of God was the Spirit of Christ with God, and
the reflection of his image, and that the Spirit was a shadow of the
Deity, yet he afterwards destroys the Deity of both, asserting that,
according to the mode of dispensation, there is a part of God in both the
Son and the Spirit; just as the same Spirit, substantially diffused in us,
and even in wood and stones, is a portion of the Deity. What he broached
concerning the Person of the Mediator, we shall examine in the proper
place. But this monstrous fiction, that a Divine Person is nothing but a
visible appearance of the glory of God, will not need a prolix refutation.
For when John pronounces that the Word (Λογος) was God before the creation
of the world, he sufficiently discriminates him from an ideal form. But if
then also, and from the remotest eternity, that Word (Λογος) who was God,
was with the Father, and possessed his own glory with the Father, he
certainly could not be an external or figurative splendour; but it
necessarily follows, that he was a real hypostasis, subsisting in God
himself. But although no mention is made of the Spirit, but in the history
of the creation of the world, yet he is there introduced, not as a shadow,
but as the essential power of God, since Moses relates that the chaotic
mass was supported by him.(267) It then appeared, therefore, that the
eternal Spirit had always existed in the Deity, since he cherished and
sustained the confused matter of the heaven and earth, till it attained a
state of beauty and order. He certainly could not then be an image or
representation of God, according to the dreams of Servetus. But in other
places he is constrained to make a fuller disclosure of his impiety,
saying that God, in his eternal reason, decreeing for himself a visible
Son, has visibly exhibited himself in this manner; for if this be true,
there is no other Divinity left to Christ, than as he has been appointed a
Son by an eternal decree of God. Besides, he so transforms those
phantasms, which he substitutes instead of the hypostases, that he
hesitates not to imagine new accidents or properties in God. But the most
execrable blasphemy of all is, his promiscuous confusion of the Son of God
and the Spirit with all the creatures. For he asserts that in the Divine
essence there are parts and divisions, every portion of which is God; and
especially that the souls of the faithful are coëternal and consubstantial
with God; though in another place he assigns substantial Deity, not only
to the human soul, but to all created things.

XXIII. From the same corrupt source has proceeded another heresy, equally
monstrous. For some worthless men, to escape the odium and disgrace which
attended the impious tenets of Servetus, have confessed, indeed, that
there are three Persons, but with this explanation, that the Father, who
alone is truly and properly God, hath created the Son and Spirit, and
transfused his Deity into them. Nor do they refrain from this dreadful
manner of expressing themselves, that the Father is distinguished from the
Son and Spirit, as being the sole possessor of the Divine essence. Their
first plea in support of this notion is, that Christ is commonly called
the Son of God; whence they conclude that no other is properly God but the
Father. But they observe not, that although the name of God is common also
to the Son, yet that it is sometimes ascribed to the Father (κατ᾽ ἐξοχην)
by way of eminence, because he is the fountain and original of the Deity;
and this in order to denote the simple unity of the essence. They object,
that if he is truly the Son of God, it is absurd to account him the Son of
a Person. I reply, that both are true; that he is the Son of God, because
he is the Word begotten of the Father before time began, for we are not
yet speaking of the Person of the Mediator; and to be explicit, we must
notice the Person, that the name of God may not be understood absolutely,
but for the Father; for if we acknowledge no other to be God than the
Father, it will be a manifest degradation of the dignity of the Son.
Whenever mention is made of the Deity, therefore, there must no opposition
be admitted between the Father and the Son, as though the name of the true
God belonged exclusively to the Father. For surely the God who appeared to
Isaiah, was the only true God;(268) whom, nevertheless, John affirms to
have been Christ.(269) He likewise, who by the mouth of Isaiah declared
that he was to be a rock of offence to the Jews, was the only true
God;(270) whom Paul pronounces to have been Christ.(271) He who proclaims
by Isaiah, “As I live, every knee shall bow to me,”(272) is the only true
God; but Paul applies the same to Christ.(273) To the same purpose are the
testimonies recited by the Apostle—“Thou, Lord, hast laid the foundation
of the earth and the heavens;” and “Let all the angels of God worship
him.”(274) These ascriptions belong only to the one true God; whereas he
contends that they are properly applied to Christ. Nor is there any force
in that cavil, that what is proper to God is transferred to Christ,
because he is the brightness of his glory. For, since the name Jehovah is
used in each of these passages, it follows that in respect of his Deity he
is self‐existent. For, if he is Jehovah, he cannot be denied to be the
same God, who in another place proclaims by Isaiah, “I am the first and I
am the last; and beside me there is no God.”(275) That passage in Jeremiah
also deserves our attention—“The gods that have not made the heavens and
the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these
heavens;”(276) whilst, on the contrary, it must be acknowledged, that the
Deity of the Son of God is frequently proved by Isaiah from the creation
of the world. But how shall the Creator, who gives existence to all, not
be self‐existent, but derive his essence from another? For whoever asserts
that the Son owes his essence to the Father, denies him to be self‐
existent. But this is contradicted by the Holy Spirit, who gives him the
name of Jehovah. Now, if we admit the whole essence to be solely in the
Father, either it will be divisible, or it will be taken away from the
Son; and so, being despoiled of his essence, he will be only a titular
god. The Divine essence, according to these triflers, belongs solely to
the Father, inasmuch as he alone possesses it, and is the author of the
essence of the Son. Thus the Divinity of the Son will be a kind of
emanation from the essence of God, or a derivation of a part from the
whole. Now, they must of necessity concede, from their own premises, that
the Spirit is the Spirit of the Father only; because if he be a derivation
from the original essence, which belongs exclusively to the Father, he
cannot be accounted the Spirit of the Son; which is refuted by the
testimony of Paul, where he makes him common to Christ and the Father.
Besides, if the Person of the Father be expunged from the Trinity, wherein
will he differ from the Son and Spirit, but in being himself the sole
Deity? They confess that Christ is God, and yet differs from the Father.
Some distinctive character is necessary, also, to discriminate the Father
from the Son. They who place this in the essence, manifestly destroy the
true Deity of Christ, which cannot exist independently of the essence,
that is, of the entire essence. The Father certainly cannot differ from
the Son, unless he have something peculiar to himself, which is not common
to the Son. What will they find, by which to distinguish him? If the
difference be in the essence, let them tell us whether he has communicated
the same to the Son. But this could not be done partially; for it would be
an abomination to fabricate a demigod. Besides, this would miserably
dismember the Divine essence. The necessary conclusion then is, that it is
entirely and perfectly common to the Father and the Son. And if this be
true, there cannot, in respect of the essence, be any difference between
them. If it be objected that the Father, notwithstanding this
communication of his essence, remains the only God with whom the essence
continues, then Christ must be a figurative god, a god in appearance and
name only, not in reality; because nothing is more proper to God than to
be, according to that declaration, “I AM hath sent me unto you.”(277)

XXIV. We might readily prove from many passages the falsehood of their
assumption, that, whenever the name of God is mentioned absolutely in the
Scripture, it means only the Father. And in those places which they cite
in their own defence, they shamefully betray their ignorance, since the
Son is there added; from which it appears, that the name of God is used in
a relative sense, and therefore is particularly restricted to the Person
of the Father. Their objection, that, unless the Father alone were the
true God, he would himself be his own Father, is answered in a word. For
there is no absurdity in the name of God, for the sake of dignity and
order, being peculiarly given to him, who not only hath begotten of
himself his own wisdom, but is also the God of the Mediator, of which I
shall treat more at large in its proper place. For since Christ was
manifested in the flesh, he is called the Son of God, not only as he was
the eternal Word begotten of the Father before time began, but because he
assumed the person and office of a Mediator, to unite us to God. And since
they so presumptuously exclude the Son from Divine honours, I would wish
to be informed, when he declares that there is none good but the one
God,(278) whether he deprives himself of all goodness. I speak not of his
human nature, lest they should object, that, whatever goodness it had, it
was gratuitously conferred on it. I demand whether the eternal Word of God
be good or not. If they answer in the negative, they are sufficiently
convicted of impiety; and if in the affirmative, they cut the throat of
their own system. But though, at the first glance, Christ seems to deny
himself the appellation of good, he furnishes, notwithstanding, a further
confirmation of our opinion. For, as that is a title which peculiarly
belongs to the one God, forasmuch as he had been saluted as good, merely
according to a common custom, by his rejection of false honour, he
suggested that the goodness which he possessed was Divine. I demand, also,
when Paul affirms that God alone is immortal, wise, and true,(279) whether
he thereby degrades Christ to the rank of those who are mortal, unwise,
and false. Shall not he then be immortal who from the beginning was life
itself, and the giver of immortality to angels? Shall not he be wise who
is the eternal Wisdom of God? Shall not he be true who is truth itself? I
demand further, whether they think that Christ ought to be worshipped.
For, if he justly claims this as his right, that every knee should bow
before him,(280) it follows that he is that God, who, in the law,
prohibited the worship of any one but himself. If they will have this
passage in Isaiah, “I am, and there is no God besides me,” to be
understood solely of the Father, I retort this testimony on themselves;
since we see that whatever belongs to God is attributed to Christ. Nor is
there any room for their cavil, that Christ was exalted in the humanity in
which he had been abased; and that, with regard to his humanity, all power
was given to him in heaven and in earth; because, although the regal and
judicial majesty extends to the whole Person of the Mediator, yet, had he
not been God manifested in the flesh, he could not have been exalted to
such an eminence, without God being in opposition to himself. And Paul
excellently determines this controversy, by informing us that he was equal
with God, before he abased himself under the form of a servant.(281) Now,
how could this equality subsist, unless he had been that God whose name is
JAH and JEHOVAH, who rides on the cherubim, whose kingdom is universal and
everlasting? No clamour of theirs can deprive Christ of another
declaration of Isaiah: “Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him;”(282)
since in these words he describes the advent of God the Redeemer, not only
for the deliverance of the people from exile in Babylon, but also for the
complete restoration of the church. Nor do they gain any thing by another
cavil, that Christ was God in his Father. For although we confess, in
point of order and degree, that the Father is the fountain of the Deity,
yet we pronounce it a detestable figment, that the essence belongs
exclusively to the Father, as though he were the author of the Deity of
the Son; because, on this supposition, either the essence would be
divided, or Christ would be only a titular and imaginary god. If they
admit that the Son is God, but inferior to the Father, then in him the
essence must be begotten and created, which in the Father is unbegotten
and uncreated. I know that some scorners ridicule our concluding a
distinction of Persons from the words of Moses, where he introduces God
thus speaking: “Let us make man in our image.”(283) Yet pious readers
perceive how frigidly and foolishly Moses would have introduced this
conference, if in one God there had not subsisted a plurality of Persons.
Now, it is certain that they whom the Father addressed, were uncreated;
but there is nothing uncreated, except the one God himself. Now,
therefore, unless they grant that the power to create, and the authority
to command, were common to the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, it will
follow, that God did not speak thus within himself, but directed his
conversation to some exterior agents. Lastly, one place will easily remove
their two objections at once. For when Christ himself declares, that God
is a Spirit, it would be unreasonable to restrict this solely to the
Father, as though the Word were not also of a spiritual nature. But if the
name of Spirit is equally as applicable to the Son as to the Father, I
conclude that the Son is comprehended under the indefinite name of God.
Yet he immediately subjoins, that none are approved worshippers of the
Father, but those who worship him in spirit and in truth.(284) Whence
follows another consequence, that, because Christ performs the office of a
Teacher, in a station of inferiority, he ascribes the name of God to the
Father, not to destroy his own Deity, but by degrees to raise us to the
knowledge of it.

XXV. But they deceive themselves in dreaming of three separate
individuals, each of them possessing a part of the Divine essence. We
teach, according to the Scriptures, that there is essentially but one God;
and, therefore, that the essence of both the Son and the Spirit is
unbegotten. But since the Father is first in order, and hath of himself
begotten his wisdom, therefore, as has before been observed, he is justly
esteemed the original and fountain of the whole Divinity. Thus God,
indefinitely, is unbegotten; and the Father also is unbegotten with regard
to his Person. They even foolishly suppose, that our opinion implies a
quaternity; whereas they are guilty of falsehood and calumny, in ascribing
to us a figment of their own; as though we pretended that the three
Persons are as so many streams proceeding from one essence, when it is
evident, from our writings, that we separate not the Persons from the
essence, but, though they subsist in it, make a distinction between them.
If the persons were separated from the essence, there would perhaps be
some probability in their argument; but then there would be a trinity of
Gods, not a trinity of persons contained in one God. This solves their
frivolous question, whether the essence concurs to the formation of the
Trinity; as though we imagined three Gods to descend from it. Their
objection, that then the Trinity would be without God, is equally
impertinent. Because, though it concurs not to the distinction as a part
or member, yet the Persons are not independent of it, nor separate from
it; for the Father, unless he were God, could not be the Father; and the
Son is the Son only as he is God. Therefore we say, that the Deity is
absolutely self‐existent; whence we confess, also, that the Son, as God,
independently of the consideration of Person, is self‐existent; but as the
Son, we say, that he is of the Father. Thus his essence is unoriginated;
but the origin of his Person is God himself. And, indeed, the orthodox
writers, who have written on the Trinity, have referred this name only to
the Persons; since to comprehend the essence in that distinction, were not
only an absurd error, but a most gross impiety. For it is evident that
those who maintain that the Trinity consists in a union of the Essence,
the Son, and the Spirit, annihilate the essence of the Son and of the
Spirit; otherwise the parts would be destroyed by being confounded
together; which is a fault in every distinction. Finally, if the words
_Father_ and _God_ were synonymous—if the Father were the author of the
Deity—nothing would be left in the Son but a mere shadow; nor would the
Trinity be any other than a conjunction of the one God with two created
things.

XXVI. Their objection, that Christ, if he be properly God, is not rightly
called the Son of God, has already been answered; for when a comparison is
made between one Person and another, the word _God_ is not used
indefinitely, but is restricted to the Father, as being the fountain of
the Deity, not with regard to the essence, as fanatics falsely pretend,
but in respect of order. This is the sense in which we ought to understand
that declaration of Christ to his Father: “This is life eternal, that they
might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast
sent.”(285) For, speaking in the capacity of Mediator, he holds an
intermediate station between God and men; yet without any diminution of
his majesty. For, although he abased himself, yet he lost not his glory
with the Father, which was hidden from the world. Thus the Apostle to the
Hebrews,(286) though he acknowledges that Christ was made for a short time
inferior to the angels, yet, nevertheless, hesitates not to assert, that
he is the eternal God, who laid the foundation of the earth. We must
remember, therefore, that whenever Christ, in the capacity of Mediator,
addresses the Father, he comprehends, under the name of God, the Divinity
which belongs also to himself. Thus, when he said to his Apostles, “I go
unto the Father, for my Father is greater than I,”(287) he attributes not
to himself a secondary Divinity, as if he were inferior to the Father with
respect to the eternal essence, but because, having obtained the glory of
heaven, he gathers together the faithful to a participation of it with
him; he represents the Father to be in a station superior to himself, just
as the illustrious perfection of the splendour which appears in heaven
excels that degree of glory which was visible in him during his incarnate
state. For the same reason, Paul says, in another place, that Christ
“shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be all
in all.”(288) Nothing would be more absurd than to deny perpetual duration
to the Deity of Christ. Now, if he will never cease to be the Son of God,
but will remain for ever the same as he has been from the beginning, it
follows, that by the name _Father_ is intended the one sole Divine
essence, which is common to them both. And it is certain that Christ
descended to us, in order that, exalting us to the Father, he might at the
same time exalt us to himself also, as being one with the Father. It is
therefore neither lawful nor right to restrict the name of God exclusively
to the Father, and to deny it to the Son. For even on this very account
John asserts him to be the true God,(289) that no one might suppose, that
he possessed only a secondary degree of Deity, inferior to the Father. And
I wonder what can be the meaning of these fabricators of new gods, when,
after confessing that Christ is the true God, they immediately exclude him
from the Deity of the Father; as though there could be any true God but
one alone, or as though a transfused Divinity were any thing but a novel
fiction.

XXVII. Their accumulation of numerous passages from Irenæus, where he
asserts the Father of Christ to be the only and eternal God of Israel, is
a proof either of shameful ignorance, or of consummate wickedness. For
they ought to have considered, that that holy man was then engaged in a
controversy with some madmen, who denied that the Father of Christ was the
same God that has spoken by Moses and the Prophets, but maintained that he
was I know not what sort of phantasm, produced from the corruption of the
world. His only object, therefore, is to show that no other God is
revealed in the Scripture than the Father of Christ, and that it is
impious to imagine any other; and therefore we need not wonder at his
frequently concluding, that there never was any other God of Israel than
he who was preached by Christ and his Apostles. So, now, on the other
hand, when a different error is to be opposed, we shall truly assert, that
the God who appeared formerly to the patriarchs, was no other than Christ.
If it be objected that it was the Father, we are prepared to reply, that,
while we contend for the Divinity of the Son, we by no means reject that
of the Father. If the reader attends to this design of Irenæus, all
contention will cease. Moreover, the whole controversy is easily decided
by the sixth chapter of the third book, where the good man insists on this
one point: That he who is absolutely and indefinitely called God in the
Scripture, is the only true God; but that the name of God is given
absolutely to Christ. Let us remember that the point at issue, as appears
from the whole treatise, and particularly from the forty‐sixth chapter of
the second book, was this: That the appellation of Father is not given in
an enigmatical and parabolical sense to one who is not truly God. Besides,
in another place he contends, that the Son is called God, as well as the
Father, by the Prophets and Apostles. He afterwards states how Christ, who
is Lord, and King, and God, and Judge of all, received power from him who
is God of all; and that is with relation to the subjection in which he was
humbled even to the death of the cross. And a little after he affirms,
that the Son is the Creator of heaven and earth, who gave the law by the
hand of Moses, and appeared to the patriarchs. Now, if any one pretends
that Irenæus acknowledges the Father alone as the God of Israel, I shall
reply, as is clearly maintained by the same writer, that Christ is one and
the same; as also he applies to him the prophecy of Habakkuk: “God shall
come from the south.” To the same purpose is what we find in the ninth
chapter of the fourth book: “Therefore Christ himself is, with the Father,
the God of the living.” And in the twelfth chapter of the same book he
states, that Abraham believed in God, inasmuch as Christ is the Creator of
heaven and earth, and the only God.

XXVIII. Their pretensions to the sanction of Tertullian are equally
unfounded, for, notwithstanding the occasional harshness and obscurity of
his mode of expression, yet he unequivocally teaches the substance of the
doctrine which we are defending; that is, that whereas there is one God,
yet by dispensation or economy there is his Word; that there is but one
God in the unity of the substance, but that the unity, by a mysterious
dispensation, is disposed into a trinity; that there are three, not in
condition, but in degree; not in substance, but in form; not in power, but
in order. He says, indeed, that he maintains the Son to be second to the
Father; but he applies this only to the distinction of the Persons. He
says somewhere, that the Son is visible; but after having stated arguments
on both sides, he concludes that, as the Word, he is invisible. Lastly,
his assertion that the Father is designated by his Person, proves him to
be at the greatest distance from the notion which we are refuting. And
though he acknowledges no other God than the Father, yet the explanations
which he gives in the immediate context show that he speaks not to the
exclusion of the Son, when he denies the existence of any other God than
the Father; and that therefore the unity of Divine government is not
violated by the distinction of persons. And from the nature and design of
his argument it is easy to gather the meaning of his words. For he
contends, in opposition to Praxeas, that although God is distinguished
into three Persons, yet neither is there a plurality of gods, nor is the
unity divided. And because, according to the erroneous notion of Praxeas,
Christ could not be God, without being the Father, therefore Tertullian
bestows so much labour upon the distinction. His calling the Word and
Spirit a portion of the whole, though a harsh expression, yet is
excusable; since it has no reference to the substance, but only denotes
the disposition and economy, which belongs solely to the Persons,
according to the testimony of Tertullian himself. Hence also that
question, “How many Persons suppose you that there are, O most perverse
Praxeas, but as many as there are names?” So, a little after, “that they
may believe the Father and the Son, both in their names and Persons.”
These arguments, I conceive, will suffice to refute the impudence of those
who make use of the authority of Tertullian in order to deceive the minds
of the simple.

XXIX. And certainly, whoever will diligently compare the writings of the
fathers, will find in Irenæus nothing different from what was advanced by
others who succeeded him. Justin Martyr is one of the most ancient; and he
agrees with us in every point. They may object that the Father of Christ
is denominated the one God by him as well as by the rest. The same is
asserted also by Hilary, and even in harsher terms: he says, that eternity
is in the Father; but does this imply a denial of the Divine essence to
the Son? On the contrary, he had no other design than to maintain the same
faith which we hold. Nevertheless, they are not ashamed to cull out
mutilated passages, in order to induce a belief that he patronized their
error. If they wish any authority to be attached to their quotation of
Ignatius, let them prove that the Apostles delivered any law concerning
Lent, and similar corruptions; for nothing can be more absurd than the
impertinencies which have been published under the name of Ignatius.
Wherefore their impudence is more intolerable, who disguise themselves
under such false colours for the purpose of deception. Moreover, the
consent of antiquity manifestly appears from this circumstance, that in
the Nicene Council, Arius never dared to defend himself by the authority
of any approved writer; and not one of the Greek or Latin fathers, who
were there united against him, excused himself as at all dissenting from
his predecessors. With regard to Augustine, who experienced great
hostility from these disturbers, his diligent examination of all the
writings of the earlier fathers, and his respectful attention to them,
need not be mentioned. If he differs from them in the smallest
particulars, he assigns the reasons which oblige him to dissent from them.
On this argument also, if he finds any thing ambiguous or obscure in
others, he never conceals it. Yet he takes it for granted, that the
doctrine which those men oppose has been received without controversy from
the remotest antiquity; and yet that he was not uninformed of what others
had taught before him, appears even from one word in the first book of his
Treatise on the Christian Doctrine, where he says, that unity is in the
Father. Will they pretend that he had then forgotten himself? But he
elsewhere vindicates himself from this calumny, where he calls the Father
the fountain of the whole Deity, because he is from no other; wisely
considering that the name of God is especially ascribed to the Father,
because, unless the original be from him, it is impossible to conceive of
the simple unity of the Deity. These observations, I hope, will be
approved by the pious reader, as sufficient to refute all the calumnies,
with which Satan has hitherto laboured to pervert or obscure the purity of
this doctrine. Finally, I trust that the whole substance of this doctrine
has been faithfully stated and explained, provided my readers set bounds
to their curiosity, and are not unreasonably fond of tedious and intricate
controversies. For I have not the least expectation of giving satisfaction
to those who are pleased with an intemperance of speculation. I am sure I
have used no artifice in the omission of any thing, from a supposition
that it would make against me. But, studying the edification of the
Church, I have thought it better not to touch upon many things, which
would be unnecessarily burdensome to the reader, without yielding him any
profit. For to what purpose is it to dispute, whether the Father be always
begetting? For it is foolish to imagine a continual act of generation,
since it is evident that three Persons have subsisted in God from all
eternity.
