PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 14 An Exposition of Romans 8:13

Chapter 1

AN EXPOSITION OF ROMANS 8:13 For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. —Romans 8:13

1. Foundation in Romans 8:13 So that my contribution of directions for mortification in believers may be orderly and clear, I will lay the foundation in the words of the apostle, “If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live” (Rom 8:13). I will focus on the great evangelical truth and mystery contained in them. The apostle, having restated his doctrine of justification by faith, and the blessed state and condition of them who are made partakers of it by grace (vv. 1-3), proceeds to improve it to the holiness and consolation of believers. Among his arguments and motives unto holiness, the verse mentioned contains one from the opposite events 6 and effects of holiness and sin: “If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die.” What it is to “live after the flesh” and to “die,” I shall no otherwise explain than as they fit in with the sense of the latter words of the verse, as before proposed, since that is not my present aim or business. In the words peculiarly designed for the foundation of the ensuing discourse, there is, First, a duty prescribed: “Mortify the deeds of the body.” Secondly, the persons are denoted to whom it is prescribed: “Ye”—“if ye mortify.” Thirdly, there is in them a promise annexed to that duty: “Ye shall live.” Fourthly, the cause or means of the performance of this duty is the Spirit: “If ye through the Spirit.” Fifthly, the condition of the whole proposition, in which duty, means, and promise are contained: “If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.”

2. Connection between True Mortification and Salvation The first thing occurring in the words as they lie in the entire proposition is the conditional note: “but if.” Conditionals in such propositions may denote either of two things: a. The uncertainty of the event or thing promised in respect of those to whom the duty is prescribed. And this takes place where the condition is absolutely necessary in order to cause 6

events – consequences.

4

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

the result, and does not depend on any determinate cause known to him to whom it is prescribed. So we say, “If we live, we will do such a thing.” This cannot be the intention of the conditional expression in this place. It is said about the persons to whom these words are spoken, “There is no condemnation to them” (Rom 8:1). b. The certainty of the connection between the things spoken of, as we say to a sick man, “If you will take such a potion, or use such a remedy, you will be well.” The thing we solely intend to express is the certainty of the connection that is between the potion or remedy and health. And this is the use of it here. The certain connection that is between the mortifying of the deeds of the body and living is intimated in this conditional particle. Now, since the possible connections of things may be manifold, 7 as cause and effect or means and end, this connection between mortification and life is not properly of cause and effect, for “the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ” (Rom 6:23). The connection is rather of means and end. God has appointed this means for attaining that end which He has freely promised. Means, though necessary, have a legitimate subordination to a result that is freely promised. A gift and something in the recipient that causes him to receive it are inconsistent. The intention, then, of this conditional proposition is that there is a certain infallible8 connection between true mortification and eternal life: if you use this means, you shall obtain that result; if you do mortify, you shall live. The main motive for and enforcement of the duty of mortification lies in this.

3. Mortification: The Work of Believers The next thing we meet with in the words is the persons to whom this duty is prescribed, and that is expressed in the word ye, which in the original is included in the Greek verb thanatoute, “if ye mortify”; that is, you believers—you to whom “there is…no condemnation” (8:1); you that are “not in the flesh, but in the Spirit” (8:9); who are “quicken[ed] by his Spirit,” the Spirit of Christ (8:10-11)—to you is this duty prescribed. The pressing of this duty directly on any other persons is a significant result of the superstition and self-righteousness that the world is full of; it is the great work and design of devout men who are ignorant of the gospel (Rom 10:3-4; Joh 15:5). Now, this description of the persons, in conjunction with the prescription of the duty, is the main foundation of the following discourse as it lies in this thesis or proposition: The choicest believers, who are assuredly freed from the condemning power of sin, ought yet to make it their business all their days to mortify the indwelling power of sin.

4. The Spirit: The Principal Efficient Cause The principal efficient cause of the performance of this duty is the Spirit: “If by the Spirit.” The Spirit here is the Spirit mentioned in Romans 8:11—the Spirit of Christ, the “Spirit of God” (v. 14), Who dwells in us (v. 9), Who quickens us (v. 11), the “Spirit of adoption” (v. 15), the Spirit that “maketh intercession for us” (v. 26). All other ways of mortification are vain; all helps leave us helpless. It must be done by the Spirit. As the apostle shows, men may attempt 7 8

manifold – varied; of many kinds.
infallible – unfailing; not capable of being wrong.

1. An Exposition of Romans 8:13

5

this work on other principles, by means and advantages administered on other accounts as they always have done and do (Rom 9:30-32). But, he says, this is the work of the Spirit; by Him alone is it to be wrought, and by no other power is it to be brought about. Mortification from a self-strength, carried on by ways of self-invention, unto the end of a self-righteousness, is the soul and substance of all false religion in the world. And this is a second principle of my ensuing discourse.

5. “Mortify the Deeds of the Body” The duty itself, “Mortify the deeds of the body,” is to be considered next. Three things are here to be inquired into: a) What is meant by “the body”; b) What is meant by “the deeds of the body”; c) What is meant by the mortifying of them.

a. “The body” The “body” in the close of the verse is the same with the “flesh” in the beginning: “If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye...mortify the deeds of the body,” that is, the flesh. It is that which the apostle has all along meant by the “flesh,” which is evident from his focus on the contrast between the Spirit and the flesh, before and after. The body, then, is taken here for that corruption and depravity of our natures whereof the body, in a great part, is the seat and instrument—the very members of the body being made servants unto unrighteousness by such corruption (Rom 6:19). It is indwelling sin, the corrupted flesh or lust, that is intended. 9 Many reasons might be given for this metonymical expression, which I shall not now insist on. The “body” here is the same as the “old man” and the “body of sin” (Rom 6:6); or it may synecdochically 10 express the whole person considered as corrupted, and the seat of lusts and distempered affections. 11

b. “The deeds of the body” The Greek word for “deeds of the body” is praxeis, which indeed denotes chiefly the outward actions, “the works of the flesh,” as they are called in Galatians 5:19; which are there said to be “manifest,” and are enumerated. Now, though the outward deeds alone are here expressed, yet 12 the inward and next causes are chiefly intended. The axe is to be “laid to the root of the trees” (Mat 3:10). The deeds of the flesh are to be mortified in their causes from which they spring. The apostle calls them “deeds” as that which every lust tends toward. Though it does but conceive and prove abortive, it aims to bring forth a perfect sin. Both in the seventh chapter and in the beginning of this chapter the apostle has treated of indwelling lust and sin as the fountain and principle of all sinful actions. Having done so, he here mentions its destruction under the name of the effects that it produces. “The deeds of the 9

metonymical expression or metonymy – figure of speech that uses the name of one thing for that of another with which it is associated, as in the use of “Washington” for the U.S. Government 10 synecdochically – pertaining to a figure of speech in which a part is made to represent the whole or the whole for a part, as in “Cleveland won by six runs,” meaning “Cleveland’s baseball team won by six home runs.” 11 distempered affections – powers in the human soul that work with the body to embrace good and reject evil, which have been diseased and disordered by sin. 12 next – nearest.

6

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

body” are the “wisdom of the flesh” as much as the “carnal 13 mind” (Rom 8:6), by a metonymy of the same nature with the former; or as the “affections [that is, passions] and lusts” of the flesh (Gal 5:24), whence the deeds and fruits of it do arise. “The body” is used in this sense in Romans 8:10, “The body is dead because of sin.”

c. To “mortify” “If ye do mortify” (or “put to death”) is a metaphorical expression taken from the putting of any living thing to death. To kill a man or any other living thing is to take away the principle of all his strength, vigor, and power, so that he cannot act, exert, or put forth any proper actings 14 of his own. So it is in this case. Indwelling sin is compared to a living person called “the old man,” with his faculties and properties, his wisdom, craft, subtlety, and strength. This, says the apostle, must be killed, put to death, mortified—that is, have its power, life, vigor, and strength to produce its effects taken away by the Spirit. It is indeed meritoriously and by way of example utterly mortified and slain by the cross of Christ. Therefore, the “old man” is said to be “crucified with” Christ (Rom 6:6), and ourselves to be “dead” with Him (6:8). And it is 15 really mortified initially in regeneration, when a principle contrary to it and destructive of it is planted in our hearts (Rom 6:3-5; Gal 5:17). But the whole work is by degrees to be carried on towards perfection all our days. We will say more about this in the process of our discourse. The intention of the apostle in this prescription of the duty mentioned is that the mortification of indwelling sin remaining in our mortal bodies is the constant duty of believers, so that it may not have life and power to bring forth the works or deeds of the flesh.

d. “Ye shall live” The promise joined to this duty is life: “Ye shall live.” The life promised is opposed to the death threatened in the previous clause, “If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die”—which the same apostle expresses as “he…shall of the flesh reap corruption” (Gal 6:8), or destruction from God. Now, perhaps the word may not only intend eternal life but also spiritual life in Christ that we have here in this life; not as to the essence and being of it, which is already enjoyed by believers, but as to the joy, comfort, and vigor of it. This is as the apostle says in another case: “Now we live, if ye stand fast” (1Th 3:8)—that is, now my life will do me good; I shall have joy and comfort with my life. “Ye shall live”—that is, you shall lead a good, vigorous, comfortable, spiritual life while you are here, and obtain eternal life hereafter. Supposing what was said before of the connection between mortification and eternal life, as of means and end, I shall add—as a second motive to the duty prescribed—only that the vigor, power, and comfort of our spiritual life depends on the mortification of the deeds of the flesh.

13

carnal – fleshly, as opposed to spiritual. actings – actions. 15 regeneration – God’s act of creating new life in a sinner by the power of the Holy Spirit. 14
