PURITAN GOLD -- The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment by Jeremiah Burroughs: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 8
The Excellence of Contentment


The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. By Jeremiah Burroughs.

Chapter 4. The Excellence of Contentment.

And that is the fourth lesson that Christ teaches the soul when he brings
it to his school to learn the art of contentment: he makes him understand
thoroughly the relation in which he has placed him to this world.
5. CHRIST TEACHES US WHEREIN CONSISTS ANY GOOD
THAT IS TO BE ENJOYED IN ANY CREATURE IN THE
WORLD.
We have taught before that there is a vanity in the creature, that is,
considered in itself, yet though there is a vanity in the creature in itself, in
respect of satisfying the soul for its portion, yet there is some goodness in
the creature, some desirableness. Now wherein does this consist? It
consists not in the nature of the creature itself, for that is nothing but
vanity, but it consists in its reference to the first being of all things: this is
a lesson that Christ teaches. If there is any good in wealth or in any
comfort in this world, it is not so much that it pleases my sense or that it
suits my body, but that it has reference to God, the first being, that by
these creatures somewhat of God's goodness might be conveyed to me,
and I may have a sanctified use of the creature to draw me nearer to God,
that I may enjoy more of God, and be made more serviceable for his glory
in the place where he has set me: this is the good of the creature. Oh, that
we were only instructed in this lesson, and understood, and thoroughly
believed this! No creature in all the world has any goodness in it any
further than it has reference to the first infinite supreme good of all, that
so far as I can enjoy God in it, so far it is good to me, and so far as I do not
enjoy God in it, so far there is no goodness in any creature. How easy it
would be, if we really believed that, to be contented! Suppose a man had
great wealth only a few years ago, and now it is all gone-I would only ask
this man, When you had your wealth, in what did you reckon the good of
that wealth to consist? A carnal heart would say, Anybody might know
that: it brought me in so much a year, and I could have the best fare, and
be a man of repute in the place where I live, and men regarded what I
said; I might be clothed as I would, and lay up portions for my children:
the good of my wealth consisted in this. Now such a man never came into
the school of Christ to know in what the good of an estate consisted, so no
marvel if he is disquieted when he has lost his estate. But when a
Christian, who has been in the school of Christ, and has been instructed

in the art of contentment, has some wealth, he thinks, In that I have
wealth above my brethren, I have an opportunity to serve God the better,
and I enjoy a great deal of God's mercy conveyed to my soul through the
creature, and hereby I am enabled to do a great deal of good: in this I
reckon the good of my wealth. And now that God has taken this away
from me, if he will be pleased to make up the enjoyment of himself some
other way, will call me to honor him by suffering, and if I may do God as
much service now by suffering, that is, by showing forth the grace of his
Spirit in my sufferings as I did in prosperity, I have as much of God as I
had before. So if I may be led to God in my low condition, as much as I
was in my prosperous condition, I have as much comfort and
contentment as I had before.
Objection. You will say, it is true that if I could honor God in my low
estate as much as in my prosperous estate then it would be something,
but how can that be? Answer. You must know that the special honor
which God has from his creatures in this world is the manifestation of the
graces of his Spirit. It is true that God gets a great deal of honor when a
man is in a public place, and so is able to do a great deal of good, to
countenance godliness, and discountenance sin, but the main thing is in
our showing forth virtues of him who has called us out of darkness into
his marvellous light. If I can say that, through God's mercy in my
affliction, I find the graces of God's Spirit working as strongly in me as
ever they did when I had my wealth, I am where I was; indeed, I am in
quite as good a condition, for I have the same good now that I had in my
prosperous estate. I reckoned the good of it only in my enjoyment of God,
and honoring of God, and now God has blessed the lack of it to stir up the
graces of his Spirit in my soul. This is the work that God calls me to now,
and I must consider God to be most honored when I do the work that he
calls me to; he set me to work in my prosperous estate to honor him at
that time in that condition, and now he sets me to work to honor him at
this time in this condition. God is most honored when I can turn from
one condition to another, according as he calls me to it.
Would you account yourselves to be honored by your servants, if when
you set them about a work that has some excellence, they will go on and
on, and you cannot get them off from it? However good the work may be,

yet if you call them off to another work, you expect them to manifest
enough respect to you, as to be content to come off from that, though they
are set about a lesser work, if it is more useful to your ends. In the same
way you were in a prosperous estate, and there God was calling you to
some service that you took pleasure in; but suppose God said: 'I will use
you in a suffering condition, and I will have you to honor me in that
way.'? This is how you honor God, that you can turn this way or that way,
as God calls you to it. Thus having learned this, that the good of the
creature consists in the enjoyment of God in it, and the honoring of God
by it, you can be content, because you have the same good that you had
before, and that is the fifth lesson.
6. CHRIST TEACHES THE SOUL WHOM HE BRINGS INTO
THIS SCHOOL IN THE KNOWLEDGE OF THEIR OWN
HEARTS.
You must learn this or you will never learn contentment. You must learn
to know your own hearts well, to be good students of your own hearts.
You cannot all be scholars in the arts and sciences in the world, but you
may all be students of your own hearts. Many of you cannot read in the
Book, but God expects you every day to turn over a leaf in your own
hearts. You will never get any skill in this mystery of contentment, except
you study the book of your own hearts. Sailors have their books which
they study, those who will be good navigators, and scholars have their
books, those who study Logic have their books according to that, and
those that study Rhetoric and Philosophy have their books according to
that, and those that study Divinity have their books whereby they come to
be helped in the study of Divinity, but a Christian, next to the Book of
God, is to look into the book of his own heart, and to read over that, and
this will help you to contentment in three ways: 1. By studying your heart
you will come soon to discover wherein your discontent lies. When you
are discontented you will find out the root of any discontent if you study
your heart well. Many men and women are discontented, and the truth is
they do not know why; they think this and the other thing is the cause.
But a man or woman who knows their own heart will soon find out where
the root of their discontent lies, that it lies in some corruption and
disorder of the heart, that through God's mercy I have now found out. It

is similar to the case of a little child who is very awkward in the house,
and when a stranger comes in he does not know what the matter is.
Perhaps he will give the child a rattle, or a nut, or something of the sort to
quiet it, but when the nurse comes she knows the temper and disposition
of the child, and therefore knows how to calm it. It is just the same here:
when we are strangers to our own hearts we are powerfully discontented,
and do not know how to quiet ourselves, because we do not know wherein
the disquiet lies, but if we are very well versed in our own hearts, when
anything happens to unsettle us, we soon find out the cause of it, and so
quickly become quiet. When a man has a watch, and understand the use
of every wheel and pin, if it goes amiss he will soon find out the cause of
it; but when someone has no skill in a watch, if it goes amiss he does not
know what is the matter, and therefore cannot mend it. So indeed our
hearts are as a watch, and there are many wheels and windings and
turnings there, and we should labor to know our hearts well, that when
they are out of tune, we may know what is the matter.
2. This knowledge of our hearts will help us to contentment, because by it
we shall come to know what best suits our condition. A man who does not
know his own heart does not think what need he has of affliction, and for
that reason is uneasy, but when God comes with afflictions to the man or
woman who have studied their own hearts, they can say, 'I would not
have been without this affliction for anything in the world, God has so
suited this affliction to my condition, and has come in such a way that if
this affliction had not come I am afraid I should have fallen into sin.'
When a poor countryman takes medicine, the medicine works, but he
thinks it will kill him, because he does not know the bad humours that are
in his body, and therefore he does not understand how suitable the
medicine is for him. But if a doctor takes a purge, and it makes him
extremely sick: 'I like this the better' he says, 'it is only working on the
humor that I know is the cause of my disease', and because of that such a
man who has knowledge and understanding of his body, and the cause of
his disorder, is not troubled or disturbed. So would we be if we did but
know the disorders of our own hearts. Carnal men and women do not
know their own spirits, and therefore they fling and vex themselves at
every affliction that befalls them, they do not know what disorders are in
their hearts which may be healed by their afflictions, if it pleases God to

give them a sanctified use of them.
3. By knowing their own hearts they know what they are able to manage,
and by this means they come to be content. Perhaps the Lord takes away
many comforts from them that they had before, or denies them some
things that they hoped to have got. Now by knowing their hearts they
know that they were not able to manage such wealth, and they were not
able to manage such prosperity. God saw it, and, a poor soul says, 'I am in
some measure convinced by looking into my own heart that I was not
able to manage such a condition.' A man desires greedily to hold on to
more than he is able to manage, and so undoes himself. Countrymen
observe that if they over-stock their land, it will quickly spoil them, and
so a wise husbandman who knows how much his ground will bear is not
troubled that he has not as much stock as others-why? Because he knows
he has not got enough ground for as great a stock, and that quiets him.
Many men and women who do not know their own hearts would fain
have as prosperous a position as others, but if they knew their own hearts
they would know that they were not able to manage it.
Suppose one of your little children of three or four were crying for the
coat of her sister who is twelve or perhaps even twenty, and said, 'Why
may not I have a coat as long as my sister's?' If she had, it would soon trip
up her heels, and scratch her face. But when the child comes to
understanding, she is not discontented because her coat is not as long as
her sister's, but says, 'My coat fits me,' and therein she is content. So if we
come to understanding in the school of Christ we will not cry, Why have I
not got such wealth as others have?, but, The Lord sees that I am not able
to manage it and I see it myself by knowing my own heart. There are
some children who, if they see a knife, will cry for it because they do not
know their strength and that they are not able to manage it, but you know
they are not able to manage it and therefore you will not give it them, and
when they come to sufficient understanding to know that they are not
able to manage it, they will not cry for it. Similarly we would not cry for
some things if we knew that we were not able to manage them. When you
vex and fret for what you have not got, I may say to you as Christ said,
'You know not of what spirit you are.' It was a saying of Cecolampadius to
Parillus, when they were speaking about his extreme poverty, 'Not so

poor, though I have been very poor, yet I would be poorer; I could be
willing to be poorer than I am.' As if he were to say, The truth is, the Lord
knew what was more suitable for me, and I knew that my own heart was
such that a poor condition was more suitable to me than a rich. So
certainly would we say, if we knew our own hearts, that such and such a
condition is better for me than if it had been otherwise.
7. THE SEVENTH LESSON BY WHICH CHRIST TEACHES
CONTENTMENT IS the burden of a prosperous outward condition.
One who comes into Christ's school to be instructed in this art never
attains to any great skill in it until he comes to understand the burden
that is in a prosperous condition.
Objection. You will say, 'What burden is there in a prosperous condition?'
Answer. Yes, there is certainly a great burden, and it needs great strength
to bear it. Just as men need strong brains to bear strong wine, so they
need strong spirits to bear prosperous conditions, and not to do
themselves hurt. Many men and women look at the shine and glitter of
prosperity, but they little think of the burden. There is a fourfold burden
in a prosperous condition.
1. There is a burden of trouble. A rose has its prickles, and the Scripture
says that he that will be rich pierceth himself through with many sorrows
(
1 Timothy 6:10). If a man's heart is set upon being rich, such a man will
pierce himself through with many sorrows: he looks upon the delight and
glory of riches which appears outwardly, but he does not consider what
piercing sorrows he may meet with in them. The consideration of the
trouble that is in a prosperous condition, I have many times thought of,
and I cannot think of anything better to compare it with than to travelling
in some open country, where round about is very fair and sandy ground,
and you see a town a great way off in a valley and you thin, Oh how well
situated that town is; but when you come and ride into the town, you ride
through a dirty lane and through a lot of fearfully dirty holes. You could
not see the dirty lane and holes when you were two or three miles off. In
the same way, sometimes we look upon the prosperity of men and think,
this man lives well and comfortably, but if we only knew what troubles he

has in his family, in his possessions, in his dealings with men, we would
not think his position so happy. A man may have a very fine new shoe,
but nobody knows where it pinches him except the one who has it on; so
you think certain men are happy, but they may have many troubles that
you little think of.
2. There is a burden of danger in it. Men in a prosperous position are in a
great deal of danger. You see sometimes in the evening that when you
light up your candles, the moths and gnats will fly up and down in the
candle and scorch their wings, and they fall down dead there. So there is a
great deal of danger in a prosperous estate, for men who are set upon a
pinnacle on high are in greater danger than other men are. Honey, we
know, invites bees and wasps to it, and the sweet of prosperity invites the
Devil and temptation. Men in a prosperous position are subject to many
temptations that other men are not subject to. The Scripture calls the
Devil Beelzebub, that is, the God of flies, and so Beelzebub comes where
the honey of prosperity is. Yes, they are in very great danger of
temptations who are in a prosperous condition. The dangers that men in
a prosperous position have more than others should be considered by
those who are lower. Think to yourself: though they are above me, yet
they are in more danger than I am.
Tall trees are a great deal more broken than low shrubs, and you know
when a ship has all its sails up in a storm, even the top sail, it is in more
danger than one which has all its sails drawn in. Similarly, men who have
their top sail and all up so finely, are more likely to be drowned, drowned
in perdition, than other men. You know what the Scripture says, how
hard it is for rich men to go into the Kingdom of Heaven; such a text
should make poor people content with their state.
We have a striking example of this in the children of Kohath: you will find
that they were in a more excellent position than the other Levites, but
they were in more danger than the others, and more trouble. That the
children of Kohath were in a higher position than the other Levites I will
show you from the fourth chapter of Numbers. There you find what their
position was: 'This shall be a service of the sons of Kohath in the
tabernacle of the congregation, about the most holy things.' Mark this,
the Levites were exercised about holy things, but the service of the sons of

Kohath was about the most holy things of all. And you find in the 21st of
Joshua that God honored the other Levites, which honor the children of
Aaron (being of the families of the Kohathites, who were the children of
Levi) had, for theirs was the first lot (
Joshua 21:10) and they were preferred before the other families of Levi.
Those who were employed in the most honorable employment had the
most honorable lot, the first lot fell to them. Thus you see how God
honored the children of the Kohathites. But the other Levites might say,
'How has God preferred this family before us?' They are indeed honored
more than the others. But notice the burden that comes with their honor;
I will show you it out of two Scriptures. The first is
Numbers 7:6-9, 'And Moses took the wagons and four oxen he gave unto
the sons of Gershom, according to their service, and four wagons and
eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari according to their service,
under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest'; but in the ninth
verse he says, 'Unto the sons of Kohath he gave none, because the service
of the sanctuary that belonged unto them, was, that they should bear
upon their shoulders.' Mark, the other Levites had oxen and wagons
given to them, to make their service easier, but, he says, to the sons of
Kohath he gave none, but they should bear their service on their
shoulders. And that is the reason why God was so displeased, because
they wanted more ease in God's service than God would have them, for
whereas they should have carried it upon their shoulders, they would
carry it upon a cart. Here you see the first burden that they had, beyond
what the other Levites had. And indeed, those who are in a more
honorable place than others have a burden to carry on their shoulders
that those who are under them to not think of, while others have ways of
easing their burden. Many times those who are employed in the ministry,
or the magistracy, who sit at the stern to order the great affairs of the
commonwealth and state, though you think they have a fine life, they lie
awake when you are asleep. If you knew the burden that lay upon their
spirits, you would think that your labor and burden were very little in
comparison of theirs.
There is another burden of danger in more than the rest, and you will find
it in Numbers 4:17: 'And the Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron

saying, Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from
among the Levites, but thus do unto them that they may live and not die:
When they approach unto the most holy things, Aaron and his sons shall
go in and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden; but
they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered, lest they die.'
Mark this text: the Lord says to Moses and Aaron, 'Cut ye not off the tribe
of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites', cut them not
off- Why? What had they done? Had they done anything amiss? No, they
had not done anything to provoke God; but the meaning is this: take
great care to instruct the family of the Kohathites in the duty that they
were to do, for, said God, they are in a great deal of danger, serving in the
most holy things. If they go in to see the holy things more than God would
have them do, it is as much as their lives are worth, and therefore, if you
neglect them, and do not inform them thoroughly in their duty, they
would be undone, said God. They are to administer in the most holy
things, and if they should but dare to presume to do anything otherwise
than God would have them, about those services, it would cost them their
lives; and therefore do not be careless of them, for if you neglect them you
will be a means of cutting them off. Thus you see the danger that the
family of the Kohathites were in; they were preferred before others, but
they were in more danger. So you think of certain men in a parish who
bear the sway and are employed in public service, and carry all before
them, but you do not consider their danger. And similarly ministers stand
in the forefront of all the spite and malice of ungodly men; certainly God
employs them in an honorable service, and a service that the angels
would delight in, but though the service is honorable, above other works,
yet the burden of danger is likewise greater than the danger of men in an
inferior position. Now when the soul gets wisdom from Christ to think of
the danger that it is in, then it will be content with the low estate in which
it is. A poor man who is in a low condition, thinks, 'I am low and others
are raised, but I know now what their burden is', and so, if he is rightly
instructed in the school of Christ, he comes to be contented.
3. In a prosperous condition there is the burden of duty. You look only at
the sweetness and comfort, the honor and respect that they have who are
in a prosperous position, but you must consider the duty that they owe to
God. God requires more duty at their hands than at yours. You are ready

to be discontented because you have not got such gifts and abilities as
others have, but God requires more duty of those who have greater
wealth than of you who have not such wealth. Oh, you would fain have
the honor, but can you carry the burden of the duty? 4. The last is the
burden of account in a prosperous condition. Those who enjoy great
wealth and a prosperous condition have a great account to give to God.
We are all stewards, and one is a steward to a meaner man, perhaps but
to an ordinary knight, another is a steward to a nobleman, an earl-now
the steward of the meaner man has not so much as the other under his
hand, and shall he be discontented because of this? No, he thinks, I have
less, and I will have to give the less account. So your account, in
comparison of the minister's and magistrate's, will be nothing: you are to
give an account of your own souls and so are they, you are to give an
account for your own family and so are they, but you will not have to give
account for congregations, and for towns, and cities and countries. You
think of princes and kings-Oh, what a glorious position they are in! But
what do you think of a king who has to give account for the disorder and
wickedness in a kingdom which he might possibly have prevented? What
an abundance of glory might a prince bring to God if he bent his soul and
all his thoughts to lift up the name of God in his kingdom! Now what God
loses through the lack of this, that king, prince or governor must give an
account for. There is a saying of Chrysostom on that place in Hebrews
where it is said that men must give an account or their souls: he wonders
that any man in a public place can be saved, because the account they
have to give is so great. I remember I have read a saying of Philip, the
King of Spain: though the story says of him that he had such a natural
conscience that he professed he would not do anything against his
conscience, no, not in secret, for gaining a world, yet when this man was
to die, 'Oh', he said, 'that I had never been a king! Oh, that I had lived a
solitary and private life all my days! Then I should have died a great deal
more securely, I should with more confidence have gone before the
throne of God to give my account. This is the fruit of my kingdom,
because I had all the glory of it, it has made my account harder to give to
God'. Thus he cried out when he was to die.
And therefore you who live in private positions, remember this: if you
come to Christ's school and are taught this lesson, you will be quiet in

your afflictions, or in your private position, because your account is not as
great as others. There is a saying I remember meeting with in Latimer's
sermons which he was wont to use: 'The half is more than the whole'; that
is, when a man is in a mean condition, he is but half way towards the
height of prosperity that others are in, yet, he says, this is safer though it
is a meaner condition than others.
Those who are in a high and prosperous condition have annexed to it the
burden of trouble, of danger, of duty, and of account. And thus you see
how Christ trains up his scholars in his school, and though they are
otherwise weak, yet by his Spirit he gives them wisdom to understand
these things aright.
8. CHRIST TEACHES THEM WHAT A GREAT AND DREADFUL
EVIL IT IS TO BE GIVEN UP TO ONE'S HEART'S DESIRES.
It is, indeed, a dreadful evil, one of the most hideous and fearful evils that
can befall any man on the face of the earth, for God to give him up to his
heart's desires. A kindred truth is that spiritual judgments are more
fearful than any outward judgments. Now once the soul understands
these things, a man will be content when God crosses him in his desires.
You are crossed in your desires, and so you are discontented and vexed
and fretted about it; is that your only misery, that you are crossed in your
desires? No, no, you are infinitely mistaken; the greatest misery of all is
for God to give you up to your heart's lusts and desires, to give you up to
your own counsels. So you have it in Psalm 81:11, 12: 'But my people
would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me,'-what then?
-'So I gave them up unto their own heart lust, and they walked in their
own counsels.' 'Oh let me not have such a misery as that', said Bernard,
'for to give me what I would have, to give me my heart's desires is one of
the most hideous judgments in the world.' In Scripture we have no
certain, evident sign of a reprobate, we cannot say, unless we knew a man
had committed the sin against the Holy Ghost, that he is a reprobate, for
we do not know what God may work upon him, but the nearest of all and
the blackest sign of a reprobate is this: for God to give a man up to his
heart's desires. All the pain of diseases, all the calamities that can be
thought of in the world are no judgments in comparison of this.

Now when the soul comes to understand this, it cries out, why am I so
troubled that I have not got my desires? There is nothing that God
conveys his wrath more through than a prosperous condition. I
remember reading of a Jewish tradition about Uzziah: when God struck
him with leprosy, they say that the beams of the sun darted upon the
forehead of Uzziah, and he was struck with leprosy in this way. The
Scripture says, indeed, that the priests looked upon him, but they say that
there was a special light and beam of the sun on his forehead that
revealed the leprosy to the priests, and they say that was the way of
conveying of it. Whether that was true or not, I am sure that this is true,
that the strong beams of the sun of prosperity upon many men make
them to be leprous. Would any poor man in the country have been
discontented that he was not in Uzziah's position? He was a great King,
aye, but there was the leprosy in his forehead. The poor man might say,
Though I live meanly in the country yet I thank God my body is whole
and sound. Would not any man rather have homespun and skins of
beasts to clothe himself with, tan to have satin and velvet that had plague
in it? The Lord conveys the plague of his curse through prosperity, as
much as through any thing in the world, and therefore when the soul
comes to understand this, this makes it quiet and content.
And then, spiritual judgments are the greatest judgments of all. The Lord
lays such and such an affliction upon my outward wealth, but what if he
had taken away my life? A man's health is a greater mercy than his
wealth, and you poor people should consider that. is the health of a man's
body better than his wealth? What then is the health of a man's soul?
That is a great deal better. The Lord has inflicted external judgments, but
he has not inflicted spiritual judgments on you, he has not given you up
to hardness of heart, and taken away the spirit of prayer from you in your
afflicted condition. Oh, then, be of good comfort though you have
outward afflictions upon you; still your soul, your more excellent part is
not afflicted. Now when the soul comes to understand this, that here lies
the sore wrath of God, to be given up to one's desires, and to have
spiritual judgments: this quiets him, and contents him, though outward
afflictions are on him. Perhaps one of a man's children has the fit of an
ague or toothache, but his next door neighbor has the plague, or all his
children have died of it. Now shall he be so discontented that his children

have toothache when his neighbour's children are dead? Think thus:
Lord, you have laid an afflicted condition upon me, but, Lord, you have
not given me the plague of a hard heart.
Now if you take these eight things before mentioned, and lay them
together, you may well apply that Scripture in the 29th of Isaiah, the last
verse, where it says, 'They also that erred in spirit shall come to
understanding; and they that murmured shall learn doctrine.' Have there
been any of you, as I fear many may be found, who have erred in spirit,
even in regard of this truth that we are now preaching of, and many who
have murmured? Oh, that this day you might come to understand, that
Christ would bring you into his school, and teach you understanding.
'And they that murmured shall learn doctrine'-what doctrine shall they
learn? These doctrines that I have opened to you. And if you will but
thoroughly study these lessons that I have set before your eyes, it will be a
special help and means to cure your murmurings and repinings at the
hand of God, and so you will come to learn Christian contentment. The
Lord teach you thoroughly by his Spirit these lessons of contentment! I
will only add one more lesson in the learning of contentment and then I
shall come to the fourth head, the excellence of contentment.
9. THE NINE AND LAST LESSON WHICH CHRIST TEACHES
Those whom he instructs in this art of contentment is the right
knowledge of God's providence, and therein are four things.
1. The universality of providence, wherein the soul must be thoroughly
instructed in to come to this art of contentment. To understand the
universality of providence, that is, how the providence of God goes
through the whole world and extends itself to everything. Not only that
God by his providence rules the world, and governs all things in general,
but that it reaches to every detail; not only to order the great affairs of
kingdoms, but it reaches to every man's family; it reaches to every person
in the family; it reaches to every condition; yea, to every happening, to
everything that falls out concerning you in every particular: not one hair
falls from your head, not a sparrow to the ground, without the providence
of God. Nothing befalls you, good or evil, but there is a providence of the
infinite eternal first Being in that thing; and therein is God's infiniteness,
that it reaches to the least things, to the least worm that is under your

feet.
Then much more does it reach to you who are a rational creature; the
providence of God is more special towards rational creatures than any
others. Now to understand in a spiritual way the universality of
providence in every particular happening from morning to night every
day, that there is nothing that befalls you but there is a hand of God in itthis is from God, and is a great help to contentment. Every man will grant
the truth of the thing, that it is so, but as the Apostle says, in
Hebrews 11:3: 'By faith we understand that the worlds were made'; by
faith we understand it. Why by faith? we can understand by reason that
no finite thing can be from itself, and therefore that the world could not
be of itself, but we understand it by faith in another way than by reason.
So whatever we understand of God in providence, yet when Christ takes u
into his school we come to understand it by faith in a better manner than
we do by reason.
2. The efficacy that is in providence. That is, that the providence of God
goes on in all things, with strength and power, and will not to be altered
by our power. Suppose we are discontented and vexed and troubled, and
we fret and rage, yet we need not think we will alter the course of
providence by our discontent. Some of Job's friends, when they saw that
he was impatient, said to him: 'Shall the earth be forsaken for thee? and
shall the rock be removed out of his place?' (Job 18:4).
So I may say to every discontented, impatient heart: what, shall the
providence of God change its course for you? Do you think it such a weak
thing, that because it does not please you it must alter its course?
Whether or not you are content the providence of God will go on, it has
an efficacy of power, of virtue, to carry all things before it. Can you make
one hair black or white with all the stir that you are making? When you
are in a ship at sea which has all its sails spread with a full gale of wind,
and is swiftly sailing, can you make it stand still by running up and down
in the ship? No more can you make the providence of God alter and
change its course with your vexing and fretting; it will go on with power,
do what you can. Do but understand the power and efficacy of providence
and it will be a mighty means helping you to learn this lesson of

contentment.
3. The infinite variety of the works of providence, and yet the order of
things, one working towards another. there is an infinite variety of the
works of God in an ordinary providence, and yet they all work in an
orderly way. We put these two things together, for God in his providence
causes a thousand thousand things to depend one upon another. There
are an infinite number of wheels, as I may say, in the works of
providence; put together all the works that ever God did from all eternity
or ever will do, and they all make up but one work, and they have been as
several wheels that have had their orderly motion to attain to the end that
God from all eternity has appointed.
We, indeed, look at things by pieces, we look at one detail and do not
consider the relation that one thing has to another, but God looks at all
things at once, and sees the relation that one thing has to another. When
a child looks at a clock, it looks first at one wheel, and then at another
wheel: he does not look at them all together or the dependence that one
has upon another; but the workman has his eyes on them all together and
sees the dependence of all, one upon another: so it is in God's providence.
Now notice how this works to contentment: when a certain passage of
providence befalls me, that is one wheel, and it may be that if this wheel
were stopped, a thousand other things might come to be stopped by this.
In a clock, stop but one wheel and you stop every wheel, because they are
dependant upon one another. So when God has ordered a thing for the
present to be thus and thus, how do you know how many things depend
upon this thing? God may have some work to do twenty years hence that
depends on this passage of providence that falls out this day or this week.
And here, by the way, we may see what a great deal of evil there is in
discontent, for you would have God's providence altered in such and such
a detail: now if it were only in that detail, and that had relation to nothing
else it would not be so much, but by your desire to have your will in such
a detail, you may cross God in a thousand things that he has to bring
about, because it is possible that a thousand things may depend upon
that one thing that you would fain have otherwise than it is. It is just as if
a child should cry out and say, 'Let that one wheel stop'; though he says
only one wheel, yet if that were to stop, it is as much as if he should say

they must all stop.
So in providence: let but this one passage of providence stop-it is as much
as if a thousand stopped. Let me therefore be quiet and content, for
though I am crossed in some one particular thing God attains his end; at
least, his end may be furthered in a thousand things by this one thing that
I am crossed in. Therefore let a man consider, this is an act of providence,
and how do I know what God is about to do, and how many things
depend upon this providence? Now we are willing to be crossed in one
thing, so that our friend may attain to what he desires in a thousand
things. If you have a love and friendship to God, be willing to be crossed
in a few things, that the Lord may have his work go on in general, in a
thousand other things. Now that is the third thing to be understood in
God's providence, which Christ teaches those whom he instructs in the
art of contentment.
4. Christ teaches them the knowledge of providence, that is, The
knowledge of God's usual way in his dealings with his people more
particularly. The other is the knowledge of God in his providence in
general. But the right understanding of the way of God in his providence
towards his people and saints is a notable lesson to help us in the art of
contentment. If we once get to know a man's way and course we may
better suit, and be content to live with him, than before we got to know
his way and course. When we come to live in a society with men and
women, the men and women may be good, but till we come to know their
way and course and disposition, many things may cross us, and we think
they are very hard, but when we come to be acquainted with their way
and spirits, then we can suit and cotton with them very well; the reason of
our trouble is because we do not understand their way. So it is with you:
those who are but as strangers to God, and do not understand the way of
God are troubled with the providences of God, and they think them very
strange and cannot tell what to make of them, because they do not
understand the ordinary course and way of God towards his people.
Sometimes if a stranger comes into a family and sees certain things done,
he wonders what is the matter, but those who are acquainted with it are
not at all troubled by it. When servants first come together and do not
know one another, they may be froward and discontented, but when they

get to be acquainted with one another's ways, then they are more
contented; just so it is when we first come to understand God's ways.
But you will say, What do you understand by God's ways? By that I mean
three things, and when we get to know them we shall not wonder so much
at the providence of God, but be quiet and contented with them:
1. GOD'S ORDINARY COURSE IS THAT HIS PEOPLE IN THIS
WORLD SHOULD BE IN AN AFFLICTED CONDITION.
God has revealed in his Word, and we may there find he has set it down
as his ordinary way even from the beginning of the world to this day, but
more especially in the times of the Gospel, that his people here should be
in an afflicted condition. Now men who do not understand this stand and
wonder to hear that the people of God are afflicted, and their enemies
prosper in their way. When those who seek God in his way and seek for
reformation are afflicted, wounded and spoiled, and their enemies
prevail, they wonder at it; but one who is in the school of Christ is taught
by Jesus Christ that God by his eternal counsels has set this as his course
and way, to bring up his people in this world in an afflicted condition.
Therefore the Apostle says, 'Account it not strange concerning the fiery
trial' (1 Peter 4:12). We are not therefore to be discontented with it, seeing
God has set such a course and way, and we know it is the will of God that
it should be so.
2. USUALLY WHEN GOD INTENDS THE GREATEST MERCY
TO ANY OF HIS PEOPLE HE BRINGS THEM INTO THE
LOWEST CONDITION.
God seems to go quite across and work in a contrary way: when he
intends the greatest mercies to his people he first usually brings them
into a very low conditions. If it is a bodily mercy, an outward mercy that
he intends to bestow, he brings them physically low, and outwardly low;
if it is a mercy in their possessions that he intends to bestow, he brings
them low in that and then raises them; and in their reputations, he brings
them low there, and then raises them; and in their spirits God ordinarily
brings their spirits low and then raises their spirits. Usually the people of
God, before the greatest comforts, have the greatest afflictions and

sorrows. Now those who understand God's ways think that when God
brings his people into sad conditions, he is leaving and forsaking them,
and that God does not intend any great good to them. But a child of God,
who is instructed in this way of God, is not troubled; 'My condition is very
low,' he says, 'but this is God's way when he intends the greatest mercy, to
bring men under the greatest afflictions.' When he intended to raise
Joseph to be second in the kingdom, God cast him into a dungeon a little
before. So when God intended to raise David and set him upon the
throne, he made him to be hunted as a partridge in the mountains (
1 Samuel 26:29). God dealt this way with his Son: Christ himself went
into glory by suffering (Hebrews 2:10); and if God so deals with his own
Son, much more with his people.
A little before daybreak you will observe it is darker than it was any time
before, so God will make our conditions a little darker before the mercy
comes. When God bestowed the last great mercy at Naseby* we were in a
very low condition; God knew what he had to do beforehand, he knew
that his time was coming for great mercies: it is the way of God to do so.
[*In 1645, the parliamentary army won a decisive victory against the
Royalists at Naseby, Northamptonshire. The messages which comprise
this book were preached by Burroughs in that year.] Be instructed aright
in this course and way that God is accustomed to walk in and that will
greatly help us to contentment.
3. IT IS THE WAY OF GOD TO WORK BY CONTRARIES, TO
TURN THE GREATEST EVIL INTO THE GREATEST GOOD.
To grant great good after great evil is one thing, and to turn great evil into
the greatest good is another, and yet that is God's way: the greatest good
that God intends for his people, he many times works out of the greatest
evil, the greatest light is brought out of the greatest darkness. I
remember, Luther has a striking expression for this: he says, 'It is the way
of God: he humbles that he might exalt, he kills that he might make alive,
he confounds that he might glorify.' This is the way of God, he says, but
every one does not understand it. This is the art of arts, and the science of
sciences, the knowledge of knowledges, to understand this, that God
when he will bring life, brings it out of death, he brings joy out of sorrow,

and he brings prosperity out of adversity, yea and many times brings
grace out of sin, that is, makes use of sin to work furtherance of grace. it
is the way of God to bring all good out of evil, not only to overcome the
evil, but to make the evil work toward the good. Now when the soul
comes to understand this, it will take away our murmuring and bring
contentment into spirits. But I fear there are but few who understand it
aright; perhaps they read of such things, and hear such things in a
sermon, but they are not instructed in this by Jesus Christ, that this is the
way of God, to bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil.

The Excellence of Contentment
Having concluded our study of the lessons we are to learn, we come to the
next sub-division, which is, the excellence of this grace of contentment.
There is, indeed, a great deal of excellence in contentment; that is, as it
were, another lesson for us to learn.
The apostle says 'I have learned', as if he should say: Blessed be God for
this! Oh! it is a mercy of God to me that I have learned this lesson, I find
so much good in this contentment, that I would not for a world be
without it.
'I have learned it', he says.
Now even the heathen philosophers had a sight of the great excellence
that is in contentment. I remember reading of Antisthenes, who desired
of his gods (speaking after the heathenish way) nothing in this world to
make his life happy but contentment, and if he might have anything that
he would desire to make his life happy, he would ask of them that he
might have the spirit of Socrates, to be able to bear any wrong, any
injuries that he met with, and to continue in a quiet temper of spirit
whatsoever befell him; for that was the temper of Socrates: whatever
befell him he continued the same man, whatever cross befell him,
however great, nobody could perceive any alteration of his spirit. This a

heathen attained to by the strength of nature, and a common work of the
Spirit. now Antisthenes saw such an excellence in this spirit that, as
Solomon when God said to him: 'What shall I give thee?' asked of him
wisdom, so he said: 'If the gods should put it to me to know what I would
have, I would desire this thing, that I might have the spirit of Socrates.'
He saw what a great excellence there was in this; and certainly a Christian
may see an abundance of excellence in it. I shall labor to set it out to you
in this chapter that you might be in love with this grace of contentment.
1. By contentment we come to give God the worship that is due
to him. It is a special part of the divine worship that we owe to God, to
be content in a Christian way, as has been shown to you. I say it is a
special part of the divine worship that the creature owes to the infinite
Creator, in that I tender the respect that is due from me to the Creator.
The word that the Greeks have that signifies, 'to worship' is the same as to
come and crouch before someone, as if a dog should come crouching to
you, and be willing to lie down at your feet. So the creature in the
apprehension of its own baseness, and the infinite excellence that is in
God above it, when it comes to worship God, comes and crouches to this
God, and lies down at the feet of God: then the creature worships God.
When you see a dog come crouching to you, and by holding your hand
over him, you can make him lie down at your feet, then consider, thus
should you do before the Lord: you should come crouching to him, and lie
down at his feet, even on your backs or bellies, to lie down in the dust
before him so as to be willing that he should do with you what he will.
Just as sometimes you may turn a dog this way or that way, up and down,
with your hand, and there he lies before you, according to your showing
him with your hand; so when the creature shall come and lie down thus
before the Lord, then a creature worships God and tenders the worship
that is due to him. Now in what disposition of heart do we thus crouch to
God more than when we have this state of contentment in all the
conditions that God disposes us to? This is crouching to God's disposal, to
be like the poor woman of Canaan, who when Christ said, 'It is not fit to
give children's meat to dogs', said 'The dogs have crumbs', I am a dog I
confess, but let me have only a crumb. And so when the soul shall be in
such a disposition as to lie down and say, 'Lord, I am but as a dog, yet let
me have a crumb', then it highly honors God. It may be that some of you

have not your table spread as others have, but God gives you crumbs;
now, says the poor woman, dogs have crumbs, and when you can find
your hearts thus submitting to God, to be but as a dog, and can be
contented and bless God for any crumb, I say this is a great worship of
God.
You worship God more by this than when you come to hear a sermon, or
spend half an hour, or an hour, in prayer, or when you come to receive a
sacrament. These are the acts of God's worship, but they are only external
acts of worship, to hear and pray and receive sacraments. But this is the
soul's worship, to subject itself thus to God. You who often will worship
God by hearing, and praying, and receiving sacraments, and yet
afterwards will be froward and discontented-know that God does not
regard such worship, he will have the soul's worship, in this subjecting of
the soul unto God. Note this, I beseech you: in active obedience we
worship God by doing what pleases God, but by passive obedience we do
as well worship God by being pleased with what God does. now when I
perform a duty, I worship God, I do what pleases God; why should I not
as well worship God when I am pleased with what God does? As it was
said of Christ's obedience: Christ was active in his passive obedience, and
passive in his active obedience; so the saints are passive in their active
obedience, they are first passive in the reception of grace, and then active.
And when they come to passive obedience, they are active, they put forth
grace in active obedience. When they performed actions to God, then the
soul says: 'Oh! that I could do what pleases God!' When they come to
suffer any cross: 'Oh, that what God does might please me!' I labor to do
what pleases God, and I labor that what God does shall please me: here is
a Christian indeed, who shall endeavor both these. It is but one side of a
Christian to endeavor to do what pleases God; you must as well endeavor
to be pleased with what God does, and so you will come to be a complete
Christian when you can do both, and that is the first thing in the
excellence of this grace of contentment.
2. IN CONTENTMENT THERE IS MUCH EXERCISE OF GRACE.
There is much strength of grace, yea, there is much beauty of grace in
contentment; there is much exercise of grace, strength of grace, and
beauty of grace: I put all these together.

1. Much exercise of grace. There is a compound of grace in contentment:
there is faith, and there is humility, and love, and there is patience, and
there is wisdom, and there is hope; almost all graces are compounded. It
is an oil which has the ingredients of every kind of grace; and therefore,
though you cannot see the particular grace; yet in this oil you have it all.
God sees the graces of his Spirit exercised in a special manner, and this
pleases God at the heart to see the graces of his Spirit exercised. In one
action that you do you may exercise one grace especially, but in
contentment you exercise a great many graces at once.
2. There is a great deal of strength of grace in contentment. It argues a
great deal of strength in the body for it to be able to endure hard weather
and whatever comes, and yet not to be much altered by it; so it argues
strength of grace to be content. You who complain of weakness of
memory, of weakness of gifts, you cannot do what others do in other
things; but have you this gracious heart-contentment, that has been
explained to you? I know that you have attained to strength of grace in
this, when it is as spiritual as has been shown to you in the explication of
this point. If a man is distempered in his body, and has many
obstructions, has an ill stomach, and his spleen and liver obstructed, and
yet for all this his brain is not disordered, it is an argument of a great
strength of brain; though many evil fumes may arise from his corrupt
stomach, yet still his brain is not disordered but he continues in the free
exercise of his reason and understanding. Every one may understand that
this man has a very strong brain, when such things do not upset him. If
other people who have a weak brain do not digest but one meal's meat,
the fumes that arise from their stomach disorder their brain and make
them unfit for everything, whereas these have strong heads, and strong
brains, and though their stomachs are ill and they cannot digest meat, yet
they still have the free use of their brain: this, I say, argues strength. So it
is in a man's spirit: you find many who have weak spirits, and if they have
any ill fumes, if accidents befall them, you will soon find them out of
temper; but there are other men, who though things fume up, still keep in
a steady way, and have the use of reason and of their graces, and possess
their souls in patience.

I remember it is reported of the eagle that it is not like other fowls: when
other fowls are hungry they make a noise; but the eagle is never heard to
make noise though it lacks food. Now it is from the magnitude of its spirit
that it will not make such complaints as other fowls do when they lack
food, because it is above hunger, and above thirst. Similarly it is an
argument of a gracious magnitude of spirit, that whatsoever befalls it, yet
it is not always whining and complaining as others do, but it goes on in its
way and course, and blesses God, and keeps in a constant tenor whatever
befalls it. Such things as cause others to be dejected and fretted and
vexed, and take away all the comfort of their lives make no alteration at
all in the spirits of these men and women. This, I say, is a sign of a great
deal of strength of grace.
3. It is also an argument of a great deal of beauty of grace. There is a
saying of Seneca, a heathen, 'When you go out into groves and woods,
and see the tallness of the trees and their shadows, it strikes a kind of
awful fear of a deity in you, and when you see the vast rivers and
fountains and deep waters, that strikes a kind of fear of a God in you, but',
he said, 'do you see a man who is quiet in tempests, and who lives happily
in the midst of adversities, why do not you worship that man?' He thinks
him a man worthy of such honor who will be quiet and live a happy life,
though in the midst of adversities. The glory of God appears here more
than in any of his works. There is no work which God has made-the sun,
moon, stars and all the world-in which so much of the glory of God
appears as in a man who lives quietly in the midst of adversity. That was
what convinced the king: when he saw that the three children could walk
in the midst of the fiery furnace and not be touched, the king was mightily
convinced by this, that surely their God was the great God indeed, and
that they were highly beloved of their God who could walk in the midst of
the furnace and not be touched, whereas the others who came only to the
mouth of the furnace were devoured. So when a Christian can walk in the
midst of fiery trials, without his garments being singed, and has comfort
and joy in the midst of everything (when like Paul in the stocks he can
sing, which wrought upon the jailor) it will convince men, when they see
the power of grace in the midst of afflictions. When they can behave
themselves in a gracious and holy manner in such afflictions as would
make others roar: Oh, this is the glory of a Christian.
