PURITAN GOLD -- Human Nature in Its Fourfold State by Thomas Boston: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 13
The Eternal State: Judgment


The General Judgment
"When the Son of Man comes in His glory, and all the angels with Him,
He will sit on His throne in heavenly glory. All the nations will be
gathered before Him, and He will separate the people one from another
as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. He will put the sheep
on His right and the goats on His left. Then the King will say to those on
His right, 'Come, you who are blessed by My Father; take your
inheritance, the kingdom prepared for you since the creation of the
world.'" Matthew 25:31-34
"Then He will say to those on His left, 'Depart from Me, you who are
cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.' Then
they will go away to eternal punishment, but the righteous to eternal life."
Matthew 25:41, 46
The dead being raised, and those found alive at the coming of the Judge
changed, then follows the general judgment, plainly and solemnly
described in this portion of Scripture; in which we shall take notice of the
following particulars:
1. The coming of the Judge. "When the Son of Man comes in His
glory," etc. The Judge is Jesus Christ, by whose almighty power, the dead
will be raised. He is also called the King, verse 34, the judging of the
world being an act of the royal Mediator's kingly office. He will come in
glory; glorious in His own person, and having a glorious retinue, even all

the holy angels with Him, to minister unto Him at this great solemnity.
2. The mounting the tribunal. He is a King, and therefore it is a
throne, a glorious throne, "He will sit on His throne in heavenly glory,"
verse 31.
3. The appearance of the parties. These are--all nations; all and
every one, small and great, of whatever nation, who ever were, are, or
shall be on the face of the earth. All shall be gathered before Him,
summoned before His tribunal.
4. The separating of them. He shall separate the elect sheep and
reprobate goats, setting each group by themselves. The godly He will set
on His right hand, as the most honorable place; the wicked on the left,
verse 33.
5. The sentencing of the parties, and that according to their works;
the righteous being absolved, and the wicked condemned, verse 34-41.
6. The execution of both sentences, in the driving away of the
wicked into hell, and carrying the godly to heaven, verse 46.
Doctrine. There shall be a general judgment. This doctrine, I shall,
I. Confirm.
II. Explain.
III. Apply.
I. The CONFIRMATION of this great truth—that there shall be a
general judgment.
1. It is evident from plain Scripture testimonies. The world has in
all ages been told of it. Enoch, before the flood, taught it in his prophecy,
related in Jude, verse 14, 15, "Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand
of his saints, to execute judgment upon all," etc. Daniel describes it,
chapter 7:9, 10, "I watched as thrones were put in place and the Ancient
One sat down to judge. His clothing was as white as snow, his hair like

whitest wool. He sat on a fiery throne with wheels of blazing fire, and a
river of fire flowed from his presence. Millions of angels ministered to
him, and a hundred million stood to attend him. Then the court began its
session, and the books were opened." The apostle is very express, Acts
17:31, "He has appointed a day, in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained." See Matt. 16:27; 2
Cor. 5:10; 2 Thess. 1:7-10; Rev. 20:11-15. God not only said it, but he has
sworn it, Romans 14:10, 11, "We must all stand before the judgment seat
of Christ. For it is written, as I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bow to
me, and every tongue confess to God." So that the truth of God is most
solemnly pledged for it.
2. The perfect justice and goodness of God, the sovereign ruler
of the world, necessarily require it, inasmuch as they require
its being well with the righteous, and ill with the wicked. Yet we
often see wickedness exalted, while truth and righteousness fall in the
streets; piety oppressed, while profanity and irreligion triumph. This is so
very common, that everyone who sincerely embraces the way of holiness,
must and does lay his account with the loss of all he has, which the world
can take away from him, Luke 14:26, "If any man comes to me, and hates
not his father, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yes, and
his own life also, he cannot be my disciple." But it is inconsistent with the
justice and goodness of God, that the affairs of men should always
continue in the state which they appear in, from one generation to
another; and that every man should not be rewarded according to his
works: and since that is not done in this life, there must be a judgment to
come; "God is just: He will pay back trouble to those who trouble you and
give relief to you who are troubled, and to us as well. This will happen
when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven in blazing fire with his
powerful angels." 2 Thess. 1:6, 7. There will be a day in which the tables
will be turned; and the wicked shall be called to an account for all their
sins, and suffer the due punishment of them; and the pious shall be
prosperous: for, as the apostle argues for the happy resurrection of the
saints, "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable," 1 Cor. 15:19.
It is true, God sometimes punishes the wicked in this life: that men may

know, "He is a God who judges in the earth;" but yet much wickedness
remains unpunished and undiscovered, to be a pledge of the judgment to
come. If none of the wicked were punished here, they would conclude
that God had utterly forsaken the earth; if all of them were punished in
this life, men would be apt to think there were no after reckoning.
Therefore, in the wisdom of God some are punished now, and some not.
Sometimes the Lord smites sinners, in the very act of sin; to show unto
the world, that he is witness to all their wickedness, and will call them to
an account for it. Sometimes he delays long before he strikes, that he may
discover to the world that he forgets not men's ill deeds, though he does
not immediately punish them. Besides all this, the sins of many outlive
them; and the impure fountain opened by them, runs long after they are
dead and gone. As in the case of Jeroboam, the first king of the ten tribes,
whose sin ran all along unto the end of that unhappy kingdom, 2 Kings
17:22, 23, "The children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam,
which he did; they departed not from them; until the Lord removed Israel
out of his sight."
3. The resurrection of Christ is a certain proof, that there shall
be a day of judgment. This argument Paul uses to convince the
Athenians, that Jesus Christ will be the Judge of the world: "Whereof,"
says he, "he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him
from the dead," Acts 17:38. The Judge is already named, his patent
written and sealed, yes, and read before all men, in his rising again from
the dead. Hereby God has given assurance of it: by raising Christ from the
dead, he has exhibited his credentials as Judge of the world. When, in the
days of his humiliation, he was cited before a tribunal, arraigned,
accused, and condemned by men; he plainly told them of this judgment,
and that he himself would be the Judge, Matt. 26:64, "Hereafter shall you
see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven." And now that he is raised from the dead, though
condemned as a blasphemer on this very head, is it not an undeniable
proof, from Heaven, of the truth of what he asserted? Moreover, this was
one of the great ends of Christ's death and resurrection: "For to this end
Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be the Lord," that
is, "the Lord Judge," as is evident from the context, "both of the dead and
of the living," Romans 14:9.

4. Every man bears about with him a witness to this within his
own bosom, Romans 2:15, "Which show the work of the law written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the
meanwhile accusing, or else excusing one another." There is a tribunal
erected within every man, where conscience is accuser, witness, and
judge, binding over the sinner to the judgment of God. This fills the most
profligate wretches with horror, and inwardly stings them, upon the
commission of some atrocious crime; in effect summoning them to
answer for it, before the Judge of the living and dead. And thus it does,
even when the crime is secret, and hidden from the eyes of the world. It
reaches those, whom the laws of men cannot reach, because of their
power or craftiness. Men have fled from the judgment of their fellowcreatures; yet go where they will, conscience as the supreme Judge's
officer, still keeps hold of them, reserving them in its chains, to the
judgment of the great day. And whether they escape punishment from
men, or fall by the hand of public justice, when they perceive death's
approach, they hear from within, of this after reckoning; being
constrained to hearken thereto, in these the most serious minutes of their
lives.
If there are some, in whom nothing of this does appear, we have no more
ground thence to conclude against it, than we have to conclude, that
because some men do not groan, therefore they have no pain; or that
dying is a mere jest, because there have been some who seemed to make
little else of it. A good face may be put upon an bad conscience; the more
hopeless men's case is, they reckon it more their interest to make no
reflections on their state and case. But everyone, who will consult himself
seriously, will find in himself the witness to the judgment to come. Even
the heathens had a notion of it, though mixed with fictions of their own.
Hence, though some of the Athenians, "when they heard of the
resurrection of the dead, mocked," yet there is no account of their
mocking, when they heard of the general judgment, Acts 17:31, 32.
II. The EXPLANATION of this great truth—that there shall be a
general judgment. For explanation, the following particulars may
serve to give some view of the transactions of that great day.

1. God shall judge the world by Jesus Christ. "He will judge the
world in righteousness by that man whom he has ordained," Acts 17:31.
The psalmist tells us, that God is judge himself, Psalm 50:6. The holy
blessed Trinity – Father, Son, and Holy Spirit – is Judge, in respect to
judicial authority, dominion, and power: but the Son incarnate is the
Judge, in respect of dispensation, and special exercise of that power. The
judgment shall be exercised or performed by him as the royal Mediator;
for he has delegated power of judgment from the Father, as his servant,
"his King," whom he has "set upon his holy hill of Zion," Psalm 2:6, and
to whom he "has committed all judgment," John 5:22. This is a part of the
Mediator's exaltation, given him in consequence of his voluntary
humiliation, Phil. 2:8-10, "He humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the cross. Therefore God also has highly
exalted him, and gave him a name which is above every name," that is,
power and authority over all, namely, "That at the name of Jesus every
knee shall bow." This is explained by the apostle himself, of "standing
before the judgment-seat of Christ," Romans 14:10, 11. So he who was
judged and condemned of men, shall be the Judge of men and angels.
2. Jesus Christ the Judge, descending from heaven into the air.
1 Thess. 4:16, 17, "He shall come in the clouds of heaven, with power and
great glory," Matt. 24:30. This his coming will be a mighty surprise to
the world, which will be found in deep security; foolish virgins sleeping,
and the wise slumbering. There will then be much luxury and debauchery
in the world, little sobriety and watchfulness; a great throng of business,
but a great scarcity of faith and holiness. "Just as it was in the days of
Noah, so also will it be in the days of the Son of Man. People were eating,
drinking, marrying and being given in marriage up to the day Noah
entered the ark. Then the flood came and destroyed them all. It was the
same in the days of Lot. People were eating and drinking, buying and
selling, planting and building. But the day Lot left Sodom, fire and sulfur
rained down from heaven and destroyed them all. It will be just like this
on the day the Son of Man is revealed." Luke 17:26-30
The coming of the Judge will surprise some at markets, buying and
selling; others at table, eating and drinking, and making merry; others
busy with their new plantings; some building new houses; nay, the

wedding-day of some will be their own and the world's judgment-day. But
the Judge comes! the markets are marred; the buyer throws away what he
has bought; the seller casts down his money; they are raised from the
table, and their mirth is extinguished in a moment; though the tree be set
in the earth, the gardener cannot stay to cast the earth about it; the
workmen throw away their tools, when the house is half built, and the
owner regards it no more; the bridegroom, bride, and guests, must leave
the wedding day, and appear before the tribunal; for, "Behold, he comes
with clouds, and every eye shall see him," Rev. 1:7.
He shall come most gloriously; for he will "come in the glory of his
Father, with the holy angels," Mark 8:38. When he came in the flesh, to
die for sinners, he laid aside the robes of his glory, and was despised and
rejected of men: but when he comes again, to judge the world, such shall
be his visible glory and majesty, that it shall cast an eternal veil over all
earthy glory, and fill his greatest enemies with fear and dread. Never had
prince and potentate in the world such a glorious train, as will accompany
this Judge: all the holy angels shall come with him, for his honor and
service. Then He, who was led to the cross with a band of soldiers, will be
gloriously attended to the place of judgment, by not a multitude of the
heavenly angels, but by "all his holy angels," says the text.
3. At the coming of the Judge, the summons is given to the
parties by the sound of the last trumpet; at which the dead are
raised, and those found alive are changed; see 1 Thess. 4:16, 17. O
loud trumpet, that shall be heard at once, in all corners of the earth, and
of the sea! O wonderful voice, that will not only disturb those who sleep
in the dust, but effectually awaken, rouse them out of their sleep, and
raise them from death! Were trumpets sounding now, drums beating,
furious soldiers crying and killing men, women and children running and
shrieking, the wounded groaning and dying; those who are in the graves
would have no more disturbance than if the world were in most profound
peace. Yes, were stormy winds casting down the lofty oaks, the seas
roaring and swallowing up the ships, the most dreadful thunders going
along the heavens, lightnings everywhere flashing, the earth quaking,
trembling, opening, and swallowing up whole cities, and burying
multitudes at once; the dead would still enjoy a perfect repose, and sleep

soundly in the dust, though their own dust should be thrown out of its
place. But at the sound of this trumpet, they shall all awake. The morning
is come, they can sleep no longer; the time for the dead to be judged: they
must get out of their graves, and appear before the Judge.
4. The Judge shall sit down on the tribunal; he shall sit on the
throne of his glory. He stood before a tribunal on earth, and was
condemned as a malefactor: now he shall sit on his own tribunal, and
judge the world. He once hung upon the cross, covered with shame; now
he shall sit on a throne of glory. What this throne shall be, whether a
bright cloud, or what else, I shall not inquire. Our eyes shall answer to
that question at length. John "saw a great white throne," Rev. 20:11. "His
throne," says Daniel, "was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning
fire," chap 7:9. Whatever it be, doubtless it will be a throne glorious
beyond expression; and in comparison with which, the most glorious
throne on the earth is but a seat on a dunghill; and the sight of it will
equally surprise kings who sat on thrones in this life, and beggars who sat
on dunghills. It will be a throne, for stateliness and glory, suited to the
quality of him who shall sit on it. Never had a judge such a throne, and
never had a throne such a judge on it.
Leaving the discovery of the nature of the throne until that day, it
concerns us more nearly to consider what a JUDGE will sit on it; a
point on which we are not left to uncertain conjectures. The Judge on the
throne will be,
(1.) A Judge VISIBLE to our bodily eyes, Rev. 1:7, "Every eye shall
see him." When God gave the law on mount Sinai, the people "saw no
similitude, only heard a voice:" but when he calls the world to an account
how they observed his law, the man Christ being Judge, we shall see our
Judge with our eyes, either to our eternal comfort, or to our eternal
confusion, according to the treatment which we give him now. That very
body which was crucified outside the gates of Jerusalem, between two
thieves, shall then be seen on the throne, shining in glory. We now see
him symbolically, in the sacrament of his supper; the saints see him by
the eye of faith; then all shall see him with those eyes now in their heads.
(2.) A Judge having full AUTHORITY and POWER to render

unto everyone according to his works, Christ, as God, has authority
of himself; and as Mediator he has a judicial power and authority, which
his Father has invested him with, according to the covenant between the
Father and the Son for the redemption of sinners. His divine glory will be
light, by which all men shall see clearly to read his commission for this
great and honorable employment. "All power is given to him in heaven
and in earth," Matt. 28:18. He has "the keys of hell and of death," Rev.
1:18. There can be no appeal from his tribunal: sentence once passed
there, must stand forever; there is no reversing it. All appeals are from an
inferior to a superior court: but when God gives sentence against a man,
where can he find a higher court to bring his process to? This judgment is
the Mediator's judgment, and therefore the last judgment. If the
Intercessor is against us, who can be for us? If Christ condemns us, who
will absolve us?
(3.) A Judge of infinite WISDOM. His eyes will pierce into, and
clearly discern the most intricate cases. His omniscience qualifies him for
judging the most retired thoughts, as well as the words and works. The
most subtle sinner shall not be able to deceive him, nor, by any artful
management, to palliate the crime. He is the searcher of hearts, to whom
nothing can be hidden or perplexed; but all things are naked and open
unto his eyes, Heb. 4:13.
(4.) A most JUST Judge; a Judge of perfect integrity. He is the
righteous Judge, 2 Tim. 4:8, and his throne a great white throne, Rev.
20:11, from whence no judgment shall proceed, but what is pure and
spotless. The Thebans painted justice blind, and without hands; because
judges ought not to respect people, nor take bribes. The Areopagites
judged in the dark; that they might not regard who spoke, but what was
spoken. With the Judge on his throne, there will be no respect of people;
he will neither regard the rich, nor the poor: but just judgment shall go
forth, in everyone's cause.
(5.) An OMNIPOTENT Judge, able to put his sentence in execution.
The united force of devils and wicked men will be altogether unable to
withstand him. They cannot retard the execution of the sentence against
them one moment; far less can they stop it altogether. "Thousand
thousands of angels minister unto him," Dan. 7:10. And, by the breath of

his mouth, he can drive the cursed herd where he pleases.
5. The PARTIES shall appear. These are men and DEVILS.
Although the fallen angels were, from the first moment of their sinning,
subjected to the wrath of God, and were cast down to hell, and wherever
they go they carry their hell about with them; yet it is evident that they
are reserved unto judgment, 2 Pet. 2:4, namely, unto the judgment of the
great day, Jude, verse 6. Then they shall be solemnly and publicly judged,
1 Cor. 6:3, "Know you not that we shall judge angels?" At that day they
shall answer for their trade of sinning, and tempting to sin, which they
have been carrying on from the beginning. And they shall receive the due
reward of all the dishonor which they have done to God, and of all the
mischief which they have done to men. Those wicked spirits now in
chains, though not in such strait custody, but that they go about, like
roaring lions, seeking whom they may devour, shall then receive their
final sentence, and be shut up in their den, in the prison; where they shall
be held in extreme and unspeakable torment, through all eternity, Rev.
20:10, "And the devil who deceived them, was cast into the lake of fire
and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night forever and ever." In prospect of which, the
devils said to Christ, "Have you come here to torment us before the
time?" Matt. 8:29.
But what we are chiefly concerned to take notice of, is the case of MEN at
that day. All men must appear before this tribunal. All of each gender, of
every age, quality, and condition; the great and small, noble and ignoble;
none are excepted. Adam and Eve, with all their sons and daughters,
everyone who has had – or, to the end of the world, shall have – a living
soul united to a body, will make up this great congregation. Even those
who refused to come to the throne of grace, shall be forced to the bar of
justice: for there can be no hiding from the all-seeing Judge, no flying
from him who is present everywhere, no resisting of him who is armed
with almighty power, "We must all stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ," 2 Cor. 5:10. "Before him shall be gathered all nations," says the
text. This is to be done by the ministry of angels. By them shall the elect
be gathered, Mark 13:27, "Then shall he send his angels, and shall gather
together his elect from the four winds." And they also shall gather the

reprobate, "As the weeds are pulled up and burned in the fire, so it will be
at the end of the age. The Son of Man will send out his angels, and they
will weed out of his kingdom everything that causes sin and all who do
evil. They will throw them into the fiery furnace, where there will be
weeping and gnashing of teeth." Matthew 13:40-42. From all corners of
the world shall the inhabitants thereof be gathered unto the place where
he shall set his throne for judgment.
6. There shall be a SEPARATION made between the righteous
and the wicked; the elect sheep being set on Christ's right hand, and
the reprobate goats on his left. There is no necessity to wait for this
separation, until the trial is over; since the parties will rise out of their
graves with plain outward marks of distinction, as was mentioned before.
The separation seems to be effected by that double gathering, before
mentioned; the one of the elect, Mark 13:2, the other of those who do
iniquity, Matt. 13:41. The elect being "caught up together in the clouds,
meet the Lord in the air," 1 Thess. 4:17, and so are set on his right hand;
and the reprobate left on the earth, are placed upon the Judge's left hand.
Here is now a total separation of two parties, who were always opposite to
each other in their principles, aims, and manner of life; who, when
together, were a burden the one to the other, under which the one
groaned, and the other raged: but now they are finally parted, never to
come together any more. The righteous and wicked, like the iron and clay,
which could never mix (see Dan. 2:41-43), are quite separated: the one
being drawn up into the air, by the attractive virtue of "the stone cut out
of the mountain," namely, Jesus Christ; and the other left upon its earth,
to be trod under foot.
Now let us look to the elect sheep on the right hand, and there we
shall see a glorious company of saints shining, as so many stars in their
orbs; and with a cheerful countenance beholding Him who sits upon the
throne. Here will be two wonderful sights, which the world never saw.
(1.) A great congregation of saints, in which there will not be so much as
one hypocrite. There was a bloody Cain in Adam's family; a cursed Ham
in Noah's family, in the ark; a treacherous Judas in Christ's own family:
but in that company there will be none but sealed ones, members of

Christ, having all one Father. This is a sight reserved for that day.
(2.) All the godly upon one side. Seldom or never do the saints on earth
make such harmony, but there are some jarring strings among them. It is
not to be expected, that men who see but in part, though they are all
going to one city, should agree as to every step in the way: no, we must
not look for it, in this state of imperfection. But at that day, Paul and
Barnabas shall meet in peace and unity, though once "the contention was
so sharp between them, that they departed asunder, the one from the
other," Acts 15:39. There shall be no more divisions, no more separate
standing among those who belonged to Christ. All the godly, of the
different parties, shall then be upon one side; seeing, whatever were their
differences in lesser things, while in the world, yet even then they met
and concerted all in one Lord Jesus Christ, by a true and lively faith, and
in the one way of holiness, or practical godliness. And vile hypocrites, of
whatever party, shall be led forth with the workers of iniquity.
Look to left hand, and there you will see the cursed goats, all the wicked
ones, from Cain to the last ungodly person who shall be in the world,
gathered together into one most miserable congregation. There are many
assemblies of the wicked now; then there shall be but one. But all of them
shall be present there, brought together, as one herd for the slaughter,
bellowing and roaring, weeping and howling, for the miseries come, and
that are coming on them. And remember, you shall not be a mere
spectator, to look at these two such different companies; but must
yourself take your place in one of the two, and shall share with the
company, whatever hand it be on. Those who now abhor no society so
much as that of the saints, would then be glad to be allowed to get in
among them, though it were but to lie at their feet. But then not one tare
shall be found with the wheat; He will thoroughly purge his floor. Many
of the right-hand men of this world, will be left-hand men in that day.
Many, who must have the door on the right hand of those who are better
than they, if the righteous be more excellent than his neighbor, shall then
be turned to the left hand, as most despicable wretches!
O, how terrible will this separation be to the ungodly! How dreadful will
this gathering them together into one company be! What they will not
believe, they will then see, namely, that but few are saved. They think it

enough now to be neighbor-like, and can securely follow the multitude:
but the multitude on the left hand will yield them no comfort. How will it
sting the ungodly church-goer, to see himself set on the same hand with
Turks and Pagans! How will it gall profane Protestants, to stand with
idolatrous Papists; praying people, with their profane neighbors, who
mocked at religious exercises; formal professors, strangers to the new
birth and the power of godliness, with persecutors! Now there are many
opposite societies in the world; but then all the ungodly shall be in one
society. And how dreadful will the faces of companions in sin be to one
another there! What doleful shrieks, when the drunkards, who have had
many a jovial day together, shall see one another face to face; when the
husband and wife, the parents and children, masters and servants, and
neighbors, who have been snares and stumbling-blocks to one another, to
the ruin of their own souls and those of their relatives, shall meet again in
that miserable society! Then there will be curses instead of greetings; and
tearing of themselves, and raging against one another, instead of their
usual embraces.
7. The parties shall be tried. The trial cannot be difficult, seeing the
Judge is omniscient, and nothing can be hidden from him. But, that his
righteous judgment may be made evident to all, he will set the hidden
things of darkness in the clearest light at that trial, 1 Cor. 4:5. Men shall
be tried,
(1.) Upon their WORKS; for "God shall bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be
evil," Eccl. 12:14. The Judge will try every man's life, and set his deeds
done in the body, with all the circumstances thereof, in a true light. Then
will many actions, commended and applauded of men, as good and just,
be discovered to have been evil and abominable in the sight of God; and
many works, now condemned by the world, will be approved and
commended by the great Judge, as good and just. Secret things will be
brought to light; and what was hidden from the view of the world, shall be
laid open. Wickedness, which has been kept hidden and secret, in spite of
all human search, will then be brought forth to the glory of God, and the
confusion of impenitent sinners, who hid it. The world appears now very
vile in the eyes of those who are exercised to godliness; and it will then

appear a thousand times more vile, when that which is done of men in
secret comes to be discovered. Every good action shall then be
remembered; and the hidden piety and good works, most industriously
concealed by the saints from the eyes of men, shall no more lie hidden:
for though the Lord will not allow men to proclaim everyone his own
goodness, yet he himself will do it in due time.
(2.) Their WORDS shall be judged, Matt. 12:37, "For by your words
you shall be justified, and by your words you shall be condemned." Not a
word spoken for God and his cause in the world, from love to himself,
shall be forgotten. They are all kept in remembrance, and shall be
brought forth as evidences of faith, and of an interest in Christ. Mal. 3:16,
17, "Then those who feared the Lord spoke often one to another, and the
Lord hearkened and heard it; and a book of remembrance was written
before him. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day
when I make up my jewels." The tongue, which did run at random, shall
then confess to God; and the speaker shall find it to have been followed,
and every word noted which dropped from the unsanctified lips. "Every
idle word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day
of judgment," Matt. 12:36. And if they shall give account of idle words,
that is, words spoken to no good purpose, neither for God's glory, nor
their own nor their neighbor's good; how much more shall men's wicked
words, their sinful oaths, curses, lies, filthy communications, and bitter
words, be called over again in that day! The tongues of many shall then
fall upon themselves, and ruin them.
(3.) Men's THOUGHTS shall be brought into judgment: the
Judge will make manifest the counsels of the hearts, 1 Cor. 4:5. Thoughts
go free from man's judgment, but not from the judgment of the heartsearching God, who knows men's thoughts, without the help of signs to
discern them by. The secret springs of men's actions will then be brought
to light; and the sins, which never came further than the heart, will then
be laid open. O, what a picture will man's corrupt nature present, when
his inmost thoughts are revealed, and all his speculative impurities are
exposed! The rottenness that is within many a whited sepulcher, the
speculative filthiness and wantonness, murder and malignity, now
lurking in the hearts of men, as in the chambers of imagery, will then be

revealed, and what good was in the hearts of any shall no more lie
concealed. If it was in their hearts to build a house to the Lord, they shall
hear, that they did well that it was in their heart.
This TRIAL will be righteous and impartial, accurate and
searching, clear and evident. The Judge is the righteous Judge, and
he will do right to everyone. He has a just balance for good and evil
actions, and for honest and false hearts. The fig-leaf cover of hypocrisy
will then be blown aside, and the hypocrite's nakedness will appear; as
when the Lord came to judge Adam and Eve "in the cool," or, as the word
is, "in the wind of the day," Gen. 3:8. "The fire," which tries things most
exquisitely, "shall try every man's work, of what sort it is," 1 Cor. 3:13.
Man's judgment is often perplexed and confused: but here the whole
process shall be clear and evident, as written with a sunbeam. It shall be
clear to the Judge, to whom no case can be intricate; to the parties, who
shall be convinced, Jude, verse 15. And the multitudes on both sides shall
see that the Judge is clear when he judges; for then "the heavens shall
declare his righteousness," in the audience of all the world; and so it shall
be universally known, Psalm 50:6.
On these accounts it is, that this trial is held out in the Scripture, under
the notion of "opening of books;" and men are said to be "judged out of
those things written in the books," Rev. 20:12. The judge of the world,
who infallibly knows all things, has no need of books to be laid before
him, to prevent mistakes in any point of law or fact; but the expression
points at his proceedings as most clear, accurate, just and well grounded,
in every step of them. Now, there are FOUR BOOKS that shall be
opened in that day.
(1.) The book of God's remembrance, or omniscience, Mal. 3:16.
This is an exact record of every man's state, thoughts, words, and deeds,
good or evil: it is, as it were, a ledger, in which the Lord puts down all that
passes in men's hearts, lips, and lives; and it is a reckoning up every day
that one lives. In it are recorded men's sins and good works, secret and
open, with all their circumstances. Here are registered all their privileges,
temporal and spiritual mercies, often made ready to their hand; the
checks, admonitions, and rebukes, given by teachers, neighbors,
afflictions, and men's own consciences; everything in its due order. This

book will serve only as a bill of indictment, in respect of the ungodly; but
it will be for another use in respect of the godly, namely, for a memorial
of their good. The opening of it is the Judge's bringing to light what is
written in it; the reading, as it were, of the bill and memorial,
respectively, in their hearing.
(2.) The book of CONSCIENCE will be opened, which shall be as a
thousand witnesses to prove the fact, Romans 2:15, "Which show the
work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience also bearing
witness." Conscience is a censor going with every man wherever he goes,
taking an account of his deeds done in the body, and, as it were, noting
them in a book. Much is written in it, which cannot be read now; the
writing of conscience being, in many cases, like to that which is made
with the juice of lemons, not to be read until it is held before the fire; but
then men shall read it clearly and distinctly: the fire which is to try every
man's work, will make the book of conscience legible in every point.
Though the book be sealed now, the conscience blind, dumb, and deaf,
the seals will then be broken, and the book opened. There shall be no
more a silent conscience, and far less a seared conscience, among all the
ungodly crew: but their conscience shall be most quick-sighted, and most
lively, in that day. None shall then call good evil, or evil good. Ignorance
of what sin is, and what things are sins, will have no place among them:
and the subtle reasonings of men, in favor of their lusts, will then be
forever baffled by their own conscience. None shall have the favor, if I
may so speak, of lying under the soft cover of delusion; but they shall all
be convicted by their conscience. Whether they will or not, they must look
on this book, read, be confounded, and stand speechless, knowing that
nothing is charged upon them by mistake; since this is a book which was
always in their own custody. Thus shall the Judge make every man see
himself in the mirror of his own conscience, which will make quick work.
(3.) The book of the LAW shall be opened. This book is the
standard and rule, by which is known what is right, and what is wrong; as
also, what sentence is to be passed accordingly, on those who are under
it. As to the opening of this book, in a statute, which shows what is sin,
and what is duty; it agrees with the opening of the book of conscience.
For conscience is set, by the sovereign lawgiver, in every man's bosom, to

be his private teacher, to show him the law; and his private pastor, to
make application of the same: and at that day, it will be perfectly fit for its
office; so that the conscience, which is most stupid now, shall then read to
the man most accurate, but dreadful lectures on the law.
But what seems principally pointed at by the opening of this book, is the
opening of that part of it which determines the reward of men's works.
Now the law promises life, upon perfect obedience: but none can be
found on the right hand, or on the left, who will pretend to that, when
once the book of conscience is opened. It threatens death upon
disobedience, and will effectually bring it upon all under its dominion.
And this part of the book of the law, determining the reward of men's
works, is opened, only to show what must be the portion of the ungodly,
and that there they may read their sentence, before it is pronounced.
But it is not opened for the sentence of the saints; for no sentence
absolving a sinner could ever be drawn out of it. The law promises life,
not as it is a rule of actions, but as a covenant of works; therefore,
innocent man could not have demanded life upon his obedience, until the
law was reduced into the form of a covenant; as was shown before. But
the saints, having been, in this life, brought under a new covenant,
namely, the covenant of grace, were dead to the law as a covenant of
works, and it was dead to them. Therefore, as they shall not now have any
fear of death from it; so they can have no hope of life from it, since "they
are not under the law, but under grace," Romans 6:14. But, for their
sentence, "another book is opened."
Thus the book of the law is opened, for the sentence against all those on
the left hand: and by it they will clearly see the justice of the judgment
against them, and how the Judge proceeds therein according to law.
Nevertheless, there will be this difference, namely, that those who had
only the natural law, and lived not under any special revelation, shall be
judged by that law of nature they had in their hearts; which law declares
"that they which commit such things," as they will stand convicted of,
"are worthy of death," Romans 1:32. But those who had the written law,
to whom the word of God came, sounding in the visible church, shall be
judged by that written law. So says the apostle, Romans 2:12, "For as
many as have sinned without" the written "law, shall also perish without"

the written "law: and as many as have sinned in the law," that is, under
the written law, "shall also be judged by the" written "law."
(4.) "Another book" shall be "opened, which is the book of LIFE," Rev.
20:12. In this the names of all the elect are written, as Christ said to his
disciples, Luke 10:20, "Your names are written in heaven." This book
contains God's gracious and unchangeable purpose, to bring all the elect
to eternal life; and that, in order thereto, they be redeemed by the blood
of his Son, effectually called, justified, adopted, sanctified, and raised up
by him at the last day without sin. It is now lodged in the Mediator's
hand, as the book of "the manner of the kingdom:" and having perfected
the work the Father gave him to do, he shall, on the great day, produce
and open the book, and present the people therein named, "faultless
before the presence of his glory," Jude, verse 24; "not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing," Eph. 5:27. Not one of those who are named in
the book will be missing. They shall be found qualified according to the
order of the book, redeemed, called, justified, sanctified, raised up,
without spot: what remains then, but, according to the same book, they
obtain the great end, namely, everlasting life? This may be gathered from
that precious promise, Rev. 3:5, "He who overcomes, the same shall be
clothed in white raiment," being raised in glory; "and I will not blot out
his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before my
Father:" it shall be, as it were, read out, among the rest of God's elect,
"and before his angels." Here is now the ground of the saints' absolution,
the ground of the blessed sentence they shall receive. The book of life
being opened, it will be known to all, who are elected, and who are not.
Thus far of the trial of the parties.
8. Then shall the Judge pronounce this blessed sentence on the
saints, "Come, you blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world," Matt. 25:34. It is most
probable, the man Christ will pronounce it with an audible voice: which
not only all the saints, but all the wicked likewise, shall hear and
understand. Who can conceive the inexpressible joy, with which these
happy ones will hear these words? Who can imagine that fullness of joy,
which will be poured into their hearts, with these words reaching their
ears? And who can conceive how much of hell shall break forth into the

hearts of all the ungodly crew, by these words of heaven? It is certain that
this sentence shall be pronounced, before the sentence of damnation.
"Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, you
blessed," etc., Matt. 25:34. "Then shall he say also to them on the left
hand, Depart from me, you cursed," etc., verse 41. There is no need of this
order, that the saints may, without fear, hear the other sentence on the
reprobate: they who are raised in glory, caught up to meet the Lord in the
air, presented without spot, and whose souls, for the far greater part of
them, have been so long in heaven before, shall not be capable of any
such fear. But hereby they will be brought in orderly, to sit in judgment,
as Christ's assessors, against the ungodly; whose torment will be
aggravated by it. It will he a hell to them to be kept out of hell, until they
see the doors of heaven opened to receive the saints, who once dwelt in
the same world with them; and perhaps in the same parish, country, or
town, and sat under the same ministry with themselves. Thus will they
see heaven afar off, to make their hell the hotter: like that unbelieving
master, 2 Kings 7:19, 20, they "shall see" the plenty "with their eyes, but
shall not eat thereof." Every word of the blessed sentence shall be like an
envenomed arrow shot into their hearts while they see what they have
lost, and from thence gather what they are to expect.
This sentence passes on the saints, "according to their works," Rev.
20:12; but not for their works, nor for their faith, as if eternal life were
merited by them. The sentence itself overthrows this absurd conceit. The
kingdom which they are called to, was "prepared for them, from the
foundation of the world;" not left to be merited by themselves, who were
but of yesterday. They inherit it as sons, but procure it not to themselves
as servants do the reward of their work. They were redeemed by the blood
of Christ, and clothed with his spotless righteousness, which is the proper
cause of the sentence. They were also qualified for heaven, by the
sanctification of his Spirit; and hence it is "according to their works:" so
that the ungodly world shall see now, that the Judge of the living and
dead does good to those who were good. Therefore, it is added to the
sentence, "For I was hungry and you gave me something to eat, I was
thirsty and you gave me something to drink, I was a stranger and you
invited me in, I needed clothes and you clothed me, I was sick and you
looked after me, I was in prison and you came to visit me," verse 35, 36;

which does not denote the ground, but the evidence of their right to
heaven: as if a judge should say, he absolves a man pursued for debt, for
the witnesses depose that it is paid already.
So the apostle says, 1 Cor. 10:5, "But with many of them God was not well
pleased; for they were overthrown in the wilderness." Their overthrow in
the wilderness was not the ground of God's displeasure with them, but it
was an evidence of it. And thus our Lord teaches us the necessary
connection between glory and good works, namely, works evangelically
good; works having a respect to Jesus Christ, and done out of faith in
him, and love to him, without which they will not be regarded in that day.
And the saints will so far be judged according to such works, that the
degrees of glory among them shall be according to these works. For it is
an eternal truth, "He who sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly," 2 Cor.
9:6.
Thus shall the good works of the godly have a glorious, but a gratuitous
reward; a reward of grace, not of debt; which will fill them with wonder at
the riches of free grace, and at the Lord's condescending to take any
notice, especially such public notice, of their poor worthless works: which
seems to be the import of what they are said to answer, "Lord, when did
we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you something to
drink? When did we see you a stranger and invite you in, or needing
clothes and clothe you? When did we see you sick or in prison and go to
visit you?" verse 37-39.
They will be amazed to see themselves set down at the marriage supper of
the Lamb, and to hear him acknowledge a little food or drink, such as
they had, which they gave to a hungry member of Christ, for his sake! O,
plentiful harvest, following upon the seed of good works! Rivers of
pleasures, in exchange for a cup of cold water, given to a disciple, in the
name of a disciple! Eternal mansions of glory, in exchange for a night's
lodging given to a saint, who was a stranger! Everlasting robes of glory, in
exchange for a new coat, or, it may be, an old one, bestowed on some
saint, who had not necessary clothing! A visit to the sick saint, repaid by
Christ himself, coming in the glory of his Father, with all his holy angels!
A visit made to a poor prisoner for the cause of Christ, repaid with a visit
from the Judge of all, taking away the visitant with him to the palace of

heaven, there to be forever with himself! These things will be matter of
everlasting amazement; and should stir up all to sow liberally in time,
while seed-time of good works lasts. But it is Christ's stamp on good
works, that puts a value on them, in the eye of our gracious God; which
seems to be the import of our Lord's reply, verse 40, "Inasmuch as you
have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, you have done it
unto me."
9. Now the saints having received their own sentence, "they shall judge
the world," 1 Cor. 6:2. This was not fulfilled, when the empire became
Christian, and Christians were made magistrates. No, the psalmist tells
us, "This honor have all the saints," Psalm 149:9. And the apostle in the
forecited place, adds, "And if the world shall be judged by you, are you
unworthy to judge the smallest matters?" verse 3, "Know you not that we
shall judge angels?" Being called, they come to receive their kingdom, in
the view of angels and men: they go, as it were—from the bar to the
throne, "To him who overcomes, I will grant to sit with me in my throne,"
Rev. 3:21. They shall not judge the world, in Christ their head, by way of
communion with him, by their works compared with those of the
ungodly, or by way of testimony against them; but they shall be assessors
to Jesus Christ the Judge, giving their voice against them, consenting to
his judgment as just, and saying Amen to the doom pronounced against
all the ungodly: as is said of the saints, upon the judgment of the great
whore, Rev. 19:1, 2, "Hallelujah – for true and righteous are his
judgments." Thus, the upright shall have dominion over them, in the
morning," of the resurrection, Psalm 49:14. Then, and not until then,
shall that be fully accomplished, "May the praise of God be in their
mouths and a double-edged sword in their hands, to inflict vengeance on
the nations and punishment on the peoples, to bind their kings with
fetters, their nobles with shackles of iron, to carry out the sentence
written against them. This is the glory of all his saints. Praise the Lord."
Psalms 149:6-9
O! what a strange turn of affairs will appear here! What an astonishing
sight will it be, to see wicked men, formerly their unjust judges, standing
as criminals before the saints, whom formerly they condemned as
heretics, rebels, and traitors! To see men of riches and power stand pale-

faced, before those whom they oppressed! To see the mocker stand
trembling before those whom he mocked! the worldly wise man, before
those whom he accounted fools! Then shall the despised faces of the
saints be dreadful faces to the wicked; and those, who sometimes were
the song of the drunkards, shall then be a terror to them. All wrongs must
be righted at length, and everyone set in his proper place.
10. The Judge will pronounce the sentence of damnation on all
the ungodly multitude. "Then He will also say to those on the left—
Depart from Me, you who are cursed, into the eternal fire prepared for
the Devil and his angels!" Matthew 25:41. Fearful doom! and that from
the same mouth from whence proceeded the sentence of absolution
before. It was an aggravation of the misery of the Jews, when their city
was destroyed, that they were ruined by one who was accounted the
darling of the world. O, what an aggravation of the misery of the wicked
will it be also, that Christ will pronounce this sentence! To hear the curse
from mount Zion, must needs be most terrible. To be condemned by him
who came to save sinners, must be double damnation But thus it will be.
The Lamb of God shall roar, as a lion, against them: he shall
excommunicate, and cast them out of his presence forever, by a sentence
from the throne, saying, "Depart from Me, you who are cursed." He shall
adjudge them to everlasting fire, and the society of devils for evermore.
And this sentence also, we suppose, will be pronounced with an audible
voice, by the man Christ. And all the saints shall say, "Hallelujah, for true
and righteous are his judgments!" None were so compassionate as the
saints when on earth, during the time of God's patience. But now that
time is at an end: their compassion for the ungodly is swallowed
in joy in the Mediator's glory, and his executing just judgment, by
which his enemies are made his footstool. Though, when on earth, the
righteous man wept in secret places for their pride, and because they
would not hear; yet "The righteous will rejoice when he sees the
retribution; he will wash his feet in the blood of the wicked." Psalm 58:10.
No pity shall then be shown them from their nearest relations. The godly
wife shall applaud the justice of the Judge, in the condemnation of her
ungodly husband! The godly husband shall say Amen! to the
condemnation of her who lay in his bosom. The godly parents shall say

Hallelujah! at the passing of the sentence against their ungodly child.
And the godly child shall, from the bottom of his heart, approve the
condemnation of his wicked parents, the father who begat him, and the
mother who bore him. The sentence is just; they are judged "according to
their works," Rev. 20:12. "And again they shouted: Hallelujah! The smoke
from her goes up for ever and ever." Revelation 19:3 "Then I heard what
sounded like a great multitude, like the roar of rushing waters and like
loud peals of thunder, shouting: Hallelujah! For our Lord God Almighty
reigns!" Revelation 19:6
There is no wrong done to them, "For I was hungry and you gave Me
nothing to eat; I was thirsty and you gave Me nothing to drink; I was a
stranger and you didn’t take Me in; I was naked and you didn’t clothe Me,
sick and in prison and you didn’t take care of Me." verse 42, 43. These are
not only evidences of their ungodly and cursed state, but most proper
grounds of their condemnation: for though good works do not merit
salvation, yet evil works merit damnation. Sins of one kind only,
namely, of omission, are here mentioned; not that these alone shall be
then discovered, for the books lay all open: but because these, though
there were no more, are sufficient to condemn unpardoned sinners. And
if men are condemned for sins of omission, much more for sins of
commission. The omission of works of charity and mercy, is mentioned in
particular, to stop the mouths of the wicked; for it is most just that he
"have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy," James 2:13.
Taking notice of the omission of acts of charity and mercy towards the
distressed members of Christ, intimates, that it is the judgment of those
who have heard of Christ in the gospel, that is principally intended in this
portion of Scripture; and that the slighting of Christ will be the great
cause of the ruin of those who hear the gospel: but the enmity of the
hearts of the wicked against Christ himself, is discovered by the treatment
they now give to his members.
In vain will they say, "Lord, when did we see You hungry, or thirsty, or a
stranger, or without clothes, or sick, or in prison, and not help You?"
verse 44. For the Lord reckons, and will reckon, the world's unkindness
to his people, unkindness to himself; "I tell you the truth, whatever you
did not do for one of the least of these, you did not do for me," verse 45.

Food and drink unhappily spared, when a member of Christ was in need
of it! O, wretched neglect, that the stranger saint was not taken in! It had
been better for them if they had left their own room, and their own bed,
than that he lacked lodging.
O, cursed clothing, may the wicked say, that was in my house, locked up
in my chest, or hanging in my wardrobe, and was not brought out to
clothe such a one! O, that I had stripped myself, rather than he had gone
away without clothing! Cursed business that diverted me from visiting
such a saint! O, that I had rather watched whole nights with him! Wretch
that I was! Why did I sit at ease in my house, when he was in prison, and
did not visit him? But now the tables are turned: Christ's servants shall
eat—but I shall be hungry; his servants shall drink—but I shall be thirsty;
they rejoice—but I am ashamed, Isaiah 65:13. They are taken in—but I am
cast out, and bid to depart; they are clothed with robes of glory—but I
"walk naked, and they see my shame," Rev. 16:15. They are now raised up
on high, beyond the reach of sickness or pain—but I must now "lie down
in sorrow," Isaiah 50:11. Now they will go to the palace of heaven—
but I must go to the prison of hell.
But if our Lord thus resents men's neglecting to help his people under
these, and the like distresses; what may they expect who are the authors
and instruments of them? If they shall be fed with wrath, who fed them
not when they were hungry; what shall become of those, who robbed and
took advantage of them? What a full cup of wrath shall be the portion of
those, who were so far from giving them food or drink when hungry or
thirsty, that they made it a crime for others to entertain them, and made
themselves drunken with their blood! They must lodge with devils for
evermore, who took not in the Lord's people, when strangers: then, what
a lodging shall those have, who drove them out of their own houses, out
of their native land, and made them strangers! Men will be condemned
for not clothing them, when naked: then, how heavy must the sentence of
those be, who have stripped them, and made them go without clothing!
Surely, if not visiting them in sickness, or in prison, shall be so severely
punished; those shall not escape a most heavy doom, who have cast them
into prisons, and have put them under such hardships, as have impaired
their health, brought sickness on them, and cut short their days in prison,

or out of prison.
To put a face upon such wicked practices, men will pretend to retain an
honor for Christ and religion, while they thus treat his members, walking
in his way, and keeping the truth. They are here represented to say,
"Lord, when did we see You hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or without
clothes, or sick, or in prison, and not help You?" verse 44. As if they
should say, Our bread, drink, lodging, clothing, and visits, were indeed
refused, but not to Christ; but to a set of men of a bad character, men who
"turned the world upside down," Acts 17:6; who troubled Israel, 1 Kings
18:7; a strange and fanatic sort of people, having laws diverse from all
people, factious and rebellious; they did not keep the king's laws, and
were therefore a dangerous set of men; it was not for the king's profit to
tolerate them, Esther 3:8. But although men cast iniquity upon the godly,
and give them evil names, that they may treat them as criminals, all these
pretenses will avail them nothing, in the great day, before the righteous
Judge, nor before their own consciences; but the real ground of their
enmity against the saints will be found, to their own conviction, to be
their enmity against Christ himself. This seems to be the import of the
objection of the damned, verse 44, and of the answer to it, verse 45, "'I
tell you the truth, whatever you did not do for one of the least of these,
you did not do for me."
11. Sentence being passed on both parties, the full execution of
the same follows, verse 46, "And these shall go away into everlasting
punishment; but the righteous into eternal life." The condemned shall get
no reprieve, but go to their place without delay; they shall be driven away
from the judgment-seat into hell: and the saints "shall enter into the
King's palace," Psalm 45:15, namely, into heaven, the seat of the blessed.
But our Lord Christ, and his glorious company, shall keep the field that
day and see the backs of all their enemies; for the condemned go off first.
In this day of the Lord, the great day, shall be the general conflagration;
by which these visible heavens, the earth, and sea, shall pass away. Not
that they shall be annihilated, or reduced to nothing, that is not the
operation of fire; but they shall be purified by that fire, from all the effects
of sin, and of the curse, upon them; and then renewed, and made more
glorious and stable. Of this conflagration, the apostle Peter speaks, 2 Pet.

3:10, "But the day of the Lord will come, as a thief in the night; in the
which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up." See also verse 7, 12. And of the renewing of
the world, he adds, verse 13, "Nevertheless we, according to his promise,
look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness."
It seems most agreeable to the Scriptures, and to the nature of the thing,
to conceive this conflagration to follow after the general judgment;
sentence being passed on both parties before it. And I think it probable,
that it will fall in with the putting of the sentence in execution against the
damned; so as they shall, according to their sentence, depart, and the
heavens and the earth pass away, together and at once, at that furious
rebuke from the throne, driving them away, out of the world (in this fire)
to the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. Even as, in
the deluge, with which the apostle Peter compares the conflagration, or
burning of the world, 2 Pet. 3: 6, 7, the world itself, and the wicked upon
it, perished together; the same water which destroyed the earth, sweeping
away the inhabitants. For it is not likely that the wicked shall at all stand
on the new earth, "wherein dwells righteousness," 2 Pet. 3:13.
And as for this earth, it shall "flee away," which seems to denote a very
quick dispatch, and it shall "flee from his face, who sits on the throne,"
Rev. 20:11, "And I saw a great white throne, and him who sat on it, from
whose face the earth and the heaven fled away." The execution of the
sentence on the wicked is also thus expressed; they "shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence," or "from the face of the
Lord," 2 Thess. 1:9. The original word is the same in both texts, which,
being compared, seem to say, that these creatures, abused by the wicked,
being left to stand as witnesses against them in the judgment, are, after
sentence passed on their abusers, made to pass away with them from the
face of the Judge. It is true, the fleeing away of the earth and the heavens
is narrated, Rev. 20:11, before the judgment; but that does not prove its
going before the judgment, any more than the narrating of the judgment,
verse 12, before the resurrection, verse 13, will prove the judgment to be
before it.
Further, it is remarkable, in the execution of the sentence, Rev. 20:14, 15,

that not only the reprobate are "cast into the lake," but "death and hell"
are cast into it likewise: all effects of sin and of the curse are removed out
of the world, for which very cause shall the conflagration be, and they are
confined to the place of the damned.
Besides all this, it is evident that the end of the world is by the
conflagration: and the apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 15:24, 25, "Then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the
Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and
power. For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet."
Which last, as it must be done before the end, so it seems not to be done,
but by putting the sentence in execution, passed in the day of judgment,
against the wicked.
Now, if the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, which is set forth for an
example, Jude, verse 7, was so dreadful, how terrible will that day be,
when the whole world shall be at once in flames! How will wretched
worldlings look, when their darling world shall be all on fire! Then shall
strong castles and towering palaces, with all their rich furniture, go up
together in one flame with the poorest cottages. What heart can fully
conceive the terror of that day to the wicked, when the whole fabric of
heaven and earth shall at once be dissolved by that fire? when that
miserable company shall be driven from the tribunal—to the pit, with fire
within them, and outside of them on every hand; and fire awaiting them
in the lake; where this fire, may also follow them.
As for the particular PLACE of this judgment, though some point us to
the valley of Jehoshaphat for it; yet our Lord, who infallibly knew it,
being asked the question by his disciples, "Where, Lord?" only said,
"Wherever the body is, there shall the eagles be gathered together," Luke
17:37. After which answer, it is too much for men to renew the question.
As for the TIME, when it shall be, in vain do men search for what the
Lord has purposely kept secret, Acts 1:7, "It is not for you to know the
times or the seasons, which the Father has put in his own power." The
apostle Paul, after having very plainly described the second coming of
Christ, 1 Thess. 4:16, 17, adds, chapter 5:1, 2, "But of the times and
seasons, brethren, you have no need that I write unto you: for yourselves

know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night."
Nevertheless, some, in several ages, have made very bold with the time;
and several particular years, which are now past, have been given out to
the world, for the time of the end, by men who have pried into the secrets
of God. Time has proclaimed to the world, their rashness and folly; and it
is probable they will be no more happy in their conjectures, whose
determinate time is yet to come. Let us rest in that, "He will come."
God has kept the day hidden from us, that we may be every day ready for
it, Matt. 25:13, "Watch, therefore; for you know neither the day nor the
hour, wherein the Son of man comes." And let us remember, that the last
day of our life, will determine our state in the last day of the world. As we
die—so shall we be judged.
III. The APPLICATION of this great truth—that there shall be a
general judgment. I shall now conclude this subject, with some
application of what has been said.
Use 1. Of comfort to all the SAINTS. Here is abundance of
consolation to all who are in the state of grace. Whatever be your
afflictions in the world, this day will make up all your losses. "Though you
have lain among the pots; yet shall you be as the wings of a dove covered
with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold," Psalm 68:13. Though the
world reproaches, judges, and condemns you; the Judge will at that day
absolve you, and bring forth your righteousness as the light. The world's
fools will then appear to have been the only wise men who were in it.
Though the cross be heavy, you may well bear it, in expectation of the
crown of righteousness, which the righteous Judge will then give you. If
the world despises you, and treats you with the utmost contempt, regard
it not: the day is coming wherein you shall sit with Christ on his throne.
Be not discouraged by reason of manifold temptations. But resist the
devil in confidence of a full and complete victory; for you shall judge the
tempter at last. Though you have hard wrestling now with the body of sin
and death; yet you shall get all your enemies under your feet at length,
and be presented faultless before the presence of his glory. Let not the
terror of that day dispirit you, when you think upon it; let those who have

slighted the Judge, and continue enemies to him, and to the way of
holiness, droop and hang down their heads, when they think of his
coming: but lift you up your heads with joy, for the last day will be your
best day. The Judge is your Head and Husband, your Redeemer, and your
Advocate. You must appear before the judgment-seat, but you "shall not
come into condemnation," John 5:24. His coming will not be against you
—but for you. He came in the flesh, to remove the lawful impediments of
the spiritual marriage, by his death; he came in the gospel to you, to
espouse you to himself; he will come, at last, to solemnize the marriage,
and take the bride home to his Father's house. "Even so, come, Lord
Jesus."
Use 2. Of terror to all UNBELIEVERS. This may serve to awaken a
secure generation, a world lying in wickedness, as if they were never to be
called to an account for it; and slighting the Mediator, as if he were not to
judge them. Ah! how few have lively impressions of the judgment to
come! Most men live as if what is said of it from the word of God, were
but idle tales. The profane lives of many speak the thoughts of it to be far
from their hearts, and in very deed make a mock of it before the world,
saying, in effect, "Where is the promise of his coming?" The hypocrisy of
others, who blind the eyes of the world with being a splendid profession,
being in appearance Christ's sheep, while they are indeed the devil's
goats, proves that the great separation of the sheep from the goats is very
little laid to heart. How do many indulge themselves in secret wickedness,
of which they would be ashamed before witnesses; not considering, that
their most secret thoughts and actions will, at that day, be revealed before
the great congregation!
How eagerly are men's hearts set on the world—as if it were to
be their everlasting habitation! The solemn assemblies, and public
ordinances, wherein the Judge is upon a transaction of peace with the
criminals, are undervalued: many hearts swim like feathers in the waters
of the sanctuary, that sink like stones to the bottom in cares of this life;
they will be very serious in trifles of this world, and trifle in the most
serious and weighty things of another world. But, O, consider the day that
is approaching, in which Christ will come to judgment! the world shall be
summoned, by the sound of the last trumpet, to appear before his

tribunal. The Judge will sit on his throne, and all nations will be
summoned before him; the separation will be made between the godly
and the wicked; the books opened, and the dead judged out of them; one
party will be adjudged to everlasting life, and the other to everlasting fire,
according to their works.
It would be a sight, of admirable curiosity, if you could wrap up yourself
in some dark cloud, or hide yourself in the cleft of some high rock, from
whence you might espy wicked kings, princes, judges, and great ones of
the earth, rising out of their marble tombs, and brought to the bar, to
answer for all their cruelty, injustice, oppression, profanity, without any
marks of distinction, but what their wickedness puts upon them. Profane,
unholy, and unfaithful ministers, pursued with the curses of their
ruined people, from their graves to the judgment seat, and charged with
the blood of souls, to whom they gave not faithful warning. Mighty men
standing trembling before the Judge, unable to recover their usual
boldness, to outwit him with their subtleties, or defend themselves by
their strength. Delicate women cast forth of their graves, as
abominable branches, dragged to the tribunal, to answer for their
ungodly lives. The ignorant, suddenly taught in the law to their cost;
and the learned declared before the world, to be fools and laborious
triflers. The atheist convinced, the hypocrite unmasked, and the
profane at length turned serious about his eternal state. Secret murders,
adulteries, thefts, cheats, and other works of darkness, which defied all
human search, discovered and laid open before the world, with their most
minute circumstances. No special regard given to the rich, no pity shown
to the poor. The scales of the world turned; oppressed and despised piety
set on high, and prosperous wickedness at last brought low. All not found
in Christ, arraigned, convicted, and condemned, without respect of
persons, and driven from the tribunal to the bottomless pit; while those
found in him, at that day, being absolved before the world, go with him
into heaven. Nay, but you can not so escape. Whoever you are, not being
in Christ, you must bear a part in this tragic and alarming scene!
Sinner, that same Lord Christ, whom you now despise, whom you wound
through the sides of his messengers, and before whom you do prefer your
lusts—will be your Judge. The neglected Savior will be a severe Judge. O!

what mountain, what rock, will you get to fall on you—to hide you from
the face of Him who sits on the throne? You have now a rock within you,
a heart of adamant, so that you can count the darts of the word as
stubble, and laugh at the shaking of the spear: but that rock will rend at
the sight of the Judge; that hard heart will then break, and you will weep
and wail, when weeping and waiting will be to no purpose. Death's bands
will fall off, the grave will cast you out; and the mountains shall skip from
you, and the rocks refuse to grind you to powder. How will your cursed
eyes abide the sight of the Judge? Behold, he comes! Where is the profane
swearer, who tore his wounds? The wretched worldling, now abandoned
of his God? The formal hypocrite, who kissed him and betrayed him? The
despiser of the gospel, who sent him away in his messengers groaning,
profaned his ordinances, and trampled under foot his precious blood? O
murderer, the slain man is your Judge—it is he whom you did so
maltreat. Behold the neglected Lamb of God appearing as a lion against
you. How will your heart endure the darts of his fiery looks? That rocky
heart, which now holds out against him, shall then be blown up; that face,
which refuses to blush now, shall then gather blackness: arrows of wrath
shall pierce where arrows of conviction cannot enter now.
What will you answer him, when he rises up, and charges you with your
unbelief and impenitence? Will you say, you were not warned?
Conscience within you will give you the lie; the secret groans and
weariness of those who warned you, will witness the contrary. If a child or
a fool did tell you that your house was on fire, you would immediately run
to quench it: but, in matters of eternal concern, men will first fill their
hearts with prejudices against the messengers, and then cast their
message behind their backs. But these silly excuses and pretenses will not
avail in the day of the Lord. How will these cursed ears, now deaf to the
call of the gospel, inviting sinners to come to Christ, hear the fearful
sentence, "Depart from me, you cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for
the devil and his angels?" No sleepy hearer shall be there; no man's heart
will then wander; their hearts and eyes will then be fixed on their misery,
which they will not now believe. O, that we knew, in this our day, the
things that belong to our peace!
Lastly, Be exhorted to believe this great truth; and believe it so that you

may prepare for the judgment. Set up a secret tribunal in your own
breasts, and often call yourselves to an account there. Make the Judge
your friend in time, by closing with him in the offer of the gospel; and
give all diligence, that you may be found in Christ at that day. Cast off the
works of darkness; and live, as believing you are, at all times, and in all
places, under the eye of your Judge, who "will bring every work into
judgment, with every secret thing." Be fruitful in good works, knowing
that as you sow, you shall reap. Study piety towards God, righteousness
and charity towards men. Lay up in store plenty of works of charity and
mercy towards those who are in distress, especially such as are of the
household of faith; that they may be produced, at that day, as evidences
that you belong to Christ. Shut not up your affections of mercy, now,
towards the needy; lest you then find no mercy. Take heed, that in all
your works you be single and sincere; aiming, in them all, at the glory of
the Lord, a testimony of your love to him, and in obedience to his
command. Leave it to hypocrites, who have their reward, to proclaim
every man his own goodness; and to sound a trumpet when they do their
alms. It is a base and unchristian spirit, which cannot have satisfaction in
a good work unless it be exposed to the view of others: it is utterly
unworthy of one who believes that the last trumpet shall call together the
whole world, before whom the Judge himself shall publish works truly
good, however secretly they were done. Live in a believing expectation of
the coming of the Lord. Let your loins be always girt, and your lamps
burning; so when he comes, whether in the last day of your life, or in the
last day of the world, you shall be able to say with joy, "Lo, this is our
God, and we have waited for him."
