PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 14
The Glory of the Person of Christ


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 2. The Glory of the Person of Christ.

Meditations and Discourses on The Glory of Christ

The Explication of the Text.
Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast
given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world. (John 17:24) The high priest under the law, when he was to enter
into the holy place on the solemn day of atonement, was to take both his hands full of sweet incense from the golden table of incense,
to carry along with him in his entrance. He had also a censer filled with fire, that was taken from the altar of burnt-offerings, where
atonement was made for sin with blood. Upon his actual entrance through the veil, he put the incense on the fire in the censer until
the cloud of its smoke covered the ark, and the mercy seat. See Lev. 16: 12,13. And the end hereof was to present unto God, in the
behalf of the people, a sweet-smelling savour from the sacrifice of propitiation. See the declaration of these things in our exposition of
Heb. 9.
In answer unto this mystical type, the great High Priest of the church, our Lord Jesus Christ, being to enter into the “holy place not
made with hands,” did, by the glorious prayer recorded in this chapter, influenced from the blood of his sacrifice, fill the heavens
above, the glorious place of God’s residence, with a cloud of incense, or the sweet perfume of his blessed intercession, typed by the
incense offered by the high priest of old. By the same eternal fire wherewith he offered himself a bloody sacrifice to make atonement

for sin, he kindled in his most holy soul those desires for the application of all its benefits unto his church which are here expressed,
and wherein his intercession does consist.
I t is only one passage in the verse above named that at present I design an inquiry into. And this is the subject-matter of what the
Lord Christ here desires in the behalf of those given him by the Father, – namely, THAT THEY MAY BEHOLD HIS GLORY .
I t is evident that in this prayer the Lord Christ has respect unto his own glory and the manifestation of it, which he had in the
entrance asked of the Father, verses 4, 5. But in this place he has not so much respect unto it as his own, as unto the advantage,
benefit, satisfaction, and blessedness of his disciples, in the beholding of it. For these things were the end of all that mediatory glory
which was given unto him. So Joseph charged his brethren, when he had revealed himself unto them, that they should tell his father
of all his “glory in Egypt,” Gen. 45: 13. This he did, not for an ostentation of his own glory, but for the satisfaction which he knew his
father would take in the knowledge of it. And such a manifestation of his glory unto his disciples does the Lord Christ here desire, as
might fill them with blessed satisfaction for evermore.
This alone, which is here prayed for, will give them such satisfaction, and nothing else. The hearts of believers are like the needle
touched by the loadstone, which cannot rest until it comes to the point whereunto, by the secret virtue of it, it is directed. For being
once touched by the love of Christ, receiving therein an impression of secret ineffable virtue, they will ever be in motion, and restless,
until they come unto him, and behold his glory. That soul which can be satisfied without it, – that cannot be eternally satisfied with it,
– is not partaker of the efficacy of his intercession.
I shall lay the foundation of the ensuing Meditations in this one assertion, – namely, That one of the greatest privileges and
advancements of believers, both in this world and unto eternity, consists in their BEHOLDING THE GLORY OF CHRIST. This,
therefore, He desires for them in this solemn intercession, as the complement of all his other requests in their behalf; – “That they
may behold my glory,” – “Hina teooroosi”, – that they may see, view, behold, or contemplate on my glory. The reasons why I assign
not this glorious privilege only unto the heavenly state, which is principally respected in this place, but apply it unto the state of
believers in this world also, with their duties and privileges therein, shall be immediately declared.
All unbelievers do in their heart call Christ “Ichabod,” – “Where is the glory?” They see neither “form nor comeliness in him,” that he
should be desired. They look on him as Michal, Saul’s daughter, did on David “dancing before the ark,” when she despised him in her
heart. They do not, indeed (many of them), “call Jesus anathema,” but cry, “Hail, Master!” and then crucify him.
Hence have we so many cursed opinions advanced in derogation unto his glory, – some of them really destructive of all that is truly
so; yea, denying the “only Lord that bought us,” and substituting a false Christ in his room. And others there are who express their
slight thoughts of him and his glory by bold, irreverent inquiries, of what use his Person is in our religion; as though there were
anything in our religion that has either reality, substance, or truth, but by virtue of its relation thereunto. And, by their answers, they
bring their own inquiries yet nearer unto the borders of blasphemy.
Never was there an age since the name of Christians was known upon the earth, wherein there was such a direct opposition made
unto the Person and glory of Christ, as there is in that wherein we live. There were, indeed, in the first times of the church, sums of
proud, doting, brain-sick persons, who vented many foolish imaginations about him, which issued at length in Arianism, in whose
ruins they were buried. The gates of hell in them prevailed not against the rock on which the church is built. But as it was said of
Caesar, “Solus accesit sobrius, ad perdendam rempublicam”, – “He alone went soberly about the destruction of the commonwealth;”
so we now have great numbers who oppose the Person and glory of Christ, under a pretence of sobriety of reason, as they vainly
plead. Y ea, the disbelief of the mysteries of the Trinity, and the incarnation of the Son of God, – the sole foundation of Christian
religion, – is so diffused in the world, as that it has almost devoured the power and vitals of it. And not a few, who dare not yet express
their minds, do give broad intimations of their intentions and good-will towards him, in making them the object of their scorn and
reproach who desire to know nothing but him, and him crucified.
G od, in his appointed time, will effectually vindicate his honour and glory from the vain attempts of men of corrupt minds against
them.
I n the meantime, it is the duty of all those who “love the Lord Jesus in sincerity,” to give testimony in a peculiar manner unto his
divine Person and glory, according unto their several capacities, because of the opposition that is made against them.
I have thought myself on many accounts obliged to cast my mite into this treasury. and I have chosen so to do, not in a way of
controversy (which formerly I have engaged in), but so as, together with the vindication of the truth, to promote the strengthening of
the faith of true believers, their edification in the knowledge of it; and to express the experience which they have, or may have, of the
power and reality of these things That which at present I design to demonstrate is, that the beholding of the glory of Christ is one of
the greatest privileges and advancements that believers are capable of in this world, or that which is to come. It is that whereby they
are first gradually conformed unto it, and then fixed in the eternal enjoyment of it. For here in this life, beholding his glory, they are
changed or transformed into the likeness of it, 2 Cor. 3: 18; and hereafter they shall be “for ever like unto him,” because they “shall see
him as he is,” 1 John 3: 1, 2. Hereon do our present comforts and future blessedness depend. This is the life and reward of our souls.
“He that has seen him has seen the Father also,” John 14: 9. For we discern the “light of the knowledge of the glory of God only in the
face of Jesus Christ,” 2 Cor. 4: 6.
There are, therefore, two ways or degrees of beholding the glory of Christ, which are constantly distinguished in the Scripture. The one
is by faith, in this world, – which is “the evidence of things not seen;” the other is by sight, or immediate vision in eternity, 2 Cor. 5: 7,
“We walk by faith, and not by sight.” We do so whilst we are in this world, “whilst we are present in the body, and absent from the
Lord,” verse 8. But we shall live and walk by sight hereafter. And it is the Lord Christ and his glory which are the immediate object
both of this faith and sight. For we here “behold him darkly in a glass” (that is by faith); “but we shall see him face to face” (by
immediate vision). “Now we know him in part, but then we shall know him as we are known,” 1 Cor. 13: 12. What is the difference
between these two ways of beholding the glory of Christ shall be afterward declared.
It is the second way – namely, by vision in the light of glory – that is principally included in that prayer of our blessed Saviour, that

his disciples may be where he is, to behold his glory. But I shall not confine my inquiry thereunto; nor does our Lord Jesus exclude
from his desire that sight of his glory which we have by faith in this world, but prays for the perfection of it in heaven. It is therefore
the first way that, in the first place, I shall insist upon; and that for the reasons ensuing: – 1. No man shall ever behold the glory of
Christ by sight hereafter, who does not in some measure behold it by faith here in this world. Grace is a necessary preparation for
glory, and faith for sight. Where the subject (the soul) is not previously seasoned with grace and faith, it is not capable of glory or
vision. Nay, persons not disposed hereby unto it cannot desire it, whatever they pretend; they only deceive their own souls in
supposing that so they do. Most men will say with confidence, living and dying, that they desire to be with Christ, and to behold his
glory; but they can give no reason why they should desire any such thing, – only they think it somewhat that is better than to be in
that evil condition which otherwise they must be cast into for ever, when they can be here no more. If a man pretend himself to be
enamoured on, or greatly to desire, what he never saw, nor was ever represented unto him, he does but dote on his own imaginations.
And the pretended desires of many to behold the glory of Christ in heaven, who have no view of it by faith whilst they are here in this
world, are nothing but self-deceiving imaginations.
So do the Papists delude themselves. Their carnal affections are excited by their outward senses to delight in images of Christ, – in his
sufferings, his resurrection, and glory above. Hereon they satisfy themselves that they behold the glory of Christ himself and that with
love and great delight. But whereas there is not the least true representation made of the Lord Christ or his glory in these things, –
that being confined absolutely unto the gospel alone, and this way of attempting it being laid under a severe interdict, – they do but
sport themselves with their own deceivings.
The apostle tells us concerning himself and other believers, when the Lord Christ was present and conversed with them in the days of
his flesh, that they “saw his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth,” John 1: 14. And we may
inquire, what was this glory of Christ which they so saw, and by what means they obtained a prospect of it. For, – l. It was not the
glory of his outward condition, as we behold the glory and grandeur of the kings and potentates of the earth; for he made himself of
no reputation, but being in the form of a servant, he walked in the condition of a man of low degree. The secular grandeur of his
pretended Vicar makes no representation of that glory of his which his disciples saw. He kept no court, nor house of entertainment,
nor (though he made all things) had of his own where to lay his head. Nor, – 2. Was it with respect to the outward form of the flesh
which he was made, wherein he took our nature on him, as we see the glory of a comely or beautiful person; – for he had therein
neither form nor comeliness that he should be desired, “his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the
sons of men,” Isa. 52: 14; 53: 2, 3. All things appeared in him as became “a man of sorrows.” Nor, – 3. Was it absolutely the eternal
essential glory of his divine nature that is intended; for this no man can see in this world. What we shall attain in a view thereof
hereafter we know not. But, – 4. It was his glory, as he was “full of grace and truth.” They saw the glory of his person and his office in
the administration of grace and truth. And how or by what means did they see this glory of Christ? It was by faith, and no otherwise;
for this privilege was granted unto them only who “received him,” and believed on his name, John 1: 12. This was that glory which
the Baptist saw, when, upon his coming unto him he said unto all that were presents “Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away
the sin of the world!” verses 29-33.
Wherefore let no man deceive himself; he that has no sight of the glory of Christ here, shall never have any of it hereafter unto his
advantage. It is not, therefore, unto edification to discourse of beholding the glory of Christ in heaven by vision, until we go through a
trial whether we see anything of it in this world by faith or no.
2. The beholding of Christ in glory is that which in itself is too high, illustrious, and marvellous for us in our present condition. It has a
splendour and glory too great for our present spiritual visible faculty; as the direct, immediate sight of the sun darkens our sight, and
does not relieve or strengthen it at all. Wherefore we have no way to take into our minds any true spiritual apprehensions of the
nature of immediate vision, or what it is to see the glory of Christ in heaven, but by that view which we have by faith in this life of the
same glory. Whatever otherwise falls into our minds is but conjecture and imagination; such as are the contemplations of most about
heavenly things.
I have seen and read somewhat of the writings of learned men concerning the state of future glory; some of them are filled with
excellent notions of truth, and elegance of speech, whereby they cannot but much affect the minds of them who duly consider what
they say. But I know not well whence it comes to pass, many complain that, in reading of such discourses, they are like a man who
“beholds his natural face in a glass, and immediately forgets what manner of man he was;” as one of old complained to the same
purpose upon his perusal of Plato’s contemplations about the immortality of the soul. The things spoken do not abide nor incorporate
with our minds. They please and refresh for a little while, like a shower of rain in a dry season, that soaketh not unto the roots of
things; the power of them does not enter into us. Is it not all from hence, that their notions of future things are not educed out of the
experience which we have of the beginnings of them in this world? Without which they can make no permanent abode in our minds,
nor continue any influence upon our affections. Y ea, the soul is disturbed, not edified, in all contemplations of future glory, when
things are proposed unto it whereof in this life it has neither foretaste, sense, experience, nor evidence. No man ought to look for
anything in heaven, but what one way or other he has some experience of in this life. If men were fully persuaded hereof, they would
be, it may be, more in the exercise of faith and love about heavenly things than for the most part they are. At present they know not
what they enjoy, and they look for they know not what.
Hence is it that men, utterly strangers unto all experience of the beginning of glory in themselves as an effect of faith, have filled their
divine worship with images, pictures, and music, to represent unto themselves somewhat of that glory which they fancy to be above.
For into that which is truly so, they have no prospect, or can have; because they have no experience of its power in themselves, nor do
they taste of its goodness by any of its first-fruits in their own minds. Wherefore by that view alone, and not otherwise, which we have
of the glory of Christ by faith here in this world, we may attain such blessed conceptions of our beholding his glory above by
immediate vision, as shall draw out our hearts unto the admiration of it and desires of its full enjoyment.
3. Herein, then, our present edification is principally concerned; for in this present beholding of she glory of Christ, the life and power
of faith are most eminently acted. And from this exercise of faith does love unto Christ principally, if not solely, arise and spring. If,
therefore, we desire to have faith in its vigour or love in its power, giving rest, complacency, and satisfaction unto our own souls, we
are to seek for them in the diligent discharge of this duty; – elsewhere they will not be found. Herein would I live; – herein would I
die; – hereon would I dwell in my thoughts and affections, to the withering and consumption of all the painted beauties of this world,

unto the crucifying all things here below, until they become unto me a dead and deformed thing, no way meet for affectionate
embraces.
F or these and the like reasons I shall first inquire into our beholding of the glory of Christ in this world by faith; and therein
endeavour to lead the souls of them that believe into the more retired walks of faith, love, and holy meditation, “whereby the King is
held in the galleries,” Cant. 7: 5.
But because there is no benefit in, nor advantage by, the contemplation of this sacred truth, but what consists in an improvement of
the practice of the duty declared in it, – namely, the constant beholding of the glory of Christ by faith, – I shalt for the promotion of it,
premise some few advantages which we may have thereby.
1 . We shall hereby be made fit and meet for heaven. Every man is not so who desires it, and hopes for it; for some are not only
unworthy of it, and excluded from it, by reason of sin, but they are unmet for it, and incapable of any advantage by it. All men,
indeed, think themselves fit enough for glory (what should hinder them?) if they could attain it; but it is because they know not what
it is. Men shall not be clothed with glory, as it were, whether they will or no. It is to be received in that exercise of the faculties of their
souls which such persons have no ability for. Music has no pleasure in it unto them that cannot hear; nor the most beautiful colours,
unto them that cannot see. It would be no benefit unto a fish, to take him from the bottom of the ocean, filled with cold and darkness,
and to place him under the beams of the sun; for he is no way meet to receive any refreshment thereby. Heaven itself would not be
more advantageous unto persons not renewed by the Spirit of grace in this life.
Hence the apostle gives “thanks unto the Father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light,” Col 1:
12. Indeed, the beginning here, and the fulness of glory hereafter, are communicated unto believers, by an almighty act of the will and
grace of God. But yet he has ordained ways, and meant, whereby they may be made meet receptive subjects of the glory so to be
communicated unto them. That this way and means is by the beholding of the glory of Christ by faith shall be fully declared in our
progress. This, therefore, should excite us unto this duty; for all our present glory consists, in our preparation for future glory.
2. No man can by faith take a real view of this glory, but virtue will proceed from it in a transforming power to change him “into the
same image,” 2 Cor. 3: 18. How this is done, and how we become like unto artist by beholding his glory, shall be fully declared in our
progress 3. The constant contemplation of the glory of Christ will give rest, satisfaction, and complacency unto the souls of them who
are exercised therein. Our minds are apt to be filled with a multitude of perplexed thoughts; – fears, cares, dangers, distresses,
passions, and lusts, do make various impressions on the minds of men, filling them with disorder, darkness, and confusion. But where
the soul is fixed in its thoughts and contemplations on this glorious object, it will be brought into and kept in a holy, serene, spiritual
frame. For “to be spiritually-minded is life and peace.” And this it does by taking off our hearts from all undue regard unto all things
below, in comparison of the great worth, beauty, and glory of what we are conversant withal. See Phil. 3: 7-11. A defect herein makes
many of us strangers unto a heavenly life, and to live beneath the spiritual refreshments and satisfactions that the gospel does tender
unto us.
4. The sight of the glory of Christ is the spring and cause of our everlasting blessedness. “We shall ever be with the Lord,” 1 Thess. 4:
17, or “be with Christ, which is best of all, Phil. 1: 23. For there shall we “behold his glory,” John 17: 24; and by “seeing him as he is,
we shall be made like him,” 1 John 3: 2; – which is our everlasting blessedness.
The enjoyment of God by sight is commonly called the BEATIFICAL VISION; and it is the sole fountain of all the actings of our souls
in the state of blessedness: which the old philosophers knew nothing of; neither do we know distinctly what they are, or what is this
sight of God. Howbeit, this we know, that God in his immense essence is invisible unto our corporeal eyes, and will be so to eternity;
as also incomprehensible unto our minds. For nothing can perfectly comprehend that which is infinite, but what is itself infinite.
Wherefore the blessed and blessing sight which we shall have of God will be always “in the face of Jesus Christ.” Therein will that
manifestation of the glory of God, in his infinite perfections, and all their blessed operations, so shine into our souls, as shall
immediately fill us with peace, rest, and glory.
These things we here admire, but cannot comprehend. We know not well what we say when we speak of them: yet is there in true
believers a foresight and foretaste of this glorious condition. There enters sometimes, by the Word and Spirit, into their hearts such a
sense of the untreated glory of God, shining forth in Christ, as affects and satiates their souls with ineffable joy. Hence ariseth that
“peace of God which passeth all understanding,” keeping “our hearts and minds through Jesus Christ,” Phil. 4: 7. “Christ,” in believers,
“The hope of glory,” gives them to taste of the first- fruits of it; yea, sometimes to bathe their souls in the fountain of life, and to drink
of the rivers of pleasure that are at his right hand. Where any are utterly unacquainted with these things, they are carnal, yes, blind,
and see nothing afar off. These enjoyments, indeed, are rare, and for the most part of short continuance. “Rara hora, brevis mora.”
But it is from our own sloth and darkness that we do not enjoy more visits of this grace, and that the dawnings of glory do not more
shine on our souls. Such things as these may excite us to diligence in the duty proposed unto us.
And I shall inquire, – 1. What is that glory of Christ which we do or may behold by faith? 2. How do we behold it? 3. Wherein our
doing so differs from immediate vision in heaven? And in the whole we shall endeavour an answer unto the inquiry made unto the
spouse, by the daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 5: 9, “What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women?
What is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou dost so charge us?”

The Glory of the Person of Christ, as the only Representative of God unto the
Church.

The glory of Christ is the glory of the person of Christ So he calls it “Ten doxan ten emen”, John 17: 24, “That glory which is mine,”
which belongeth to me, unto my person.
The person of Christ may be considered two ways: – 1. Absolutely in itself. 2. In the susception and discharge of his office, with what
ensued thereon. His glory on these distinct accounts is distinct and different; but all equally his own. How in both respects we may
behold it by faith, is that which we inquire into.
The first thing wherein we may behold the glory of the person of Christ, God and man, which was given him of his Father, consists in
the representation of the nature of God, and of the divine person of the Father, unto the church in him; for we behold “the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ,” 2 Cor. 4: 6. Otherwise we know it not, we see it not, we see nothing of it; that is the way of seeing and
knowing God, declared in the Scripture as our duty and blessedness. The glory of God comprehends both the holy properties of his
nature and the counsels of his will; and “the light of the knowledge” of these things we have only “in the face” or person “of Jesus
Christ.” Whatever obscure, imperfect notions we may have of them other ways, we cannot have “fotismon tes gnoseos tes doxes tou
Theou”, “the light of the” illuminating, irradiating “knowledge of the glory of God,” which may enlighten our minds and sanctify your
hearts, but only “en prosopoi”, “in the face” or person “of Jesus Christ:” for he is “the image of God,” 2 Cor. 4: 4; “the brightness of the
Father’s glory, and the express image of his person,” Heb. 1: 3; “the image of the invisible God,” Col. 1: 15. I do here only mention
these things because I have handled them at large in my discourse of the “Mystery of Godliness,” or the Person of Christ; whereunto I
refer the readers for their full declaration and vindication. Herein is he glorious, in that he is the great representative of the nature of
God and his will unto us; which without him would have been eternally hid from us, or been invisible unto us, – we should never
have seen God at any time, here nor hereafter, John 1: 18.
I n his divine person absolutely considered, he is the essential image of God, even the Father. He is in the Father, and the Father in
him, in the unity of the same divine essence, John 14: 10. Now he is with the Father, John 1: 1, in the distinction of his person, so is he
his essential image, Col. 1: 15; Heb. 1: 3. In his incarnation he becomes the representative image of God unto the church, 2 Cor. 4: 6;
without whom our understandings can make no such approach unto the divine excellencies but that God continues to be unto us
what he is in himself, – the “visible God.” In the face of Jesus Christ we see his glory.
This is the original glory of Christ, given him by his Father, and which by faith we may behold. He, and he alone, declares, represents,
and makes known, unto angels and men, the essential glory of the invisible God, his attributes and his will; without which, a
perpetual comparative darkness would have been the whole creation, especially that part of it here below.
This is the foundation of our religion, the Rock whereon the church is built, the ground of all our hopes of salvation, of life and
immortality: all is resolved into this, – namely, the representation that is made of the nature and will of God in the person and office
of Christ. If this fail us, we are lost for ever; if this Rock stand firm, the church is safe here, and shall be triumphant hereafter.
Herein, then, is the Lord Christ exceedingly glorious. Those who cannot behold this glory of his by faith, – namely, as he is the great
divine ordinance to represent God unto us, – they know him not. In their worship of him, they worship but an image of their own
devising.
Y ea, in the ignorance and neglect hereof consists the formal nature of unbelief, even that which is inevitably ruinous unto the souls of
men. He that discerns not the representation of the glory of God in the person of Christ unto the souls of men, is an unbeliever. Such
was the state of the unbelieving Jews and gentiles of old; they did not, they would not, they could not, behold the glory of God in him,
nor how he did represent him. That this was both the cause and the formal nature of their unbelief, the apostle declares at large, 1 Cor.
1: 21-25. Not to see the wisdom of God, and the power of God, and consequently all the other holy properties of his nature, in Christ, is
to be an unbeliever.
The essence of faith consists in a due ascription of glory to God, Rom. 4: 20. This we cannot attain unto without the manifestation of
those divine excellencies unto us wherein he is glorious. This is done in Christ alone, so as that we may glorify God in a saving and
acceptable manner. He who discerns not the glory of divine wisdom, power, goodness, love, and grace, in the person and office of
Christ, with the way of the salvation of sinners by him, is an unbeliever.
Hence the great design of the devil, in the beginning of the preaching of the gospel, was to blind the eyes of men, and fill their minds
with prejudices, that they might not behold this glory of his; so the apostle gives an account of his success in this design, 2 Cor. 4: 3, 4,
“If our gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that are lost: in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.” By various ways and methods of
deceit, to secure the reputation he had got of being “god of this world,” by pretences and appearances of supernatural power and
wisdom, he laboured to blind the eyes of men with prejudices against that glorious light of the gospel which proposed the Lord Christ
as the only image of God. This blindness, this darkness is cured in them that believe, by the mighty power of God; for God, who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has irradiated our hearts with the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, verse 6, – wherein true saving faith does consist. Under this darkness perished the unbelieving world of Jews and Gentiles: and
such is the present condition of all by whom the divine person of Christ is denied; for no mere creature can ever make a perfect
representation of God unto us. But we must a little farther inquire into this mystery.
I. Since men fell from God by sin, it is no small part of their misery and punishment, that they are covered with thick darkness and
ignorance of the nature of God. They know him not, they have not seen him at any time. Hence is that promise to the church in
Christ, Isa. 60: 2, “For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon thee,
and his glory shall be seen upon thee.”
The ancient philosophers made great inquiries into, and obtained many notions of, the Divine Being – its existence and excellencies.
And these notions they adorned with great elegance of speech, to allure others unto the admiration of them. Hereon they boasted
themselves to be the only wise men in the world, Rom. 1: 22, “faskontes einai sofoi”, – they boasted that they were the wise. But we
must abide in the judgement of the apostle concerning them in their inquiries; he assures us that the world in its wisdom – that is,
these wise men in it by their wisdom – knew not God, 1 Cor. 1: 21. And he calls the authors of their best notions, Atheists, or men
“without God in the world,” Eph. 2: 12. For, – 1. They had no certain guide, rule, nor light, which, being attended unto, might lead

them infallibly into the knowledge of the divine nature. All they had of this kind was their own “logismoi”, their reasonings or
imaginations; whereby they commenced “sodzetetai tou aionos toutou”, “the great disputes of the world;” but in them they “waxed
vain, and their foolish heart was darkened,” Rom. 1: 21. They did at best but endeavour “pselafain”, “to feel after God,” as men do in
the dark after what they cannot clearly discern, Acts 17: 27. Among other, Cicero’s book, “De Nature Decorum,” gives us an exact
account of the intention of the apostle in that expression. And it is at this day not want of wit, but hatred of the mysteries of our
religion, which makes so many prone to forego all supernatural revelation, and to retake themselves unto a religion declared, as they
suppose, by reason and the light of nature; – like bats and owls, who, being not able to bear the light of the sun, retake themselves
unto the twilight, to the dawnings of light and darkness.
2 . Whatever they did attain, as unto rational notions about things invisible and incomprehensible, yet could they never deliver
themselves from such principles and practices in idolatry and all manner of flagitious sins, as that they could be of any benefit unto
them. This is so effectually demonstrated by the apostle in the 1st chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, as that we need not to insist
upon it.
Men may talk what they please of a light within them, or of the power of reason to conduct them unto that knowledge of God
whereby they may live unto him; but if they had nothing else, if they did not boast themselves of that light which has its foundation
and original in divine revelation alone, they would not excel them who, in the best management of their own seasonings, “knew not
God,” but waxed vain in their imaginations With respect unto this universal darkness, – that is, ignorance of God, with horrid
confusion accompany it in the minds of men, – Christ is called, and is, the “light of men,” the “light of the world;” because in and by
him alone this darkness is dispelled, as he is the “Sun of Righteousness” 2. This darkness in the minds of men, this ignorance of God,
his nature and his will, was the original of all evil unto the world, and yet continues so to be. For, – 1. Hereon did Satan erect his
kingdom and throne, obtaining in his design until he bare himself as “the god of this world,” and was so esteemed by the most. He
exalted himself by virtue of this darkness (as he is the “prince of darkness”) into the place and room of God, as the object of the
religious worship of men. For the things which the Gentiles sacrificed they sacrificed unto devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10: 20; Lev.
17: 7; Deut. 32: 17; Ps. 106: 37; Gal. 4: 8. This is the territory of Satan; yea, the power and sceptre of his kingdom in the minds of the
“children of disobedience.” Hereby he maintains his dominion unto this day in many and great nations, and with individual persons
innumerable.
2. This is the spring of all wickedness and confusion among men themselves. Hence arose that flood of abominations in the old world,
which God took away with a flood of desolation: hence were the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah, which he revenged with “fire from
heaven.” In brief; all the rage, blood, confusion, desolations, cruelties, oppressions, villainies, which the world has been and is filled
withal, whereby the souls of men have been and are flooded into eternal destruction, have all arisen from this corrupt fountain of the
ignorance of God.
3. Of such as those described we are the posterity and offspring. Our forefathers in this nation were given up unto as brutish a service
of the devil as any nation under the sun. It is therefore an effect of infinite mercy, that the day has dawned on us, poor Gentiles, and
that the “day spring from on high has visited us” See the glory of this grace expressed, Eph 3: 5-10. God might have left us to perish in
the blindness and ignorance of our forefathers; but of his own accord, and by his own powerful grace alone, he has “translated us out
of darkness into his marvellous light.” But, alas! the horrible ingratitude of men for the glorious light of the gospel, and the abuse of it,
will issue in a sore revenge.
G od was known under the Old Testament by the revelation of his Word, and the institution of his worship. This was the glory and
privilege of Israel, as the Psalmist declares, Ps. 147: 19, 20, “He showeth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgements unto
Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation.” The church then knew him; yet so as that they had an apprehension that he dwelt in
“thick darkness,” where they could not have any clear views of him, Exod. 21; Deut. 5: 22; 1 Kings 8: 12; 2 Chron. 6: 1. And the reason
why God so represented himself in darkness unto them, was, to instruct them in their imperfect state, wherein they could not
comprehend that glory which should afterward be revealed. For as he is now made known in Christ, we see that “he is light, and in
him there is no darkness at all.”
4 . Hitherto darkness in general covered the earth, and gross darkness the people, as unto the knowledge of God; only there was a
twilight in the church. The day did not yet dawn, the “shadows did not flee away,” nor the “day-star shine” in the hearts of men. But
when the “Sun of Righteousness” did arise in his strength and beauty, when the Son of God “appeared in the flesh,” and in the
discharge of his office, – God himself, as unto his being, and manner of existence in three distinct persons, with all the glorious
properties of the divine nature, was illustriously manifested unto them that did believe; and the light of the knowledge of them
dispelled all the shadows that were in the church, and shone into the darkness which was in the world, so as that none continued
ignorant of God but those who would not see. See John 1: 5, 14, 17, 18; 2 Cor. 4: 3, 4.
Herein is the Lord Christ glorious. And this is that which I shall now speak unto, – namely, how we may behold the glory of Christ in
the representation and revelation that is made of God and his glory, in his person and office, unto all that do believe. For it is not so
much the declaration of the nature of the things themselves, wherein the glory of Christ does consist, as our way and duty in the
beholding of them, which at present is designed.
He calls unto us, saying, “Behold me, – look unto me, – and be saved,” Isa. 45: 22. What is it that we see in Christ? what do we
behold in him? He asketh that question concerning his church, “What will ye see in the Shulamite?” Whereto he answers, “As it were
the company of two armies” Cant. 6: 13; or the two churches of the Old and New Testament, in order and beauty. We may inquire,
What shall we, what do we see in him? Do we see him as “the image of the invisible God,” representing him, his nature, properties,
and will unto us? Do we see him as the “character,” the “express image of the person of the Father,” so that we have no need of Philips
request, “Lords show us the Father?” because having seen him, we have seen the Father also, John 14: 9.
This is our first saving view of Christ, the first instance of our beholding his glory by faith. So to see him as to see God in him, is to
behold his glory; for herein he is eternally glorious. And this is that glory whose view we ought to long for and labour after. And if we
see it not, we are yet in darkness; yea, though we say we see, we are blind like others. So David longed and prayed for it, when yet he
could behold it only in types and shadows, Ps. 63: 1, 2, “O God, thou art my God; early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my
flesh longeth for thee; – to see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary.” For there was in the sanctuary an
