PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 14
Means to Make Grace Victorious

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 13. Means to Make Grace Victorious.

14. Means to Make Grace Victorious
As to directions on how we are to conduct ourselves so that the judgment
of Christ in us may indeed be victorious, we must know that, though
Christ has undertaken this victory, yet he accomplishes it by training us
up to fight his battles. He overcomes in us by making us `wise unto
salvation' (2 Tim. 3:15); and, in the measure that we believe Christ will
conquer, in that measure we will endeavor by his grace that we may
conquer, for faith is an obedient and a wise grace. Christ makes us wise to
ponder and weigh things, and to rank and order them accordingly, so that
we may make the fitter choice of what is best. Some rules to help us in
judging are these:
RULES FOR RIGHT JUDGMENT
We should judge of things as to whether they help or hinder our main
purpose; whether they further or hinder our judgment; whether they
make us more or less spiritual, and so bring us nearer to the fountain of
goodness, God himself; whether they will bring us peace or sorrow at the
last; whether they commend us more or less to God, and whether they are
the thing in which we shall approve ourselves to him most. We should
also judge of things now as we shall do hereafter when the soul shall be
best able to judge, as when we are under any public calamity, or at the
hour of death, when the soul gathers itself from all other things to itself.
We should look back to former experience and see what is most agreeable
to it, and what was best in our worst times. If grace is or was best then, it

is best now. We should also labour to judge of things as he does who must
judge us, and as holy men judge, who are led by the Spirit. More
particularly, we should judge according to what those judge that have no
interest in any benefit that may come by the thing which is in question;
for outward things blind the eyes even of the wise. We see that papists are
most corrupt in those things where their honor, ease, or profit is engaged;
but in the doctrine of the Trinity, which does not touch on these things,
they are sound. But it is not sufficient that judgment is right. It must also
be ready and strong.
KEEPING OUR JUDGMENT CLEAR
1. Where Christ establishes his government, he inspires care to keep the
judgment clear and fresh, for while the judgment stands straight and
firm, the whole frame of the soul continues strong and impregnable. True
judgment in us advances Christ, and Christ will advance it. All sin is
either from false principles, or ignorance, or thoughtlessness, or unbelief
of what is true. By lack of consideration and weakness of assent, Eve lost
her hold at first (Gen. 3:6). It is good, therefore, to store up true
principles in our hearts, and to refresh them often, that, in virtue of them,
our affections and actions may be more vigorous. When judgment is
fortified, evil finds no entrance, but good things have a side within us to
entertain them. While true convincing light continues, we will not do the
least ill of sin for the greatest ill of punishment. `In vain the net is spread
in the sight of any bird' (Prov. 1:17). While the soul is kept aloft, there is
little danger of snares below. We must lose our high estimation of things
before we can be drawn to any sin.
2. And because knowledge and affection mutually help one another, it is
good to keep up our affections of love and delight by all sweet
inducements and divine encouragements; for what the heart likes best,
the mind studies most. Those that can bring their hearts to delight in
Christ know most of his ways. Wisdom loves him that loves her. Love is
the best entertainer of truth; and when it is not entertained in the love of
it (2 Thess. 2:10), lovely as it is, it leaves the heart, and will stay no
longer. It has been a successful way of corrupting the judgment, to begin
by withdrawing love, because, as we love, so we tend to judge. And
therefore it is hard to be affectionate and wise in earthly things. But in

heavenly things, where there has been a right informing of the judgment
before, the more our affections grow, the better and clearer our
judgments will be, because our affections, though strong, can never rise
high enough to reach the excellency of the things. We see in the martyrs,
when the sweet doctrine of Christ had once gained their hearts, it could
not be removed again by all the torments the wit of cruelty could devise.
If Christ has once possessed the affections, there is no dispossessing of
him again. A fire in the heart overcomes all fires without.
3. Wisdom also teaches us where our weakness lies, and our enemy's
strength. By this means a jealous fear is stirred up in us, whereby we are
preserved; for out of this godly jealousy we keep those provocations,
which are active and working, from that which is passive and catching in
us, as we keep fire from powder. Those who wish to hinder the generation
of noisome creatures will hinder the conception first, by keeping male
and female apart. This jealous care will be much furthered by observing
strictly what has helped or hindered a gracious temper in us, and it will
make us take heed that we consult not with flesh and blood in ourselves
or others. Otherwise, how can we think that Christ will lead us out to
victory, when we take counsel with his and our enemies?
4. Christ also makes us careful to use all means by which fresh thoughts
and affections may be stirred up and preserved in us. Christ so honours
the use of means, and the care he bestows on us, that he ascribes both
preservation and victory to our care in keeping ourselves. `He that is
begotten of God keepeth himself' (1 John 5:18), though not by himself,
but by the Lord, in dependence on him, in the use of means. We are only
safe when we wisely make use of all good advantages that we have access
to. By going out of God's ways we go out of his government, and so lose
our good frame of mind, and find ourselves overspread quickly with a
contrary disposition. When we draw near to Christ (James 4:8), in his
ordinances, he draws near to us.
5. We must keep grace in exercise. It is not sleepy habits, but grace in
exercise, that preserves us. While the soul is in some civil or sacred
employment, corruptions within us are much suppressed, and Satan's
ways of approach to us stopped. The Spirit then has a way open to enlarge
his influence in us, and likewise the protection of angels is then closest to

us. This course often prevails more against our spiritual enemies than
direct opposition. Christ is in honor bound to maintain those that are in
his work.
6. In following all these directions, we must look up to Christ, the
quickening Spirit, and make our resolutions in his strength. Though we
are exhorted to cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart (Acts 11:23),
yet we must pray with David, `Keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thee' (1
Chron. 29:18). Our hearts are of themselves very loose and unsettled.
`Unite my heart to fear thy name' (Psa. 86:11), or else, without him, our
best purposes will fall to the ground. It is a pleasing request, out of love to
God, to beg such a frame of soul from him, that he may take delight in it;
and therefore, in the use of all the means, we must send up our desires
and complaints to him for strength and help, and then we may be sure
that he will `send forth judgment unto victory'.
7. Lastly, it furthers the state of the soul to know what frame it should be
in, that so we may order our souls accordingly. We should always be fit
for communion with God, and be heavenly minded in earthly business,
and be willing to be taken off from it to redeem time for better things. We
should be ready at all times to depart hence, and to live in such a
condition as we would be content to die in. We should have hearts
prepared for every good duty, open to all good opportunities, and shut to
all temptations, keeping our watch, and being always ready armed. So far
as we come short of these things, so far we have just cause to be humbled,
and yet we should press forward, so that we may gain more upon
ourselves, and make these things more familiar and lovely to us. And
when we find our souls at all declining, it is best to raise them up
presently by some awakening meditations, such as of the presence of
God, of the strict reckoning we are to make, of the infinite love of God in
Christ and the fruits of it, of the excellency of a Christian's calling, of the
short and uncertain time of this life, of how little good all those things
that steal away our hearts will do us before long, and of how it shall be for
ever with us hereafter, as we spend this short time well or ill. The more
we make way for such considerations to sink into our hearts, the more we
shall rise nearer to that state of soul which we shall enjoy in heaven.

When we grow careless of keeping our souls, then God recovers our taste
of good things again by sharp crosses. Thus David, Solomon and Samson
were recovered. This taste of good things is much easier kept than
recovered.
REASONS FOR SEEMING LACK OF PROGRESS
Objection: But, notwithstanding my striving, I seem to remain at a
standstill.
1. Grace, as the seed in the parable, grows, we know not how. Yet at
length, when God sees fittest, we shall see that all our endeavor has not
been in vain. The tree falls upon the last stroke, yet all the strokes help
the work forward.
2. Sometimes victory is suspended because some Achan is not found out,
or because we are not humble enough, as Israel had the worst against the
Benjamites till they fasted and prayed (Judg. 20:26); or because we
betray our helps, and do not stand on our guard, and do not soon yield to
the motions of the Spirit, who puts us in mind always of the best things, if
we would regard his prompting. Our own consciences will tell us, if we
give them leave to speak, that some sinful favouring of ourselves is the
cause. The way in this case to prevail is, first, to get the victory over the
pride of our own nature by taking shame to ourselves, in humble
confession to God; and then, secondly, to overcome the unbelief of our
hearts by yielding to the promise of pardon; and then, thirdly, in
confidence of Christ's assistance, to set ourselves against those sins which
have prevailed over us. So prevailing over ourselves, we shall easily
prevail over all our enemies, and conquer all conditions we shall be
brought into.
ALL SHOULD SIDE WITH CHRIST
The second use of the truth that Christ will have the victory is to establish
the fact that the best course for nations and states is to `kiss the Son'
(Psa. 2:12), and to embrace Christ and his religion; to side with Christ,
and to own his cause in the world. His side will prove the stronger side at
last. Happy are we if Christ honours us so much as to use our help to fight

his battle `against the mighty' (Judg. 5:23). True religion in a state is as
the main pillar of a house and the post of a tent that upholds all. So also
for families, let Christ be the chief governor of the family. And let every
one be as a house of Christ, to dwell familiarly in, and to rule. Where
Christ is, all happiness must follow. If Christ goes, all will go. Where
Christ's government, in his ordinances and his Spirit, is, there all
subordinate government will prosper. Religion inspires life and grace into
all other things. All other virtues without it are but as a fair picture
without a head. Where Christ's laws are written in the heart, there all
other good laws are best obeyed. None despise man's law but those that
despise Christ's first. Nemo humanam auctoritatem contemnit, nisi qui
divinam prius contempsit (No one despises human authority unless he
first despises divine authority). Of all persons, a man guided by Christ is
the best; and of all creatures in the world, a man guided merely by will
and affection, next to the devil, is the worst. The happiness of weaker
things stands in being ruled by stronger. It is best for a blind man to be
guided by him that has sight. It is best for sheep, and other feckless
creatures, to be guided by man. And it is happiest for man to be guided by
Christ, because his government is so victorious that it frees us from the
fear and danger of our greatest enemies, and tends to bring us to the
greatest happiness that our nature is capable of. This should make us
rejoice when Christ reigns in us. When Solomon was crowned, the people
rejoiced so that the city rang (1 Kings 1:45). Much more should we rejoice
in Christ our king.
And likewise for those whose souls are dear to us, our endeavor should be
that Christ may reign in them also, that they may be baptized by Christ
with this fire (Matt. 3:11), that these sparks may be kindled in them. Men
labour to cherish the spirit and mettle, as they term it, of those they train
up, because they think they will have use of it in the manifold affairs and
troubles of this life. Oh, but let us cherish the sparks of grace in them; for
a natural spirit in great troubles will fail, but these sparks will make them
conquerors over the greatest evils.
The third use of the truth of Christ's victory is to observe that if Christ's
judgment shall be victorious, then popery, being an opposite frame, set
up by the wit of man to maintain stately idleness, must fall. And it is

fallen already in the hearts of those on whom the light of Christ has
shone. It is a lie, and founded on a lie, on the infallible judgment of a man
subject to sin and error. When that which is taken for a principle of truth
becomes a principle of error, the more reliance on it, the more danger
there is.