PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 11
Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty


The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 10. Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty.

10. Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty

125

majesty, caused Job to abhor himself, and not only so, but to abase himself before the Almighty.
Take note of Isaiah. In the sixth chapter of his prophecy, a scene is brought before us that
has few equals even in Scripture. The prophet beholds the Lord upon the throne, a throne
“high and lifted up.” Above this throne stood the seraphims with veiled faces, crying, “Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts.” What is the effect of this sight upon the prophet? We read
“Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips...for mine eyes
have seen the King, the LORD of hosts” (Isa 6:5). A sight of the divine King humbled Isaiah
into the dust, bringing him, as it did, to a realization of his own nothingness.
One more. Look at the prophet Daniel. Toward the close of his life, this man of God beheld
the Lord in theophanic1 manifestation. He appeared to His servant in human form, “clothed in
linen” and with loins “girded with fine gold,” symbolic of holiness and divine glory. We read
that “his body also was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes
as lamps of fire, and his arms and his feet like in color to polished brass, and the voice of his
words like the voice of a multitude” (Dan 10:6). Daniel then tells the effect this vision had upon him and those who were with him:
And I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the men that were with me saw not the vision; but
a great quaking fell upon them, so that they fled to hide themselves. Therefore I was left
alone, and saw this great vision, and there remained no strength in me: for my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength. Yet heard I the voice
of his words: and when I heard the voice of his words, then was I in a deep sleep on my
face, and my face toward the ground (Dan 10:7-9).
Once more, then, we are shown that to obtain a sight of the sovereign God is for creature
strength to wither up, and results in man being humbled into the dust before his Maker.

B. Godly Fear
What then ought to be our attitude toward the Supreme Sovereign? We reply: one of godly
fear. Why is it that today the masses are so utterly unconcerned about spiritual and eternal
things, and that they are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God (2Ti 3:4)? Why is it that,
even on the battlefields, multitudes were so indifferent to their soul’s welfare? Why is it that
defiance of heaven is becoming more open, more blatant, more daring? The answer is because
“there is no fear of God before their eyes” (Rom 3:18). Again, why is it that the authority of the
Scriptures has been lowered so sadly of late? Why is it that, even among those who profess to
be the Lord’s people, there is so little real subjection to His Word, and that its precepts are so
lightly esteemed and so readily set aside? Ah! what needs to be stressed today is that God is a
God to be feared.
“The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge” (Pro 1:7). Happy the soul that has
been awed by a view of God’s majesty, that has had a vision of God’s awful greatness, His ineffable 2 holiness, His perfect righteousness, His irresistible power, His sovereign grace. Does
someone say, “But it is only the unsaved, those outside of Christ, who need to fear God”? Then
the sufficient answer is that the saved, those who are in Christ, are admonished to work out
1
2

theophanic – pertaining to the visible appearance of God to man.
ineffable – incapable of being expressed; too great to be described in words.

126

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

their own salvation with “fear and trembling” (Phi 2:12). Time was when it was the general
custom to speak of a believer as a “God-fearing man”—that such an appellation 3 has become
nearly extinct only serves to show whither we have drifted. Nevertheless, it still stands written,
“Like as a father pitieth his children, so the LORD pitieth them that fear him” (Psa 103:13)!
When we speak of godly fear, of course, we do not mean a servile 4 fear, such as prevails
among the heathen in connection with their gods. No; we mean that spirit that Jehovah is
pledged to bless, that spirit to which the prophet referred when he said, “To this man will I
[the Lord] look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word”
(Isa 66:2). It was this the apostle had in view when he wrote, “Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king” (1Pe 2:17). And nothing will foster this godly fear like a
recognition of the sovereign majesty of God.

C. Implicit Obedience
What ought to be our attitude toward the sovereignty of God? We answer again: one of implicit obedience. A sight of God leads to a realization of our littleness and nothingness, and issues in a sense of dependency and of casting ourselves upon God. Or again, a view of the divine
Majesty promotes the spirit of godly fear, and this, in turn, begets an obedient walk. Here then
is the divine antidote 5 for the native evil of our hearts. Naturally, man is filled with a sense of
his own importance, with his greatness and self-sufficiency; in a word, with pride and rebellion.
But, as we remarked, the great corrective is to behold the mighty God, for this alone will really
humble him. Man will glory either in himself or in God. Man will live either to serve and please
himself, or he will seek to serve and please the Lord. None can serve two masters.
Irreverence begets disobedience. Said the haughty monarch of Egypt, “Who is the LORD
that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the LORD; neither will I let Israel go”
(Exo 5:2). To Pharaoh, the God of the Hebrews was merely a god, one among many, a powerless entity who needed not to be feared or served. How sadly mistaken he was, and how bitterly
he had to pay for his mistake, he soon discovered. But what we are here seeking to emphasize
is that Pharaoh’s defiant spirit was the fruit of irreverence, and this irreverence was the consequence of his ignorance of the majesty and authority of the divine Being.
Now if irreverence begets disobedience, true reverence will produce and promote obedience.
To realize that the Holy Scriptures are a revelation from the Most High, communicating to us
His mind and defining for us His will, is the first step toward practical godliness. To recognize
that the Bible is God’s Word, and that its precepts are the precepts of the Almighty, will lead us
to see what an awful thing it is to despise and ignore them. To receive the Bible as addressed to
our own souls, given to us by the Creator Himself, will cause us to cry with the psalmist, “Incline my heart unto thy testimonies...Order my steps in thy word” (Psa 119:36, 133). Once the
sovereignty of the author of the Word is apprehended, it will not longer be a matter of picking
and choosing from the precepts and statutes of that Word, selecting those that meet with our
approval; but it will be seen that nothing less than an unqualified and whole-hearted submission becomes the creature.
3

appellation – name or title.
servile – slave-like, cringing; terrified at the prospect of harsh treatment from a hard taskmaster.
5
antidote – something that counteracts injurious effects.
4

10. Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty

127

D. Entire Resignation
What ought to be our attitude toward the sovereignty of God? One of entire resignation. A
true recognition of God’s sovereignty will exclude all murmuring. This is self-evident, yet the
thought deserves to be dwelt upon. It is natural to murmur against afflictions and losses. It is
natural to complain when we are deprived of those things upon which we had set our hearts.
We are apt to regard our possessions as ours unconditionally. We feel that, when we have prosecuted our plans with prudence and diligence, we are entitled to success; that when by dint6 of
hard work we have accumulated a “competence,” we deserve to keep and enjoy it; that when
we are surrounded by a happy family, no power may lawfully enter the charmed circle and
strike down a loved one. And if in any of these cases disappointment, bankruptcy, or death actually comes, the perverted instinct of the human heart is to cry out against God. But in the
one who, by grace, has recognized God’s sovereignty, such murmuring is silenced and, instead, there is a bowing to the divine will and an acknowledgment that He has not afflicted us
as sorely as we deserve.
A true recognition of God’s sovereignty will avow God’s perfect right to do with us as He
wills. The one who bows to the pleasure of the Almighty will acknowledge His absolute right to
do with us as seemeth Him good. If He chooses to send poverty, sickness, domestic bereavements, even while the heart is bleeding at every pore, it will say, “Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right” (Gen 18:25)! Often there will be a struggle, for the carnal mind remains in the
believer to the end of his earthly pilgrimage. But though there may be a conflict within his
breast, nevertheless, to the one who has really yielded himself to this blessed truth, there will
7
presently be heard that voice saying, as of old it said to the turbulent Gennesaret, “Peace be
still” (Mar 4:39). The tempestuous flood within will be quieted and the subdued soul will lift a
tearful but confident eye to heaven and say, “Thy will be done” (Luk 11:2; see also 22:42)
A striking illustration of a soul bowing to the sovereign will of God is furnished by the history of Eli the high priest of Israel. In First Samuel chapter three, we learn how God revealed
to the young child Samuel that He was about to slay Eli’s two sons for their wickedness, and
on the morrow Samuel communicates this message to the aged priest. It is difficult to conceive of more appalling intelligence for the heart of a pious parent. The announcement that
his child is going to be stricken down by sudden death is, under any circumstances, a great
trial to any father, but to learn that his two sons—in the prime of their manhood, and utterly
unprepared to die—were to be cut off by a divine judgment must have been overwhelming.
Yet, what was the effect upon Eli when he learned from Samuel the tragic tidings? What reply
did he make when he heard the awful news? “And he said, It is the LORD: let him do what
seemeth him good” (1Sa 3:18). And not another word escaped him. Wonderful submission!
Sublime resignation! Lovely exemplification of the power of divine grace to control the
strongest affections of the human heart and subdue the rebellious will, bringing it into unrepining acquiescence 8 to the sovereign pleasure of Jehovah.
6

dint – force; power.
Gennesaret – Sea of Galilee in Israel (Luk 5:1). This lake is 12 ½ miles long and from 4 to 7 ½ miles broad.
Its surface is 682 feet below the level of the Mediterranean; its depth is from 80 to 160 feet. It was the center of ministry of Jesus Christ, when a population of about one million lived along its shores.
8
acquiescence – acceptance and submission without protest.
7

128

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Another example, equally striking, is seen in the life of Job. As is well known, Job was one
that feared God and eschewed evil. If ever there was one who might reasonably expect divine
providence to smile upon him—we speak as a man—it was Job. Yet, how fared it with him?
For a time the lines fell unto him in pleasant places. The Lord filled his quiver by giving him
seven sons and three daughters. He prospered him in his temporal affairs until he owned great
possessions. But, of a sudden, the sun of life was hidden behind dark clouds. In a single day
Job lost not only his flocks and herds, but his sons and daughters as well. News arrived that his
cattle had been carried off by robbers and his children slain by a cyclone. And how did he receive this intelligence? Hearken to his sublime words: “The LORD gave, and the LORD hath
taken away” (Job 1:21). He bowed to the sovereign will of Jehovah. He traced his afflictions
back to their first cause. He looked behind the Sabeans who had stolen his cattle, and beyond
the winds that had destroyed his children, and saw the hand of God. But not only did Job recognize God’s sovereignty, he rejoiced in it, too. To the words, “The LORD gave, and the LORD
hath taken away,” he added, “blessed be the name of the LORD” (Job 1:21). Again we say,
Sweet submission! Sublime resignation!
A true recognition of God’s sovereignty causes us to hold our every plan in abeyance to
God’s will. The writer well recalls an incident that occurred in England over twenty years ago.
Queen Victoria was dead, and the date for the coronation of her eldest son, Edward, had been
set for April 1902. In all the announcements which were sent out, two little letters were omitted: “D. V.”—Deo Volente, God willing. Plans were made and all arrangements completed for
the most imposing celebrations that England had ever witnessed. Kings and emperors from all
parts of the earth had received invitations to attend the royal ceremony. The Prince’s proclamations were printed and displayed, but, so far as the writer is aware, the letters “D. V.” were
not found on a single one of them. A most imposing program had been arranged, and the late
Queen’s eldest son was to be crowned Edward the Seventh at Westminster Abbey at a certain
hour on a fixed day. And then God intervened and all man’s plans were frustrated. A still small
voice was heard to say, “You have reckoned without Me,” and Prince Edward was stricken
down with appendicitis and his coronation postponed for months!
As remarked, a true recognition of God’s sovereignty causes us to hold our plan in abeyance
to God’s will. It makes us recognize that the divine Potter has absolute power over the clay and
molds it according to his own imperial pleasure. It causes us to heed that admonition, now,
alas! so generally disregarded:
Go to now, ye that say, Today or tomorrow we will go into such a city, and continue
there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain: Whereas ye know not what shall be on the
morrow. For what is your life? It is even a vapor, that appeareth for a little time, and
then vanisheth away. For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this,
or that (Jam 4:13-15).
Yes, it is to the Lord’s will we must bow. It is for Him to say where I shall live, whether in
America or Africa. It is for Him to determine under what circumstances I shall live, whether
amid wealth or poverty, whether in health or sickness. It is for Him to say how long I shall
live, whether I shall be cut down in youth like the flower of the field, or whether I shall continue for three score and ten years. To really learn this lesson is, by grace, to attain unto a high
form in the school of God—and, even when we think we have learned it, we discover, again
and again, that we have to relearn it.

10. Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty

129

E. Deep Thankfulness and Joy
What ought to be our attitude toward the sovereignty of God? One of deep thankfulness and
joy. The heart’s apprehension of this most blessed truth of the sovereignty of God produces
something far different than a sullen bowing to the inevitable. The philosophy of this perishing world knows nothing better than to “make the best of a bad job.” But with the Christian it
should be far otherwise. Not only should the recognition of God’s supremacy beget within us
godly fear, implicit obedience, and entire resignation, but it should cause us to say with the
psalmist, “Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name” (Psa
103:1). Does not the apostle say, “Giving thanks always for all things unto God and the Father
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ” (Eph 5:20)? Ah! it is at this point the state of our souls is
so often put to the test. Alas, there is so much self-will in each of us. When things go as we
wish them, we appear to be very grateful to God; but what of those occasions when things go
contrary to our plans and desires?
We take it for granted when the real Christian takes a train-journey that, upon reaching his
destination, he devoutly returns thanks unto God—which, of course, argues that He controls
everything; otherwise, we ought to thank the engine-driver, the stoker, the signalmen, etc. Or,
if in business, at the close of a good week, gratitude is expressed unto the Giver of every good
(temporal) and every perfect (spiritual) gift—which again argues that He directs all customers
to your shop. So far, so good. Such examples occasion no difficulty. But imagine the opposites.
Suppose my train was delayed for hours; did I fret and fume? Suppose another train ran into it
and I am injured! Or suppose I have had a poor week in business, or that lightning struck my
shop and set it on fire, or that burglars broke in and rifled it, then what: do I see the hand of
God in these things?
Take the case of Job once more. When loss after loss came his way, what did he do? Bemoan
his “bad luck”? Curse the robbers? Murmur against God? No; he bowed before Him in worship.
Ah! dear reader, there is no real rest for your poor heart until you learn to see the hand of God
in everything. But, for that, faith must be in constant exercise. And what is faith? A blind credulity? A fatalistic acquiescence? No, far from it. Faith is a resting on the sure Word of the living God, and therefore says, “We know that all things work together for good to them that love
God, to them who are the called according to his purpose” (Rom 8:28); and therefore faith will
give “thanks always for all things” (Eph 5:20). Operative faith will “rejoice in the Lord alway”
(Phi 4:4).

F. Christ, Our Example
We turn now to mark how this recognition of God’s sovereignty—which is expressed in
godly fear, implicit obedience, entire resignation, and deep thankfulness and joy—was supremely and perfectly exemplified by the Lord Jesus Christ.
1. Christ’s godly fear
In all things the Lord Jesus has left us an example that we should follow His steps. But is
this true in connection with the first point made above? Are the words “godly fear” ever linked
with His peerless name? Remembering that “godly fear” signifies not a servile terror, but ra-

130

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

ther a filial 9 subjection and reverence. And remembering too that “the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom” (Pro 9:10), would it not rather be strange if no mention at all were made
of “godly fear” in connection with the One Who was wisdom incarnate!
What a wonderful and precious word is that of Hebrews 5:7, “Who in the days of his flesh,
having offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was
able to save him from death, and having been heard for his godly fear” (R.V.). What was it but
“godly fear” that caused the Lord Jesus to be “subject” unto Mary and Joseph in the days of His
childhood? Was it “godly fear”—a filial subjection to and reverence for God—that we see displayed when we read, “And he came to Nazareth where he had been brought up: and, as his
custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day” (Luk 4:16)? Was it not “godly
fear” that caused the incarnate Son to say, when tempted by Satan to fall down and worship
him, “It is written, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve”? Was
it not “godly fear” that moved Him to say to the cleansed leper, “Go thy way, show thyself to
the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded” (Mat 8:4)? But why multiply illustrations? 10
2. Christ’s implicit obedience
How perfect was the obedience that the Lord Jesus offered to God the Father! And in reflecting upon this, let us not lose sight of that wondrous grace that caused Him, Who was in the
very form of God, to stoop so low as to take upon Him the form of a servant (Phi 2:7) and thus
be brought into the place where obedience was becoming. As the perfect servant, He yielded
complete obedience to His Father. How absolute and entire that obedience was, we may learn
from the words: He “became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross” (Phi 2:8). That
this was a conscious and intelligent obedience is clear from His own language: “Therefore doth
my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh if
from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down and I have power to take it
again. This commandment have I received from my Father” (Joh 10:17-18).
3. Christ’s entire resignation
And what shall we say of the absolute resignation of the Son to the Father’s will?—what
but: between Them there was entire oneness of accord. Said He, “For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me” (Joh 6:38); and how fully He
substantiated that claim, all know who have attentively followed His path as marked out in the
Scriptures. Behold Him in Gethsemane! The bitter “cup,” held in the Father’s hand, is presented to His view. Mark well His attitude. Learn of Him Who was meek and lowly in heart.
Remember that there in the garden we see the Word become flesh, a perfect man. His body is
quivering at every nerve in contemplation of the physical sufferings that await Him; His holy
and sensitive nature is shrinking from the horrible indignities that shall be heaped upon Him;
His heart is breaking at the awful “reproach” that is before Him; His spirit is greatly troubled
as He foresees the terrible conflict with the power of darkness; and above all, and supremely,
His soul is filled with horror at the thought of being separated from God Himself—thus and
9
10

filial – as of a child toward a parent.
Note how Old Testament prophecy also declared that “the Spirit of the Lord” should “rest upon him, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear
of the Lord” (Isa 11:2).—A.W.P.

10. Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty

131

there He pours out His soul to the Father, and with strong crying and tears He sheds, as it
were, great drops of blood. And now observe and listen; still the beating of thy heart and
hearken to the words that fall from His blessed lips—“Father, if thou be willing, remove this
cup from me: nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done” (Luk 22:42). Here is submission
personified; here is resignation to the pleasure of a sovereign God superlatively exemplified.
And He has left us an example that we should follow His steps, He Who was God became man
and was tempted in all points like as we are (Heb 4:15), sin apart, to show us how to wear our
creature nature!
Above we asked, What shall we say of Christ’s absolute resignation to the Father’s will? We
answer further, This: that here, as everywhere, He was unique, peerless. In all things He has
the preeminence. In the Lord Jesus there was no rebellious will to be broken. In His heart
there was nothing to be subdued. Was not this one reason why, in the language of prophecy,
He said, “I am a worm, and no man” (Psa 22:6)—a worm has no power of resistance! It was
because in Him there was no resistance that He could say, “My meat is to do the will of him
that sent me” (Joh 4:34). Yea, it was because He was in perfect accord with the Father in all
things that He said, “I delight to do thy will, O God; yea, thy law is within my heart” (Psa 40:8).
Note the last clause here and behold His matchless excellency. God has to put His laws into
our minds, and write them in our hearts (see Heb 8:10), but His Law was already in Christ’s
heart!
What a beautiful and striking illustration of Christ’s thankfulness and joy is found in Matthew 11. There we behold, first, the failure of the faith of His forerunner (vv. 2-3). Next, we
learn of the discontent of the people, satisfied neither with Christ’s joyous message, nor with
John’s solemn one (vv. 16-20). Third, we have the non-repentance of those favoured cities in
which our Lord’s mightiest works were done (vv. 21-24). And then we read, “At that time Jesus
answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes” (v. 25)! Note the
parallel passage in Luke 10:21 opens by saying, “In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said,
I thank thee,” etc. Ah! here was submission in its purest form. Here was One by Whom the
worlds were made, yet, in the days of His humiliation and in the face of His rejection, thankfully and joyously bowing to the will of the “Lord of heaven and earth.”

G. Adoring Worship
What ought to be our attitude toward God’s sovereignty?—finally, one of adoring worship.
It has been well said that “true worship is based upon recognized greatness, and greatness is
superlatively seen in sovereignty, and at no other footstool will men really worship” (J. B.
Moody). In the presence of the divine King upon His throne, even the seraphims veil their faces (Isa 6:2).
Divine sovereignty is not the sovereignty of a tyrannical despot, but the exercised pleasure
of One Who is infinitely wise and good! Because God is infinitely wise, He cannot err; and because He is infinitely righteous, He will not do wrong. Here then is the preciousness of this
truth. The mere fact itself that God’s will is irresistible and irreversible, fills me with fear; but
once I realize that God wills only that which is good, my heart is made to rejoice.
Here then is the final answer to the question of this chapter, What ought to be our attitude
toward the sovereignty of God? The becoming attitude for us to take is that of godly fear, im-

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

132

plicit obedience, and unreserved resignation and submission. But not only so; the recognition
of the sovereignty of God, and the realization that the sovereign Himself is my Father, ought
to overwhelm the heart and cause me to bow before Him in adoring worship. At all times I
must say, “Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.”
We conclude with an example that well illustrates our meaning. Some two hundred years
ago, the saintly Madam Guyon, 11 after [nearly] ten years spent in a dungeon lying far below the
surface of the ground, lit only by a candle at meal-times, wrote these words.
A little bird I am, Shut from the fields of air;
Yet in my cage I sit and sing To Him Who placed me there;
Well pleased a prisoner to be,
Because, my God, it pleases Thee.
Nought have I else to do, I sing the whole day long;
And He Whom most I love to please, Doth listen to my song;
He caught and bound my wandering wing,
But still He bends to hear me sing.
My cage confines me round; Abroad I cannot fly;
But though my wing is closely bound, My heart’s at liberty,
My prison walls cannot control
The flight, the freedom of the soul.
Ah! it is good to soar These bolts and bar above,
To Him Whose purpose I adore, Whose Providence I love;
And in Thy mighty will to find
The joy, the freedom of the mind. 

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

1. Describe what an understanding of the doctrine of the sovereignty of God is designed to do
for and in us.
2. Describe the consequences of a lack of fear of God.
3. What is the fear of God?
4. Describe what flows from a true recognition of God’s sovereignty.
5. a. On what point are our souls so often put to the test?
11

Madame Guyon (Jeanne-Marie Bouvier de la Motte-Guyon, 1648-1717) – French mystic and a key advocate of Quietism, aspects of which are considered heresy.

10. Our Attitude Toward His Sovereignty

b. Why is this so?
6. What is the key point 12 for each of the following?
a. Philippians 2:7
b. Philippians 2:8
c. John 10:17-18
d. John 6:38
e. Luke 22:42
f. Psalm 40:8
7. What should be our attitude toward the sovereignty of God?

12

See chapter 2 Questions for clarification regarding what is a “key point.”

133

11
DIFFICULTIES AND OBJECTIONS
“Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. Hear now,
O house of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not
your ways unequal?”—Ezekiel 18:25

A. Introduction
A convenient point has been reached when we may now examine more definitely some of
the difficulties encountered and the objections that might be advanced against what we have
written in previous pages. The author deemed it better to reserve these for a separate consideration rather than deal with them as he went along, requiring, as that would have done, the
breaking of the course of thought and destroying the strict unity of each chapter, or else cumbering our pages with numerous and lengthy footnotes.
That there are difficulties involved in an attempt to set forth the truth of God’s sovereignty
is readily acknowledged. The hardest thing of all, perhaps, is to maintain the balance of truth;
it is largely a matter of perspective. That God is sovereign is explicitly declared in Scripture;
that man is a responsible creature is also expressly affirmed in Holy Writ. To define the relationship of these two truths, to fix the dividing line betwixt them, to show exactly where they
meet, to exhibit the perfect consistency of the one with the other, is the weightiest task of all.
Many have openly declared that it is impossible for the finite mind to harmonize them. Others
tell us it is not necessary or even wise to attempt it. But, as we have remarked in an earlier
chapter, it seems to us more honoring to God to seek in His Word the solution to every problem. What is impossible to man is possible with God (Mat 19:26); and while we grant that the
finite mind is limited in its reach, yet we remember that the Scriptures are given to us that the
man of God may be “throughly furnished” (2Ti 3:17)—and if we approach their study in the
spirit of humility and of expectancy, then according unto our faith will it be unto us (Mat
9:29).
As remarked above, the hardest task in this connection is to preserve the balance of truth,
while insisting on both the sovereignty of God and the responsibility of the creature. To some
of our readers it may appear that, in pressing the sovereignty of God to the lengths we have,
man is reduced to a mere puppet. Hence, to guard against this, they would modify their definitions and statements relating to God’s sovereignty, and thus seek to blunt the keen edge of
what is so offensive to the carnal mind. Others, while refusing to weigh the evidence that we
have adduced in support of our assertions, may raise objections that to their minds are sufficient to dispose of the whole subject. We would not waste time in the effort to refute objec-
