PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 14
How May Faith Be Illustrated?


HOW MAY FAITH BE ILLUSTRATED?

T

O MAKE THE MATTER Of faith clearer still, I will give you a
few illustrations. Though the Holy Spirit alone can make my reader
see, it is my duty and my joy to furnish all the light I can, and to
pray the divine Lord to open blind eyes. Oh that my reader would pray
the same prayer for himself!
The faith which saves has its analogies in the human frame.
It is the eye which looks. By the eye we bring into the mind that which is
far away; we can bring the sun and the far-off stars into the mind by a
glance of the eye. So by trust we bring the Lord Jesus near to us; and
though He be far away in Heaven, He enters into our heart. Only look to
Jesus; for the hymn is strictly true —
There is life in a look at the Crucified One,
There is life at this moment for thee.

Faith is the hand which grasps. When our hand takes hold of anything for
itself, it does precisely what faith does when it appropriates Christ and
the blessings of His redemption. Faith says, “Jesus is mine.” Faith hears of
the pardoning blood, and cries, “I accept it to pardon me.” Faith calls the
legacies of the dying Jesus her own; and they are her own, for faith is
Christ’s heir; He has given Himself and all that He has to faith. Take, O
friend, that which grace has provided for thee. You will not be a thief, for
you have a divine permit: “Whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely.” He who may have a treasure simply by his grasping it will be
foolish indeed if he remains poor.
Faith is the mouth which feeds upon Christ. Before food can nourish us, it
must be received into us. This is a simple matter — this eating and
drinking. We willingly receive into the mouth that which is our food, and
then we consent that it should pass down into our inward parts, wherein it
is taken up and absorbed into our bodily frame. Paul says, in his Epistle to
the Romans, in the tenth chapter, “The word is nigh thee, even in thy
mouth.” Now then, all that is to be done is to swallow it, to suffer it to go
down into the soul. Oh that men had an appetite! For he who is hungry

37

and sees meat before him does not need to be taught how to eat. “Give
me,” said one, “a knife and a fork and a chance.” He was fully prepared to
do the rest. Truly, a heart which hungers and thirsts after Christ has but to
know that He is freely given, and at once it will receive Him. If my reader
is in such a case, let him not hesitate to receive Jesus; for he may be sure
that he will never be blamed for doing so: for unto “as many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God.” He never
repulses one, but He authorizes all who come to remain sons for ever.
The pursuits of life illustrate faith in many ways. The farmer buries good
seed in the earth, and expects it not only to live but to be multiplied. He
has faith in the covenant arrangement, that “seed-time and harvest shall not
cease,” and he is rewarded for his faith.
The merchant places his money in the care of a banker, and trusts
altogether to the honesty and soundness of the bank. He entrusts his
capital to another’s hands, and feels far more at ease than if he had the
solid gold locked up in an iron safe.
The sailor trusts himself to the sea. When he swims he takes his foot from
the bottom and rests upon the buoyant ocean. He could not swim if he did
not wholly cast himself upon the water.
The goldsmith puts precious metal into the fire which seems eager to
consume it, but he receives it back again from the furnace purified by the
heat.
You cannot turn anywhere in life without seeing faith in operation between
man and man, or between man and natural law. Now, just as we trust in
daily life, even so are we to trust in God as He is revealed in Christ Jesus.
Faith exists in different persons in various degrees, according to the
amount of their knowledge or growth in grace. Sometimes faith is little
more than a simple clinging to Christ; a sense of dependence and a
willingness so to depend. When you are down at the seaside you will see
limpets sticking to the rock. You walk with a soft tread up to the rock;
you strike the mollusk a rapid blow with your walking-stick and off he
comes. Try the next limpet in that way. You have given him warning; he
heard the blow with which you struck his neighbor, and he clings with all
his might. You will never get him off; not you! Strike, and strike again, but

38

you may as soon break the rock. Our little friend, the limpet, does not
know much, but he clings. He is not acquainted with the geological
formation of the rock, but he clings. He can cling, and he has found
something to cling to: this is all his stock of knowledge, and he uses it for
his security and salvation. It is the limpet’s life to cling to the rock, and it
is the sinner’s life to cling to Jesus. Thousands of God’s people have no
more faith than this; they know enough to cling to Jesus with all their heart
and soul, and this suffices for present peace and eternal safety. Jesus
Christ is to them a Savior strong and mighty, a Rock immovable and
immutable; they cling to him for dear life, and this clinging saves them.
Reader, cannot you cling? Do so at once.
Faith is seen when one man relies upon another from a knowledge of the
superiority of the other. This is a higher faith; the faith which knows the
reason for its dependence, and acts upon it. I do not think the limpet
knows much about the rock: but as faith grows it becomes more and more
intelligent. A blind man trusts himself with his guide because he knows
that his friend can see, and, trusting, he walks where his guide conducts
him. If the poor man is born blind he does not know what sight is; but he
knows that there is such a thing as sight, and that it is possessed by his
friend and therefore he freely puts his hand into the hand of the seeing one,
and follows his leadership. “We walk by faith, not by sight.” “Blessed are
they which have not seen, and yet have believed.” This is as good an image
of faith as well can be; we know that Jesus has about Him merit, and
power, and blessing, which we do not possess, and therefore we gladly
trust ourselves to Him to be to us what we cannot be to ourselves. We
trust Him as the blind man trusts his guide. He never betrays our
confidence; but He “is made of God unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption.”
Every boy that goes to school has to exert faith while learning. His
schoolmaster teaches him geography, and instructs him as to the form of
the earth, and the existence of certain great cities and empires. The boy
does not himself know that these things are true, except that he believes
his teacher, and the books put into his hands. That is what you will have
to do with Christ, if you are to be saved; you must simply know because
He tells you, believe because He assures you it is even so, and trust
yourself with Him because He promises you that salvation will be the

39

result. Almost all that you and I know has come to us by faith. A scientific
discovery has been made, and we are sure of it. On what grounds do we
believe it? On the authority of certain well-known men of learning, whose
reputations are established. We have never made or seen their experiments,
but we believe their witness. You must do the like with regard to Jesus:
because He teaches you certain truths you are to be His disciple, and
believe His words; because He has performed certain acts you are to be
His client, and trust yourself with Him. He is infinitely superior to you,
and presents himself to your confidence as your Master and Lord. If you
will receive Him and His words you shall be saved.
Another and a higher form of faith is that faith which grows out of love.
Why does a boy trust his father? The reason why the child trusts his
father is because he loves him. Blessed and happy are they who have a
sweet faith in Jesus, intertwined with deep affection for Him, for this is a
restful confidence. These lovers of Jesus are charmed with His character,
and delighted with His mission, they are carried away by the
lovingkindness that He has manifested, and therefore they cannot help
trusting Him, because they so much admire, revere, and love Him.
The way of loving trust in the Savior may thus be illustrated. A lady is the
wife of the most eminent physician of the day. She is seized with a
dangerous illness, and is smitten down by its power; yet she is
wonderfully calm and quiet, for her husband has made this disease his
special study, and has healed thousands who were similarly afflicted. She
is not in the least troubled, for she feels perfectly safe in the hands of one
so dear to her, and in whom skill and love are blended in their highest
forms. Her faith is reasonable and natural; her husband, from every point
of view, deserves it of her. This is the kind of faith which the happiest of
believers exercise toward Christ. There is no physician like Him, none can
save as He can; we love Him, and He loves us, and therefore we put
ourselves into His hands, accept whatever He prescribes, and do whatever
He bids. We feel that nothing can be wrongly ordered while He is the
director of our affairs; for He loves us too well to let us perish, or suffer a
single needless pang.
Faith is the root of obedience, and this may be clearly seen in the affairs of
life. When a captain trusts a pilot to steer his vessel into port he manages

40

the vessel according to his direction. When a traveler trusts a guide to
conduct him over a difficult pass, he follows the track which his guide
points out. When a patient believes in a physician, he carefully follows his
prescriptions and directions. Faith which refuses to obey the commands of
the Savior is a mere pretense, and will never save the soul. We trust Jesus
to save us; He gives us directions as to the way of salvation; we follow
those directions and are saved. Let not my reader forget this. Trust Jesus,
and prove your trust by doing whatever He bids you.
A notable form of faith arises out of assured knowledge; this comes of
growth in grace, and is the faith which believes Christ because it knows
Him, and trusts Him because it has proved Him to be infallibly faithful.
An old Christian was in the habit of writing T and P in the margin of her
Bible whenever she had tried and proved a promise. How easy it is to trust
a tried and proved Savior! You cannot do this as yet, but you will do so.
Everything must have a beginning. You will rise to strong faith in due time.
This matured faith asks not for signs and tokens, but bravely believes.
Look at the faith of the master mariner — I have often wondered at it. He
looses his cable, he steams away from the land. For days, weeks, or even
months, he never sees sail or shore; yet on he goes day and night without
fear, till one morning he finds himself exactly opposite to the desired haven
toward which he has been steering. How has he found his way over the
trackless deep? He has trusted in his compass, his nautical almanac, his
glass, and the heavenly bodies; and obeying their guidance, without
sighting land, he has steered so accurately that he has not to change a point
to enter into port. It is a wonderful thing — that sailing or steaming
without sight. Spiritually it is a blessed thing to leave altogether the shores
of sight and feeling, and to say, “Good-by” to inward feelings, cheering
providences, signs, tokens, and so forth. It is glorious to be far out on the
ocean of divine love, believing in God, and steering for Heaven straight
away by the direction of the Word of God. “Blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet have believed”; to them shall be administered an abundant
entrance at the last, and a safe voyage on the way. Will not my reader put
his trust in God in Christ Jesus. There I rest with joyous confidence.
Brother, come with me, and believe our Father and our Savior. Come at
once.

41
