PURITAN GOLD -- Female Piety by John Angell James: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 13
The Character of Rebekah


Female Piety: or, The Young Woman's Guide Through Life to Immortality. By John Angell James.

Chapter 9. The Character of Rebekah.

THE CHARACTER OF REBEKAH
"Before I had finished praying these words, I saw Rebekah
coming along with her water jug on her shoulder. She went
down to the spring and drew water and filled the jug. So I said to
her, 'Please give me a drink.' She quickly lowered the jug from
her shoulder so I could drink, and she said, 'Certainly, sir, and I
will water your camels, too!'" Genesis 24:45-46

Every one must be struck, I would think, with the narratives in the
book of Genesis, and their correspondence to the state of society to
which they relate. Their realistic descriptions guarantees their
truthfulness, and explains their peculiarity. We find all that
charming simplicity which is in keeping with the primitive life of the
people referred to; together with all the defects in their conduct,
which their imperfect knowledge might be expected to bring with it.
Another kind of narrative, more in conformity with the advance and
artificial refinement of modern society, would excite suspicion of the
truthfulness of the story.
Where shall we find in all the range of fiction anything so exquisite as
the history of Joseph; or even as the beautiful story which furnishes
the example to be contemplated in this chapter? I invite those
endowed with taste to the perusal of this portion of Holy Writ. True,
it relates rather to the history of a family than of a nation. And it is
worthy of remark, that the Spirit of God preserved in the inspired
chronicles this little gem of historic narrative, rather than the record
of anything going on at that time among the great kingdoms of
antiquity, not excepting Egypt, the birthplace and cradle of science.
The secular historian delights to emblazon his page with the conflicts
of empires, the exploits of heroes, and the prowess of armies—but
what is the influence of such records upon the moral habits, social
happiness, and individual character of mankind—compared with
that of the story of the holy courtship of Isaac and Rebekah?
Sarah, the beloved and faithful wife of Abraham, had died, and been
laid in the cave of Machpelah. Sadness and desolation were reigning
in the patriarch's household. His tent was empty; the grief of Isaac,
who loved his mother most tenderly, was unsoothed; and upon him
the heart of the venerable widower was now turned with more
concentrated affection. Isaac, the miraculous child of promise,

though forty years of age, was unmarried. The holy patriarch, amid
much domestic distress—the consequence of polygamy—had known
the happiness of possessing a faithful and devoted wife, and he now
became naturally anxious to see his beloved son in possession of a
companion in life, before he himself should go the way of all flesh.
His solicitude however was not merely that Isaac should be married
—but well married—which in his view meant not wealthily, but
religiously. Abraham was a worshiper of Jehovah, and abhorred
idolatry—by the votaries of which he was surrounded on every side;
and it pierced his heart with anguish to think of the child of his love
contracting a marriage with one of them. He knew that Isaac's
character as well as his happiness depended upon his choice.
Moreover it was not only a private matter of personal and family
arrangement, involving Isaac's happiness and the comfort of his
father, but also a public concern, intimately affecting the covenant
which the Almighty had entered into with him, and the countless
millions who were to be blessed in his seed. Isaac sustained a sacred
character, he was the child of promise, and inherited, and was to
transmit, the promises concerning the Messiah.
As Abraham had relatives in the land of Mesopotamia who
worshiped the living God, he determined to send his personal
servant to engage a wife for Isaac from their family. We must
suppose of course that all this was with the knowledge of Isaac and
met with his cordial consent, though parental authority was then
more extensive, and filial submission to it, more exemplary, than
they now are. Parents, in those times, chose wives for their sons, and
husbands for their daughters; and often were regulated in their
choice more by regard to wealth and rank than by the adaptation and
affection of the parties to be united. I do not wish this custom to be
revived—it is unnatural, and reduces marriage to a matter of bargain
and sale. But I do wish parental counsel, consent, and approbation,

to be always sought in a matter of so much importance to all parties
concerned, whether directly or remotely.
The trusty servant selected by Abraham proceeded on his mission—
so delicate, difficult, and momentous to both the father and son. Not
however until religious solemnities had been observed, and the
patriarch had commended Eleazar to God by prayer. If we wanted
the character of a faithful servant delineated to the life, where could
we find a picture so perfect as this man? I shall not follow him
through his long and wearisome journey of nearly five hundred
miles, nor will I dwell upon the anxious ruminations of his mind
during the weeks it occupied. Yet I cannot but imagine how
constantly that mind was lifted up to God for protection, direction,
and success. He at length arrived at the city of his destination. It was
a summer evening, and observing a well outside the walls, he
stopped to give his camels water, before he passed through the gates.
Aware that it was the custom for the young women to come and draw
water for household purposes, he first placed his camels by the well,
and then betook himself to prayer for Divine direction.
"O Lord, God of my master," he prayed. "Give me success and show
kindness to my master, Abraham. Help me to accomplish the
purpose of my journey. See, here I am, standing beside this spring,
and the young women of the village are coming out to draw water.
This is my request. I will ask one of them for a drink. If she says, 'Yes,
certainly, and I will water your camels, too!'—let her be the one you
have appointed as Isaac's wife. By this I will know that you have
shown kindness to my master." Genesis 24:12-14
It is noticeable that he did not fix upon the one who would first offer
her services, but upon the one who would first willingly grant the
service asked of her. In this he proceeded wisely, conceiving, it would

seem, that a maid who offered unasked, to a stranger, even so slight a
service as a draught of water at a public well, showed no maidenly
spirit; and deeming perhaps that such attention might be an excuse
for curiosity, and an evidence rather of officious forwardness, than of
an obliging disposition.
Eleazar's conduct in all this is worthy of notice, as furnishing a
beautiful comment upon Solomon's advice, "In all your ways
acknowledge Him, and he shall direct your paths." Let us thus begin,
carry on, and end, all our works in God. What is begun in prayer,
usually, as in this case, ends in praise. So thought Eleazar when he
knelt down by the side of the well of Nahor, and poured out this
simple and beautiful prayer. In his case it no doubt was well, but
ordinarily it does not become us to ask, much less to prescribe,
special tokens by which God shall indicate his will.
Having presented his prayer, he waited for the answer, and waited in
strong faith that he should receive it. He did not wait long. A young
woman came towards the well, with a water jug upon her shoulder.
By her appearance, perhaps by an impression from God, he was
possessed with the idea that she was the person sought, and that the
Lord had answered his prayer. He therefore addressed her in the
language which he had resolved to employ, and received the very
answer which was to be the sign of her being the object of his
mission. Her gentleness, cheerfulness, diligence, and courtesy,
manifested towards a stranger of whom she could have no
knowledge, were truly admirable—unmixed and uncorrupted as they
were by any improper forwardness or levity. She was frank without
being obtrusive, kind without being familiar. She neither ran away
affrighted from his presence, for her innocence gave her courage—
nor did she step beyond the decorum of her sex, nor allow her
courtesy to infringe upon her modesty. It was well for Rebekah that

she did not answer with a proud and haughty contempt, and a surly
refusal. "Yes, and it was well for another woman, who long after met
another stranger, 'wearied with his journey,' at another well, that
when she met his request, 'Give me a drink,' with the surly question,
'How is it that you being a Jew, ask drink of me who am a
Samaritan?' it was well, I say, for her that she had a different person
from Abraham's servant to deal with."
The words in which Rebekah's answer and conduct are described,
paint the scene to the life—"Drink, my lord," she said, and quickly
lowered the jar to her hands and gave him a drink. After she had
given him a drink, she said, "I'll draw water for your camels too, until
they have finished drinking." So she quickly emptied her jar into the
trough, ran back to the well to draw more water, and drew enough
for all his camels." Conduct so amiable overwhelmed Eleazar; and so
slow of heart are we to believe in the answer of our prayers, that
—"Without saying a word, the man watched her closely to learn
whether or not the Lord had made his journey successful." Genesis
24:21
There are cases in which the mind, like the eye, is lit up by a sudden
light. It was so here. Finding at length that she was indeed the object
of his journey, he could not repress the feelings of his full heart, but
expressed them in two ways. The first has in all ages and in all
countries been considered as one inlet to the female heart; that
heart, which has at any rate been ever thought "accessible to finery,
presents, and praise." "Then at last, when the camels had finished
drinking, he gave her a gold ring for her nose and two large gold
bracelets for her wrists."
But this was not the only expression of his joy and gratitude, for
unrestrained by the presence of Rebekah, "He bowed down his head

and worshiped, saying—Blessed be Jehovah, God of my master
Abraham, who has not left destitute my master of his mercy and his
truth—I being in the way, Jehovah led me to the house of my
master's brethren." Did the heart of Rebekah, true to instinctive
perception in all such matters, begin to divine what this present and
this praise to God meant? Did a thought glance across her mind of
the nature of this man's visit to Nahor? Or was the scene beheld by
her in awe and wonder at the character and errand of the mysterious
stranger? She must have known of her noble relation, Abraham,
whose name she now heard in prayer from the lips of Eleazar.
But let us for a moment forget Rebekah, to look upon this holy,
faithful, loving servant. Never did piety and fidelity more truly blend
the sanctity of the one with the devotedness of the other. Happy
master, to have such a servant! Happy servant, to be blessed with
such a master!
It is not necessary for me to enter very minutely into the incidents of
the scenes which followed. How Rebekah hastened with the news to
her father's house, and how Laban her brother went forth to greet the
stranger and conduct him to their home. We mark, as if we saw
them, the courtesy of the opening interview; the frank interchange of
kindly greetings and good offices; the admirable delicacy of the
servant's introduction of himself to the family of Bethuel; the
servant's impatience to fulfill his errand; the simple recital of what
the Lord had done for him; and the full development of the object of
his visit.
Upon hearing them, Laban, as the surviving representative of his
father, replied, "The thing proceeds from the Lord, we cannot speak
unto you bad or good. Behold, Rebekah is before you, take her, and
go, and let her be your master's son's wife, as the Lord has spoken."

This was dependent, as the after part of the narrative shows, upon
the girl's consent. To help to gain this, a second splendid present was
prepared for her—of jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and clothing.
This was, and is still, the oriental custom of contracting all bargains
and entering into all covenants, relating to marriage, trade, or
politics. Very natural was the remonstrance which the brother, and
especially the mother of the bride, addressed to the impatient
servant of Abraham, when in the morning he said, "Send me away to
my master. And her brother and her mother said, let the girl abide
with us a few days, at the least ten; after that she shall go." Whether
it be a respite of ten days, or as some say, of ten months, or even
years, that the mother joined with her son in soliciting, before the
daughter should bid her a last adieu, this is a touch of genuine
tenderness which we would not willingly lose from the narrative. For
it is a narrative which proves its own truth by its being so thoroughly,
all throughout, true to nature.
Rebekah was now called in and the question put to her, "Will you go
with this man?" Was she deficient in virgin modesty, in prudence, in
thoughtfulness? Did she display an unseemly haste to become a wife?
Did she venture too carelessly to commit herself and her happiness
for life to one of whom she knew nothing, but by report? Did she not
take the decisive step in the dark, when she consented to peril in
such haste the comfort of her life, upon the truth of the singular
embassy that had come to her? In ordinary circumstances I would
unquestionably reply to these questions in the affirmative, and I
would earnestly recommend to all young women at the present day,
and to all who have the care of them, whether parents or guardians,
more delay, inquiry, and caution, than were observed in this case.
Hasty offers of marriage should be met either by immediate refusal
or lengthened consideration. It is too momentous an affair to be
decided without much investigation and reflection.

But there was a peculiarity here. Something, perhaps, may be justly
imputed to the times in which they lived, but far more to the
religious state of Rebekah's mind; a sense of duty overwhelmed a
feeling of reluctance, together with every inferior consideration. She
was doubtless in the habit of daily communion with God, and in
fervent prayer had sought Divine direction; she saw an overruling
providence; God was in the affair; his finger, visible to the eye of
faith, pointed the way in which she should go; and with unhesitating
obedience she confessed her readiness to part from all the felicities of
home, and seek a distant alliance—at the voice of the Almighty Being
to whom she had committed her future destiny.
Flattering as the scene before her must have appeared to a worldly
eye, the sacrifices she made at this moment of compliance were
certainly very considerable. What could have led to such an answer,
when standing between the tears of parental and fraternal affection,
and the urgency of a mere stranger, the servant too of her future
home—but a faith which overcame the world, and dictated her holy
resolution. Heaven appointed her journey, and nature pleaded in
vain. That religion had something to do with it, I have no doubt; that
the promptings of the female heart had also some influence, I have as
little doubt. "What woman," says Monod, "under a sense of her
dependence, has not wished once in her life, for the arm of a man to
support her, and his name to shelter her? But at the same time, what
woman under the feeling of reserve, has not kept her secret closely
shut up within her own bosom, waiting silently until she is sought
for, even though she should wait until the hour of her death,
hastened, perhaps, in some cases, by that internal fire by which she
would be consumed within, rather than allow it to be blazed abroad.
The invariable order of marriage which surrenders the initiative to
man, and does not accord even the appearance of it to woman, is not
a refinement of civilization, it is not even a nicety of the gospel, it is a

law imposed on woman in every age, not excepting the most
barbarous; and among all people, not excepting the most savage."
Rebekah partook of this feeling, but she worshiped the true God, and
lived amid those who worshiped idols, where perhaps few
opportunities of a holy union presented themselves; and now one
offered, in which was combined all that piety could desire, and even
vanity crave; she therefore required little or no time to deliberate
upon it, and at once consented to accompany the servant of
Abraham. Rebekah took leave of her friends, and proceeded on her
eventful journey under the care of Eleazar, and accompanied, both
for her comfort and her protection, by Deborah, an old and faithful
servant who had nursed her from a child.
For a moment we leave her, proceeding on her journey, to speak of
her future husband, of whom good Bishop Hall says, "Of all the
patriarchs, none made so little noise in the world as Isaac; none lived
either so privately, or so innocently; neither know I whether he
proved himself a better son or husband. For the one he gave himself
over to the knife of his father when about to be offered up in
sacrifice, and mourned three years for his mother; for the other he
reserved himself in chaste forbearance twenty years and prayed."
Isaac appears to have been a quiet, retiring, domestic, and devotional
character; good, rather than great, and altogether blameless, with the
exception that he was a little too much addicted to the gratification of
his palate. "It is a calm and peaceful summer evening. The oxen have
been lodged in their stalls, and the implements of husbandry are at
rest in the furrows of the field. Not a breath of wind rustles in the
noiseless leaves. Not a stray sheep wanders in the dark shadow of the
hills. It is a time of profound repose. One solitary figure is seen
slowly pacing the sweet-scented meadow path. Unconscious of

nature's charms, although his soul is melted into sweet harmony
with the peace that reigns all around, he is wrapped in holy
fellowship with the God of his salvation." (Candlish)
It is Isaac, "who had gone out into the fields to meditate." No
improper oratory for the good man, who, surrounded by the glories
of creation, looks through nature up to nature's God. In such an
exercise and such a frame of mind, Isaac was well prepared to receive
the best possible earthly blessing—a good wife. Perhaps he was then
meditating upon Eleazar's mission, and beseeching heaven for its
success. Behold the answer of his prayers! A cavalcade is seen in the
distance approaching. It draws nearer and nearer. Can it be the
return of Eleazar, the faithful servant? And are there not two women
in the retinue, one young and the other far advanced in life? The
vision of his future wife now flashed through his imagination as the
procession drew nearer, and his eyes with fixed attention rested
upon the beauteous form of Rebekah.
"And who," says Rebekah, whose eyes are as busy in looking towards
Canaan as Isaac's are in the direction of Mesopotamia, "is that
meditative man approaching us?" The secret is disclosed by the
faithful, joyful Eleazar. "My master, Isaac!" As she approached her
destined husband, see how female delicacy, and maiden modesty and
reserve, resume their empire. "She alighted off the camel; and took a
veil and covered herself." This act expressed her subjection as his
already espoused wife, to him as her future husband.
"And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took
Rebekah, and she became his wife, and he loved her—and Isaac was
comforted after his mother's death." In this tender manner does this
admirable story close. Peace be to that dwelling, the residence of a
dutiful son and a tender husband—and of a kind, generous, open-

hearted, pious wife. Dutiful sons promise to be affectionate husbands
—and were I a woman, and received an offer of marriage, one of the
first enquiries I would make concerning the man who solicited my
hand and heart, would be "How did he behave to his mother?"
feeling assured that conjugal affection could scarcely be expected to
dwell in that heart from which filial regard had been excluded. He
who is insensible to a mother's tender affection, believe me, my
young friends, is not to be entrusted with the care of a woman's heart
and happiness.
"We may here pause and remark that all the circumstances continue
to make this portion of the sacred record peculiarly attractive. In
reading it we feel at home amid these patriarchal incidents and
descriptions, realizing them as if they were familiar. The stately
pomp and ceremony, reserve and coldness and suspicion of a more
artificial social state pass away. The freshness of nature's early truth
and tenderness returns—artless, guileless, fearless. We breathe a
purer and freer air. We are touched with a deeper sense at once of a
special Providence in heaven, and of a real and true sympathy on
earth. We feel that there can be such a thing as the exercise of a frank
and generous trust, relying both upon God and upon man; and that it
is possible to act upon the belief both of God's superintendence and
of man's sincerity."
Before we consider what is to be learned from the conduct of
Rebekah as a wife and a mother, we will for a few moments
contemplate her in reference to the act which made her such, her
marriage. The circumstances connected with this were peculiar to
the times, and partook of a simplicity, as I have already remarked, to
which your history is not likely to supply a parallel. One thing,
however, may be noticed—it was with the concurrence and consent
of her family. I cannot account for the fact of Bethuel, Rebekah's

father, being passed over in silence, and Laban her brother only
being mentioned as conducting the transaction, except upon the
supposition that Bethuel was dead. It is true the name occurs once in
the history, but this probably was a brother. But Laban was
consulted. There was nothing clandestine in the affair. And moreover
it was a marriage in which the claims of religion were considered. On
this delicate subject I cannot enlarge. If Rebekah had showed too
great an eagerness for leaving the single state, and somewhat too
hasty a decision, we do not recommend this to you; from this
however we have absolved her.
It may be natural enough to prefer the married to the unmarried
state, when an opportunity offers for entering into it. But let not your
minds be unduly restless and anxious in realizing the object of your
wishes. Avoid all romantic and poetic imaginativeness on this
momentous affair. Do not allow yourselves ever to treat it with levity,
or to sustain or adopt a line of conduct which would look as if you
were more anxious to be a wife—than to be qualified for such a state.
Never come to the conclusion that you cannot be happy if you are not
married—and cannot but be happy if you are married. Let the
multitude of happy maidens and the equal number of unhappy
wives, correct such mistakes, and dispel all the illusions with which
the idea of marriage disturbs the propriety of some young women's
conduct.
Treat the whole subject, not as a matter of poetry and romance, but
as one of the gravest realities of life. It is an affair of love—but it is
also an affair of prudence. It is a matter of taste, and even of poetic
delightedness—but it is also a matter of judgment and of conscience.
It is not a thing to be laughed and joked about—but to be pondered
in the deepest recesses of the soul—and prayed over in the most

solemn seasons of devotion. It is momentous to both parties, but
most so to the woman.
"Life or death, felicity or a lasting sorrow, are in the power of
marriage. A woman indeed ventures most, for she has no sanctuary
to retire to from an evil husband. She must dwell upon her sorrow,
and hatch the eggs which her folly or her unhappiness has produced
—and she is more under it, because her tormentor has a warrant of
prerogative, and the woman may complain to God, as subjects do of
tyrant princes; but otherwise, she has no appeal in the causes of
unkindness. And even of the man we may say, though he can run
from many hours of his sadness, yet he must return to it again, and
when he sits among his neighbors he remembers the objection that
lies in his bosom, and he sighs deeply." (Jeremy Taylor's "Marriage
Ring")
It is not necessary for me here to lay down many rules for your
guidance in this affair. When however it comes in your way, consult,
not only your heart, and your imagination, and your young
companions—but your judgment, your God by prayer, and your
parents for advice. Enter into no commitment without the
cognizance of those natural guides and guardians of your youth. It is
at the beginning of connections of this kind that parental counsel
should be sought. Never commit yourselves by a word until the
domestic oracle has been consulted—nor allow your affections to be
entangled until a father's and a mother's judgment have been
pronounced. Determine that similarity of taste, especially in the most
important of all matters, religion—shall form the basis of any union
you may form.
Should it be that God has not destined you to wedded bliss, do not
forget "that there are advantages peculiar to single life—that it

affords an immunity from many cares, an opportunity for intellectual
pursuits, a power to do good extensively—which married women
may not enjoy. And if these privileges are improved; if cheerfulness
and benevolence characterize the disposition, there will be no lack of
occupation, of happiness, or of sympathy. The kind sister or aunt will
be always welcomed; she will be hailed as the agreeable companion,
or the tender nurse; as the participator in joy, or the sympathizer in
sorrow; as the helper in business, or the companion in affliction; she
will be the ready assistant in every good work, the children will run
to greet her arrival, the poor will rise up and call her blessed. And if
in truth, as we do see in some bright examples in our own day, her
energy grows with her desire of doing good, and in the assiduous and
pain-taking efforts of Christian charity she seems to forget the
weakness of her sex, she realizes in one of its most pleasing forms
primitive devotedness. In pious exercises more spiritual, in selfdenial more mortified, in faith more pure, than any of the cloistered
nuns of the strictest order; while at the same time her religion is
without superstition, and her sobriety without gloom. She is one of a
holy sisterhood—whose vows are scriptural—and whose voluntary
service is the labor of love." (Mrs. Sandford)
We now turn to another chapter in the history of Rebekah, in which
she appears to far less advantage than she does in the one we have
just reviewed, where the artless simplicity of the virgin is lost in the
crooked policy of the designing wife and the too partial mother.
Perhaps it will be thought by some that as I am addressing young
women, I might have cut short the story with her marriage and her
virtues—and drawn a veil over her future failings. But I bear in
recollection what I said in a former chapter that the matron should
be held up to the maiden, that from the outset she may learn what to
copy—and what to avoid. And here is a striking example to serve this
purpose—an affecting instance to prove what a transformation a

change of circumstances may produce in the same person! Isaac and
Rebekah, like Abraham and Sarah, had their faith tried in waiting
long for the son who was to be the heir of promise. Twenty years
elapsed and Rebekah bore no child. In answer to the earnest prayers
of her husband, God gave her the prospect of becoming a mother.
Before this happy event took place she received a communication
from the Lord that she should give birth to twins, who should be the
heads of two separate nations, and that contrary to the order of
nature and the custom of nations—the elder brother should serve the
younger. Esau and Jacob were born, grew up, and exhibited great
difference of taste and character. Into this family of Isaac and
Rebekah there entered that which has rent myriads and myriads of
households, setting the husband against the wife, the mother against
the father, and one child against another; disturbing the harmony of
domestic peace; poisoning the springs of domestic happiness; and
preventing the progress of domestic improvement—I mean parental
favoritism. "Isaac loved Esau in particular because of the wild game
he brought home, but Rebekah favored Jacob." Genesis 25:28
In the case of Isaac and Rebekah, the parents had each their favorite
child, and what was worse—manifested their fondness. It may in
some cases be almost impossible not to have a preference for one
child above another, but what anxious carefulness should there be to
conceal it! Policy and justice both demand from parents an equal
distribution of their affection, their favor, and their goods; for if
there be one folly which more certainly punishes itself than another,
it is this ill-judged and wicked favoritism between children. Parental
partiality injures both the one preferred and the one that is slighted—
inflating the one with pride, insolence, and vanity—and corrupting
the other by jealousy, envy, and revenge. Isaac loved Esau, and for a
reason not very honorable to his character, "because he ate his wild
game." Rebekah loved Jacob, for what reason we are not told; it is

probable on account both of his superior excellence, and of the
revelation which God had made to her concerning his future history.
She was undoubtedly a woman of sincere faith, and even her most
censurable conduct arose from misdirected piety. She, like another
female in after times, pondered in her heart all the things which had
been spoken of God concerning her child of promise.
It was not long before the effects of parental partiality appeared in
the family. A competition for precedence, and the 'right of firstborn'
engaged the attention of the brothers, and whetted their spirits
against each other from their earliest years, and the outcome was
alienation, separation, hostility, on the part of the children, and
sorrow and distress on the part of the parents. Jacob's conduct was
selfishness, and Esau's profane. The younger son knew that he was
destined to precedence, and instead of leaving God to fulfill his own
purpose, sought to accomplish it in a manner unworthy both of
himself and of the blessing.
Time, which moves on with ceaseless tread, had brought Isaac to old
age; and he now thought of his approaching end, and the propriety of
settling his domestic affairs. His great concern was to direct the
descent of the patriarchal blessing, which in this case, implied more
than that ordinary benediction which every good man would
pronounce on all his children without distinction; it comprehended
the great things contained in the covenant with Abraham, according
to which his posterity was to be selected and distinguished as the
peculiar people of God, and to give birth to the Messiah. Isaac ought
to have remembered the communication made to Rebekah, and by
her doubtless told to him, that this blessing was to be bestowed upon
Jacob. Natural attachment for a while overcame his faith, and he
prepared to divert the blessing from the channel marked out for it by
the purpose and providence of God. To enkindle his affection for

Esau, by the remembrance of past gratifications, he wished to have
some savory meat, certainly a carnal introduction to so divine an act,
partaking more of the flesh than of the Spirit, and betraying more of
that parental partiality under which he had acted, than of the faith of
a son of Abraham.
See, of what importance it is to avoid contracting bad habits early,
seeing time, indulgence and habit, interweave them with our very
constitution, until they become a second nature, and age confirms
instead of eradicating them. We find the two great infirmities of
Isaac's character predominant to the last–
1. A disposition to gratify his palate with a particular kind of food.
2. Partiality to his son Esau.
Rebekah, whose affection was ever wakeful, active, and jealous for
her favorite child, overheard the charge given by her husband to
Esau, and instantly plans a scheme to divert the blessing into
another, and as she knew into its right, channel. What should she
have done? Expostulated with Isaac on the impropriety of acting in
direct opposition to the revealed purpose of God. Such an appeal to a
mind devout and contemplative, as his evidently was,
notwithstanding its weaknesses, would in all probability have
succeeded. Instead of this, she manifested what has ever been
considered to be one of woman's infirmities—a disposition to have
recourse to finesse, stratagem, and maneuver—a wish to carry her
object by a indirect and circuitous way—rather than by an open and
straightforward course.
It is unnecessary for me to enter into the details of her plan, its
prompt execution, and its success. It is a sad story. There was
nothing but shameless trickery and imposition, a disguised person, a
stolen name, a false answer. Everything was bad except the motive,

and that could not alter the character of the action, and transmute
evil into good. It was a disgrace to Rebekah, a cruel fraud practiced
upon Isaac, and a most grievous injury inflicted on the moral
character of her son. We must not load Jacob with more of the
infamy of this transaction than what really belongs to him. He was
not first in the transgression. His feelings revolted from it when it
was proposed to him. He remonstrated against it. His remonstrance,
however, was founded more upon the 'consequences of the evil' than
the evil itself. And there is a striking difference between his
reasoning and that of his son Joseph. Jacob said, "I shall bring a
curse upon me, and not a blessing;" Joseph's pious and noble reply
was, "How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God."
The resoluteness of Rebekah is astounding and affecting, confirming
the general opinion that woman, in a bad purpose, is often more bold
and determined than man. "Upon me be your curse, my son—only
obey my voice." Appalling spectacle, to see a mother, a religious
mother, so far forgetting what is due to her sex, her relationship, and
her piety, as not only to lead, but to goad and drag on her son to
perpetrate falsehood, and to practice deception upon his half-blind
father! O mothers, read this account and tremble!
The plan moves forward, but the whole plot was in danger of
exploding. The conference between Isaac and his son Jacob is deeply
affecting. The half awakened suspicion and artless simplicity of the
father, invests, by the power of contrast, with deeper shades of
infamy and guilt, the shameless, undaunted effrontery of the son.
Such is the way of transgressors, one sin prepares for, and leads on,
to another, until the sinner is involved by a kind of necessity to add
another and another lie to help on the former one. Isaac's ears were
keener than his eyes, and his mind was not so blunted by age as not
to be capable of reasoning upon some improbabilities; for there is

something about falsehood, which though it may silence, yet will not
ordinarily satisfy. Trickery however, in this case was too deep for
honesty, and Isaac, kind and credulous, soon had his suspicions
lulled, ate the meal, and bestowed the blessing. It is no part of my
design to paint, or rather copy the scene which followed, when the
return of Esau revealed the plot and proclaimed the deception. The
shock to poor old Isaac was almost overwhelming. As an aged and an
decaying man, the infliction which had been practiced upon him
would excite his indignation. Yet a moment's reflection would
convince him of his mistake in intending to convey to Esau that
blessing which God designed for Jacob. Such considerations rushing
upon his mind at once, sufficiently account for all his feelings—it was
to him like a place where two seas meet, or as the union of
subterranean fires and waters which causes the earth to tremble.
Esau is to be pitied, and would be more so if his distress arose from
any other feelings than disappointed ambition. He who profanely
despised his birthright, cared for the loss of the blessing, only as it
deprived him of some earthly distinctions and temporal possessions.
Rebekah's deceitful policy had succeeded. But she soon began to reap
its bitter fruits, in perceiving the feud which she had occasioned
between the two brothers. The same tent could no longer contain
them. And news having reached her that Esau plotted revenge, even
to the murder of his fraudulent brother, she hurried away Jacob to
the land of Padan-Aram, to seek a protection and a home among her
own relatives.
With the sequel of this interesting story you are acquainted, and we
return to Rebekah. The best explanation that can be given of her
conduct, and it has been advanced by her apologists as her defense,
is that she acted from religious motives. Perhaps it is in part true; but

I do not think wholly so. There is much of the mother mixed up with
the believer; and no small share of regard for the interests of a
favorite child, blended with regard for the purposes of God. But be it
so, that religion had the principal hand in this odious deception, then
we see how early pious frauds were practiced for the furtherance of
the faith; and Rebekah, so far as this part of her conduct is
concerned, is presented to us as anticipating the principles of the
Jesuits; for even if we concede to her a religious end, we must admit
she adopted the most sinful means to obtain it. She was
unquestionably right in her belief that God designed the blessing for
Jacob, and in this one respect, I mean her faith, she was stronger and
more unswerving than her husband. Yet this faith was mixed with
some unbelief after all; for what else was it but a partial distrust, that
led her to adopt such sinful means to secure the accomplishment of
the divine purpose? Does God's truth require man's falsehood to
fulfill it? Cannot we leave God to find means to perform his own
word without supposing he requires our sins to help him out of a
dilemma? The urgency of the temptation was no doubt very great. In
her view an hour or two would decide the matter, and the blessing
intended for Jacob would be transferred to Esau, and how then
would the declaration be fulfilled? She should have left it to God.
Let us now leave the history, and learn the LESSONS with which it is
fraught. The Scripture narratives are intended to exhibit holiness and
sin embodied in living characters; the one for our imitation, and the
other for our warning. And not infrequently we find both sin and
holiness blended in the same character, requiring a careful analysis
and an accurate discrimination. This discrimination is requisite in
looking at the character now before us.
As you see Rebekah with her water jug on the shoulder coming to
draw water, you cannot fail to notice her domestic and industrious

habits. Yes, it was when thus occupied—and not when indolently
reclining upon the couch of ease, nor when sauntering with a
company of associates as idle and gossiping as herself, nor when
wasting her time in useless occupations of frivolity and amusement,
that Eleazar saw her. No! but, though high-born, wealthy, and
beautiful, bearing the water jug upon her shoulder to the well to
draw the evening's supply of water for the family.
Every young woman should aim to be useful at home, and she is not
a wise or good mother who does not train her daughters for such
occupations. But as I have already dwelt on this, it is not necessary to
enlarge upon it here, any further than to say that the humble yet
useful employments of domestic life, are a virtuous woman's most
honorable station; that whether in single life, wedlock, or
widowhood, God and nature have destined you, my female friends, to
occupation—not perhaps highly honorable in the eyes of 'unfeeling
wealth' or 'giddy intemperance'—but highly important to the
happiness of others, and therefore essential to your own.
We cannot fail to notice in Rebekah's early deportment an artless
genuine SIMPLICITY—affectingly in contrast with her subsequent
artifice and duplicity. This it is which invests her character, and most
of the excellent ones in Scripture, with such an irresistible charm. To
whatever we look we find that 'simplicity is beauty'. This is true of
nature as the great model. Amid all its grandeur and complexity, its
processes appear easy and spontaneous, being all originated and
directed by a wisdom and a power which operate not only without
visible effort but in perfect repose. Simplicity is no less beautiful in
art than in nature, and the very perfection of art is to hide itself in
copying the simplicity of nature. All this holds good of manners,
there especially affectation is hateful and repulsive. 'Studied display'
of any kind, whether of intellect or virtue, of conversation or even of

pronunciation, or of singularity, whether in dress or habits—is
always odious. It cannot secure respect but must excite ridicule.
Perhaps this is one of the principal follies against which women, and
especially young educated women, have to guard. An 'artificial
character' has a deeper meaning, involving immorality, as signifying
a tendency to artifice, equivocation, and the simulation of virtue not
really possessed. This in its fixed and consolidated form, is hypocrisy
—the most odious vice on earth.
But I now refer to 'artificial manners'—the affectation or parade of
superiority in any particular; a studied mannerism for the purpose of
display. This generally springs from that vanity which has been
considered by many female writers as one of the foibles of their sex,
and the prevalence of which really spoils many otherwise useful and
amiable characters. It is in woman what ambition is in man; and
though it may be a less dangerous, it is a more odious fault; and it is
a form of self-love equally jealous and insatiable. Nothing can be
more opposite to the spirit of the gospel, and the only security
against it is genuine humility. Be clothed, young women, with an
artless genuine simplicity. It is your most befitting and beautiful
garment; and where will you obtain it, but from the wardrobe of
Christianity?
Observe the COURTEOUS affability of this interesting young
woman. Here was a stranger, a servant, though evidently a servant of
a wealthy master; and yet how respectful, how gentle, how affable
was her address. Josephus, fond of adding in his paraphrastic
manner to the terseness and simplicity of the Scripture narrative,
relates that there were other young women with Rebekah, who were
asked for water, but refused; and that she reproved them for their
churlishness. COURTESY is a befitting grace in both sexes, but most

so in the female. While rudeness, which is a 'blemish' upon
masculine character, is a 'blot' upon feminine character. A female
churl is a monstrosity, from which we turn away with insufferable
disgust. Courtesy is one of the cheapest exercises of virtue; it costs
even less than rudeness—for the latter, except in hearts that are
petrified into stone, must put the subject of it to some expense of
feeling. Even a rough voice issuing from female lips is disagreeable,
much more rough manners exhibited by a female form.
There are various things which prevent the exercise of courtesy. In
some cases, it is to be traced to pride, a vice which befits a demon,
but not a woman. In others it is the result of an absolute bad
disposition—a morose, sour, and ill-conditioned mind, which knows
no congenial seasons, and experiences no soft emotions. Some are
petulant and peevish, and when putting on a mood of civility, are
easily driven from it by the slightest touch of their irritability. Be
courteous then; it is, if not of the solid substance of holiness, at least
its polish. It is a Christian grace; for an apostle has said, "Be
compassionate and courteous."
Akin to this was Rebekah's KINDNESS. There was not only an
external affability of manner—but a real benevolence of disposition.
Here was a stranger, tired and faint with a day's journey in a hot
country, asking her kind offices to procure a supply of water for
himself and his weary animals. To grant his request for himself,
would have cost her no great labor; but it must have been a
considerable effort to draw water enough for a number of thirsty
camels! And this is more apparent when you know the construction
of eastern wells, which are not like ours, but are a kind of sunken
cistern, to which you descend by a flight of steps. How many
tiresome descents must this young creature have made, before she
satisfied the thirst of Eleazar's camels.

And there is another little circumstance which marks her kindness;
Eleazar asked only for a "sip "of water, for so the original word
signifies, and she said, "Drink, and your camels." It was a solitary act,
I admit; but it was so promptly, so generously done as to indicate a
habit. It is said, with as much beauty as simplicity, "Love is kind;"
and, if possible, with still greater beauty, it is given as one of the
traits of the virtuous woman, "In her tongue is the law of kindness,"
the tongue here, as in all cases, commanding the hand.
Insensibility in a man is bad enough, but worse in a woman. An
unfeeling woman is a contradiction in terms, for the female heart has
ever been found the dwelling-place of kindness, where the misery of
others, when all other hopes have failed, is sure to find an asylum. In
what age, or in what country in the world, has woman forfeited her
character as the ministering angel of humanity? When and where has
the female bosom disowned the claims of misery and repudiated the
virtue of benevolence? Arctic snows have not frozen up the springs of
mercy in the female heart, nor tropical suns dried them up. Tyranny
has not crushed it out, nor barbarism extinguished it. Look at Mr.
Park, when alone in the midst of Africa, and lying down to die in
poverty and despair, found by the black women of that wild land,
carried to their tent, fed, clad, and cherished amid the tender strains
of the impromptu song, with which they cheered the feelings of his
heart and expressed the benevolence of their own. Young women,
cherish in your bosoms the purest philanthropy. Abhor selfishness—
you are made for kindness. Oppose not the design of your Creator.
Do no violence to your own nature. A stony heart does not behoove
you. A tearless woman is a revolting scene in our sorrowful world.
She may be pure and beautiful as the marble statue—but if withal she
is as hard and cold, who can admire her?

I cannot yet pass from the contemplation of this sweet and amiable
young creature to behold her in her future character, until I have
referred again to the veil of MODESTY under which all this affability
and kindness was concealed. In listening to her language, in
witnessing her conduct, will the most fastidious, prudish, or
censorious of her sex, find anything to condemn in anything she said
or did? Did she in the smallest measure violate decorum? She did not
stand to gaze upon the stranger and his camels, or do anything to
attract his attention, but was intent upon the object for which she
came, and was diverted from it only by an opportunity to do good,
thrown in her way, without her seeking for it. She did not anxiously
or confidently enter into discourse with the man, but waited until she
was addressed, and then answered him modestly.
Modesty is the most attractive of all female graces. What is
intelligence without it, but bolder impudence; or beauty but a more
seductive snare? There is, I know, a reserve that degenerates into
repulsive pride; as on the other hand, there is a frankness that
corrupts into forwardness. Woman is intended neither to avoid man
by a bashful timidity, nor to court him by an obtrusive advance. A
genuine modesty guards against each extreme. It is that semitransparent veil, which by revealing half her excellence, makes more
lovely that which it reveals, and excites desire to know the rest. It is
her shield as well as her veil, repelling all the darts with which, either
by acts, by words, or by looks, any one would dare to assail her
purity. It is also her ornament, investing all her other excellences
with additional charms, the blush of purity upon the cheek of beauty.
It is her power, by which she subdues every heart that is worth the
conquest. Yes, what is not modesty to woman? Lay not aside your
veil. Cast not away your shield. Divest not yourselves of your
brightest ornament. Enfeeble not your power to influence others.
Avoid everything in which the absence of this virtue can show itself.

See how the lack of it is reproved by the prophet Isaiah in his third
chapter and how the practice of it enjoined by the apostle Paul
—"That women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with
shamefacedness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array, but which becomes women professing
godliness, with good works." Neither in dress, nor in conversation,
nor in action, violate this law. Chastity is the robe which every
woman should wear, and modesty is the golden clasp that keeps it
upon her, and the fringe that adorns it. When the clasp is lost, the
garment is likely to fall off; and when the fringe is torn away, or
carelessly allowed to be trampled upon, the disfigurement of the robe
has commenced, until at length it is cast away as not worth being
retained.
I do not wish you to mistake a silly and affected bashfulness for
modesty. You live not amid Asiatic ignorance, tyranny, sensuality,
and female degradation, where woman is used mainly to pander to
the appetite of her master, and where by a cruel jealousy she is
excluded from communion with all but her fellow-slaves and their
common tyrant. You are the women of an enlightened age and
country, and you are admitted on equal terms to all the enjoyments
of social communion. Assert in this respect your rights; maintain
your standing, and while you throw off all boldness, cast away with it
all unworthy prudishness. In one of my previous chapters, I
remarked that the over-prudish mind, which can never speak to one
of the opposite sex but with a blush, is not always the purest one in
reality.
There are, my young friends, one or two momentous lessons for you
to learn from Rebekah's conduct in after life—lessons which you
must carry with you through all your future existence on earth. The
first is GENERAL—a change of circumstances often produces a

considerable change of character and conduct. How unlike the maid
of Nahor was the wife in Canaan! And is it an uncommon thing now,
for a change, far more extensive and more powerful than this, to be
effected by the new condition into which marriage brings the female
character?
Learn also this SPECIAL lesson—that we should never seek a good
end by bad means; or in other words, never do evil that good may
come. Abhor the great principle and favorite maxim of Jesuitism,
that the end sanctifies the means; and especially abhor the
application and operation of this most detestable principle in
reference to religion; a principle which is more or less interwoven
with the whole history of Popery. What crimes have been perpetrated
by the zealots of Rome in the abused name of religion, for the good of
their church! The pages of history which record the progress of that
dreadful apostasy are not only 'stained' with blood, but 'steeped' in it.
And even by other professing Christians, holding a purer creed, and
animated by a milder spirit, how much has been done, ostensibly for
religion, but really for sectarianism, in contradiction of every
principle of the law of God, and love to our neighbor! Religion
refuses to be served by any principles of action but its own, and
disdains to accept any offering which is contrary to truth, love,
holiness, and honor. And as the stronger our zeal is for an object, the
more we are in danger of resorting, in times of difficulty or in
prospect of defeat, to unworthy means; so the more fervent we are to
promote any religious cause, the more watchful should we be against
being seduced into the use of 'unholy means' to obtain success. The
wife of Isaac was right in her object, but wrong in her means, to
obtain the blessing for Jacob.

But we must take leave of Rebekah. It is somewhat remarkable that
the sacred narrative takes no notice of her death. One might have
hoped that she who came upon our notice at first like a bright and
lovely vision, would have been seen to depart with as much
gracefulness, simplicity, and beauty as she exhibited when we first
saw her with such delighted attention. Is it that this despicable act of
her old age so disrobed her character of its pristine beauty that
censure is pronounced upon her by this most impressive silence? But
is hers the only instance of painful contrast between the maid and
the matron? The only instance that has disappointed the hopes
raised by youthful excellences? The only instance in which the fullblown flower has not answered to the bud? Happy would it have
been for thousands if it were.
Let it then be your first solicitude to exhibit, in your early life and
single state, all those general and moral beauties which form the
character of virgin excellence. Be holy, industrious, modest,
benevolent, and useful—inspire hope in every beholder, and awaken
expectation. But then, be ever anxious, studious, and prayerful, that
in the transition from the single to the wedded state; in the
development of the girl into the woman—all that was lovely, artless,
and simple in youthful charms, shall, with unbroken and unvarying
consistency, ripen into all that is holy, estimable, venerable in the
wife, the mother, and the matron.
