PURITAN GOLD -- Human Nature in Its Fourfold State by Thomas Boston: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 13
The State of Innocence: Of Man's Original Righteousness

---

I. Of Man's Original Righteousness.
As to the righteousness of this state, consider, that as uncreated
righteousness, the righteousness of God is the supreme rule; so all
created righteousness, whether of men or angels, has respect to a law as
its rule, and is a conformity thereto. A creature can no more be morally
independent of God in its actions and powers, than it can be naturally
independent of him. A creature, as a creature, must acknowledge the
Creator's will as its supreme law; for as it cannot exist without him, so it
must not be but for him, and according to his will; yet no law obliges,
until it is revealed. And hence it follows, that there was a law, which man,
as a rational creature, was subjected to in his creation; and that this law

was revealed to him.
"God made man upright," says the text. This supposes a law to which he
was conformed in his creation; as when anything is made regular, or
according to rule, of necessity the rule itself is presupposed. Whence we
may gather, that this law was no other than the eternal, indispensable law
of righteousness, observed in all points by the second Adam, opposed by
the carnal mind, and some notions of which remain yet among the
Pagans, who, "having not the law, are a law unto themselves," Romans
2:14. In a word, this law is the very same which was afterwards summed
up in the ten commandments, and promulgated, on mount Sinai, to the
Israelites, called by us the moral law, and man's righteousness consisted
in conformity to this law or rule.
More particularly, there is a twofold conformity required of a man—a
conformity of the powers of his soul to the law, which you may call
habitual righteousness; and a conformity of all his actions to it, which is
actual righteousness. Now, God made man habitually righteous; man was
to make himself actually righteous—the former was the stock which God
put into his hand; the latter was the improvement he should have made
of it. The sum of what I have said is, that the righteousness wherein man
was created, was the conformity of all the faculties and powers of his soul
to the moral law. This is what we call Original Righteousness, which man
was originally endued with. We may take it up in these three things:
1. Man's UNDERSTANDING was a lamp of light. He had perfect
knowledge of the law, and of his duty accordingly—he was made after
God's image, and consequently could not lack knowledge, which is a part
thereof, Col. 3:10, "The new man is renewed in knowledge, after the
image of him who created him." And indeed, this was necessary to fit him
for universal obedience; seeing no obedience can be according to the law,
unless it proceed from a sense of the commandment of God requiring it.
It is true, Adam had not the law written upon tables of stone; but it was
written upon his mind, the knowledge thereof being created with him.
God impressed it upon his soul, and made him a law to himself, as the
remains of it among the heathens do testify, Romans 2:14, 15. And seeing
man was made to be the mouth of the creation, to glorify God in his
works, we have ground to believe he had naturally an exquisite

knowledge of the works of God. We have a proof of this in Adam's giving
names to the beasts of the field, and the fowls of the air, and those such as
express their nature. "Whatever Adam called every living creature, that
was the name thereof," Gen. 2:19. The dominion which God gave him
over the creatures, soberly to use and dispose of them according to his
will (still in subordination to the will of God), seems to require no less
than a knowledge of their natures. And, besides all this, his perfect
knowledge of the law proves his knowledge in the management of civil
affairs, which, in respect of the law of God, "a good man will guide with
discretion," Psalm 112:5.
2. His WILL in all things was agreeable with the will of God,
Eph. 4:24. There was no corruption in his will, no inclination to evil; for
that is sin, properly and truly so called—hence the apostle says, Rom 7:7,
"I had not known sin—but by the law; for I had not known lust, except the
law had said, You shall not covet." An inclination to evil is really a
fountain of sin, and therefore inconsistent with that rectitude and
uprightness which the text expressly says he was endued with at his
creation. The will of man, then, was directed and naturally inclined to
God and goodness, though mutable. It was disposed, by its original make,
to follow the Creator's will, as the shadow does the body; and was not left
in an equal balance to good and evil—for at that rate he had not been
upright, nor habitually conformed to the law; which in no moment can
allow the creature not to be inclined towards God as his chief end, any
more than it can allow man to be a God to himself. The law was
impressed upon Adam's soul—now this, according to the new covenant,
by which the image of God is repaired, consists in two things:
(1.) Putting the law in the mind, denoting the knowledge of it.
(2.) Writing it in the heart, denoting inclinations in the will, answerable
to the commands of the law, Heb. 8:10. So that as the will, when we
consider it as renewed by grace, is by that grace naturally inclined to the
same holiness, in all its parts, which the law requires; so was the will of
man, when we consider him as God made him at first, endued with
natural inclinations to everything commanded by the law. For if the
regenerate are partakers of the divine nature, as undoubtedly they are, for
so says the Scripture, 2 Pet. 1:4; and if this divine nature can import no

less than the inclination of the heart to holiness, then surely Adam's will
could not lack this inclination; for in him the image of God was perfect. It
is true it is said, Romans 2:14, 15, "That the Gentiles show the work of the
law written in their hearts;" but this denotes only their knowledge of that
law, such as it is—but the apostle to the Hebrews, in the text cited, takes
the word heart in another sense, distinguishing it plainly from the mind.
And it must be granted, that, when God promises, in the new covenant,
"to write his law in the hearts of his people," it imports quite another
thing than what heathens have—for though they have notions of it in
their minds—yet their hearts go another way; their will has a bent and
bias quite contrary to that law; therefore, the expression suitable to the
present purpose must needs import, besides these notions of the mind,
inclinations of the will going along therewith; which inclinations, though
mixed with corruption in the regenerate, were pure and unmixed in
upright Adam. In a word, as Adam knew his Master's pleasure in the
matter of duty, so his will inclined to what he knew.
3. His AFFECTIONS were orderly, pure, and holy; which is a
necessary part of that uprightness wherein man was created. The apostle
has a petition, 2 Thess. 3:5, "The Lord direct your hearts into the love of
God;" that is, "The Lord straighten your hearts," or make them lie
straight to the love of God—and our text tells us that man was made
straight. "The new man is created in righteousness and true holiness,"
Eph. 4:24. Now this holiness, as it is distinguished from righteousness,
may import the purity and good order of the affections. Thus the apostle,
1 Tim. 2:8, will have men to "pray, lifting up holy hands, without wrath
and doubting:" because, as troubled water is unfit to receive the image of
the sun, so the heart filled with impure and disorderly affections is not fit
for divine communications. Man's sensitive appetite was, indeed,
naturally carried out towards objects grateful to the senses. For seeing
man was made up of body and soul, and God made man to glorify and
enjoy him, and for this end to use his good creatures in subordination to
himself; it is plain that man was naturally inclined both to spiritual and
sensible good; yet to spiritual good, the chief good as his ultimate end.
Therefore, his sensitive motions and inclinations were subordinate to his
reason and will, which lay straight with the will of God, and were not in
the least contrary to the same. Otherwise he would have been made up of

contradictions; his soul being naturally inclined to God, as the chief end,
in the superior part thereof; and the same soul inclined to the creature, as
the chief end, in the inferior part thereof, as they call it—which is
impossible, for man, at the same instant, cannot have two chief ends.
Man's affections, then, in his primitive state, were pure from all
defilement, free from all disorder and distemper, because in all their
motions they were duly subjected to his clear reason, and his holy will. He
had also an executive power answerable to his will; a power to do the
good which he knew should be done, and which he was inclined to do,
even to fulfill the whole law of God. If it had not been so, God would have
required of him perfect obedience; for to say that "the Lord gathers where
he has not sown," is but the blasphemy of a wicked heart against so good
and bountiful a God, Matt. 25:24-26.
From what has been said, it may be gathered, that the original
righteousness explained was universal and natural—yet
mutable.
1. It was UNIVERSAL, both with respect to the subject of it—the whole
man; and the object of it—the whole law. Universal, I say, with respect to
the subject of it; for this righteousness was diffused through the whole
man—it was a blessed leaven, which leavened the whole lump. There was
not a wrong pin in the tabernacle of human nature, when God set it up,
however shattered it is now. Man was then holy in soul, body, and spirit;
while the soul remained untainted, its lodging was kept clean and
undefiled; the members of the body were consecrated vessels, and
instruments of righteousness. A combat between flesh and spirit, reason
and appetite, nay, the least inclination to sin, or lust of the flesh in the
inferior part of the soul, was utterly inconsistent with this uprightness in
which man was created; and has been invented to veil the corruption of
man's nature, and to obscure the grace of God in Jesus Christ; it looks
very much like the language of fallen Adam, laying his own sin at his
Maker's door, Gen. 3:12, "The woman whom you gave me—she gave me
of the tree, and I did eat."
But as this righteousness was universal in respect of the subject, because
it spread through the whole man; so also it was universal in respect of the

object, the holy law. There was nothing in the law but what was
agreeable to his reason and will, as God made him, though sin has now
set him at odds with it; his soul was shaped out in length and breadth to
the commandment, though exceeding broad; so that his original
righteousness was not only perfect in its parts—but in degrees.
2. As it was universal, so it was NATURAL to him, and not supernatural
in that state. Not that it was essential to man, as man, for then he could
not have lost it, without the loss of his very being; but it was natural to
him—he was created with it, and it was necessary to the perfection of
man, as he came out of the hand of God, necessary to his being placed in
a state of integrity. Yet,
3. It was MUTABLE; it was a righteousness that might be lost, as is
manifested by the doleful event. His will was not absolutely indifferent to
good and evil; God set it towards good only—yet he did not so fix and
confirm its inclinations, that it could not alter. No, it was moveable to
evil, and that only by man himself, God having given him a sufficient
power to stand in this integrity, if he had pleased. Let no man quarrel
with God's works in this; for if Adam had been unchangeably righteous,
he must have been so either by nature or by free gift—by nature he could
not be so, for that is proper to God, and incommunicable to any creature;
if by free gift, then no wrong was done to him in withholding what he
could not crave. Confirmation in a righteous state is a reward of grace,
given upon continuing righteous through the state of trial, and would
have been given to Adam if he had stood out the time appointed for
probation by the Creator; and accordingly is given to the saints upon
account of the merits of Christ, who "was obedient even unto death." And
herein believers have the advantage of Adam, that they can never totally
nor finally fall away from grace.
Thus was man made originally righteous, being created in "God's own
image," Gen. 1:27, which consists in the positive qualities of "knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness," Col. 3:10; Eph. 4:24. "All that God
made was very good," according to their several natures, Gen. 1:31. And
so was man morally good, being made after the image of him who is
"good and upright," Psalm 25:8. Without this, he could not have
answered the great end of his creation, which was, to know, love, and

serve his God, according to his will; nay, he could not be created
otherwise, for he must either be conformed to the law in his powers,
principles, and inclinations, or not—if he was, then he was righteous;
and, if not, he was a sinner, which is absurd and horrible to imagine.
II. I shall lay before you some of those things which
accompanied or flowed from the righteousness of man's
primitive state. Happiness is the result of holiness; and as this was a
holy, so it was a happy state.
1. Man was then a very glorious creature. We have reason to
suppose, that as Moses' face shone when he came down from the mount,
so man had a very lightsome and pleasant countenance, and beautiful
body, while as yet there was no darkness of sin in him at all. But seeing
God himself is "glorious in holiness," Exod. 15:11, surely that spiritual
loveliness which the Lord put upon man at his creation, made him a very
glorious creature. O, how did light shine in his holy life, to the glory of the
Creator! while every action was but the darting forth of a ray and beam of
that glorious unmixed light which God had set up in his soul, while that
lamp of love, lighted from heaven, continued burning in his heart, as in
the holy place; and the law of the Lord, put in his inward parts by the
finger of God, was kept by him there, as in the most holy place. There was
no impurity to be seen without; no squint look in the eyes, after any
unclean thing; the tongue spoke nothing but the language of heaven; and,
in a word, "the King's son was all glorious within," and his "clothing of
wrought gold."
2. He was the favorite of Heaven. He shone brightly in the image of
God; who cannot but love his own image, wherever it appears. While he
was alone in the world, he was not alone, for God was with him. His
communion and fellowship were with his Creator, and that immediately;
for as yet there was nothing to turn away the face of God from the work of
his own hands, seeing sin had not as yet entered, which alone could make
the breach.
By the favor of God he was advanced to be confederate with heaven in the
first covenant, called the covenant of works. God reduced the law, which
he gave in his creation, into the form of a covenant, whereof perfect

obedience was the condition—life was the thing promised, and death the
penalty. As for the condition, one great branch of the natural law was,
that man should believe whatever God revealed, and should do whatever
he commanded; accordingly, God making this covenant with man,
extended his duty to the "not eating of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil;" and the law thus extended, was the rule of man's covenant
obedience. How easy were these terms to him who had the natural law
written on his heart; and that inclining him to obey this positive law
revealed to him, it seems, by an audible voice, Gen. 2:16, 17, the matter
whereof was so very easy! And indeed, it was highly reasonable that the
rule and matter of his covenant obedience should be thus extended, that
which was added being a thing in itself indifferent, where his obedience
was to turn upon the precise point of the will of God, the plainest
evidence of true obedience; and it being in an external thing, wherein his
obedience or disobedience would be most clear and conspicuous.
Now, upon this condition, God promised him life, the continuance of
natural life, in the union of soul and body, and of spiritual life, in the
favor of his Creator—he promised him also eternal life in heaven, to have
been entered into when he should have passed the time of his trial upon
earth, and the Lord should see fit to transport him into the upper
paradise. This promise of life was included in the threatening of death,
mentioned, Gen. 2:17. For while God says, "In the day you eat thereof,
you shall surely die;" it is, in effect, "If you do not eat of it, you shall
surely live." And this was sacramentally confirmed by another tree in the
garden, called therefore, "The Tree of Life," which he was debarred from,
when he had sinned; Gen. 3:22, 23, "Lest he put forth his hand, and take
also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever; therefore the Lord God
sent him forth from the garden of Eden."
Yet it is not to be thought that man's life and death did hang only on this
matter of the forbidden fruit—but on the whole law; for so says the
apostle, Gal. 3:10, "It is written, Cursed is everyone that continues not in
all things which are written in the book of the law to do them." That of the
forbidden fruit was a revealed part of Adam's religion, and so was
necessary expressly to be laid before him; but as to the natural law, he
naturally knew death to be the wages of disobedience, for the very

heathens were not ignorant of this, "knowing the judgment of God, that
they which commit such things are worthy of death," Romans 1:32.
Moreover, the promise included in the threatening, secured Adam's life,
according to the covenant, as long as he obeyed the natural law, with the
addition of that positive command; so that he needed nothing to be
expressed to him in the covenant but what concerned the eating of the
forbidden fruit.
That eternal life in heaven was promised in this covenant, is plain from
this, that the threatening was of eternal death in hell, to which, when man
had made himself liable, Christ was promised, by his death to purchase
eternal life. And Christ himself expounds the promise of the covenant of
works, of eternal life, while he proposes the condition of that covenant to
a proud young man, who, though he had not Adam's stock—yet would
needs enter into life in the way of working, as Adam was to have done
under this covenant, Matt. 19:17, "If you will enter into life" (namely,
eternal life, by doing, ver. 16), "keep the commandments."
The penalty was death, Gen. 2:17, "In the day that you eat thereof, you
shall surely die." The death threatened was such as the life promised was,
and that most justly; namely, temporal, spiritual, and eternal death. The
event is a commentary on this; for that very day he did eat thereof he was
a dead man in law—but the execution was stopped because of his
posterity, then in his loins, and another covenant was prepared—
however, that day his body got its death-wound, and became mortal.
Death also seized his soul; he lost his original righteousness, and the
favor of God; witness the pangs of conscience which made him hide
himself from God. And he became liable to eternal death, which would
have actually followed of course, if the Mediator had not been provided,
who found him bound with the cords of death, as a malefactor ready to be
led to execution. Thus you have a short description of the covenant into
which the Lord brought man in the state of innocence.
And does it seem a small thing unto you, that earth was thus confederate
with heaven? This could have been done to none but him whom the King
of Heaven delighted to honor. It was an act of grace, worthy of the
gracious God whose favorite he was; for there was grace and free favor in
the first covenant, though the exceeding riches of grace, as the apostle

calls it, Eph. 2:7, were reserved for the second. It was certainly an act of
grace, favor, and admirable condescension in God, to enter into a
covenant, and such a covenant, with his own creature. Man was not at his
own—but at God's disposal, nor had he anything to work with but what
he had received from God. There was no proportion between the work
and the promised reward. Before that covenant, man was bound to
perfect obedience, in virtue of his natural dependence on God; and death
was naturally the wages of sin, which the justice of God could and would
have required, though there had never been any covenant between God
and man—but God was free; man could never have required eternal life
as the reward of his work, if there had not been such a covenant. God was
free to have disposed of his creatures as he saw fit—if he had stood in his
integrity to the end of time, and there had been no covenant promising
eternal life to him upon his obedience, God might have withdrawn his
supporting hand at last and so have made him creep back into nothing,
whence almighty power had drawn him forth. And, what wrong could
have been in this, for God would have only taken back what he freely
gave? But now, the covenant being made, God becomes debtor to his own
faithfulness—if man will work, he may crave the reward on the ground of
the covenant. Well might the angels, then, upon his being raised to this
dignity, have given him this salutation—"Hail! you who is highly favored,
the Lord is with you."
3. God made him lord of the world, prince of the inferior
creatures, universal Lord and emperor of the whole earth. His
creator gave him dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
the air, over all the earth, yes, and every living thing that moves on the
earth; he "put all things under his feet," Psalm 8:6-8. He gave him a
power, soberly to use and dispose of the creatures in the earth, sea, and
air. Thus man was God's deputy governor in the lower world, and this his
dominion was an image of God's sovereignty. This was common to the
man and to the woman—but the man had one thing peculiar to him,
namely, that he had dominion over the woman also, 1 Cor. 11:7. Behold
how the creatures came unto him, to own their subjection, and to do him
homage as their Lord, and quietly stood before him until he put names on
them as his own, Gen. 2:19. Man's face struck an awe upon them; the
stoutest creatures stood astonished, tamely and quietly owning him as

their Lord and ruler. Thus was man "crowned with glory and honor,"
Psalm 8:5. The Lord dealt most liberally and bountifully with him, "put
all things under his feet;" only he kept one thing, one tree in the garden,
out of his hands, even the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
But you may say, and did he grudge him this? I answer, Nay; but when he
had made him thus holy and happy, he graciously gave him this
restriction, which was in its own nature a prop and stay to keep him from
falling. And this I say upon these three grounds:
(1.) As it was most proper for the honor of God, who had made man Lord
of the lower world, to assert his sovereign dominion over all, by some
particular visible sign; so it was most proper for man's safety. Man being
set down in a beautiful paradise, it was an act of infinite wisdom, and of
grace too, to keep him from one single tree, as a visible testimony that he
must hold all of his Creator, as his great landlord; that so, while he saw
himself Lord of the creatures, he might not forget that he was still God's
subject.
(2.) This was a memorial of his mutable state given to him from heaven,
to be laid up by him for his greater caution. For man was created with a
free will to good, which the tree of life was an evidence of—but his will
was also free to evil, and the forbidden tree was to him a memorial
thereof. It was, in a manner, a continual watchword to him against evil, a
beacon set up before him, to bid him beware of dashing himself to pieces
on the rock of sin.
(3.) God made man upright, directed towards God as his chief end. He set
him, like Moses, on the top of the hill, holding up his hands to heaven—
and as Aaron and Hur held up Moses' hands, Exodus 17:10-12, so God
gave man an erect figure of body, and forbade him the eating of this tree
to keep him in that posture of uprightness wherein he was created. God
made the beasts looking down towards the earth, to show that their
satisfaction might be brought from thence; and accordingly it does afford
them what is suited to their appetite—but the erect figure of man's body,
which looks upward, showed him that his happiness lay above him, in
God; and that he was to expect it from heaven, and not from earth. Now
this fair tree, of which he was forbidden to eat, taught him the same

lesson; that his happiness lay not in enjoyment of the creatures, for there
was a lack even in paradise—so that the forbidden tree was, in effect, the
hand of all the creatures, pointing man away from themselves to God for
happiness. It was a sign of emptiness hung before the door of the
creation, with the inscription, "This is not your rest."
4. As he had a perfect tranquility within his own bosom, so he
had a perfect calm without. His heart had nothing to reproach him
with; conscience then had nothing to do—but to direct, approve, and feast
him—and without, there was nothing to annoy him. The happy pair lived
in perfect amity; and though their knowledge was vast, true, and clear—
they knew no shame. Though they were naked, there were no blushes in
their faces; for sin, the seed of shame, was not yet sown, Gen. 2:25. And
their beautiful bodies were not capable of injuries from the air—so they
had no need of clothes, which are originally the badges of our shame.
They were liable to no diseases nor pains—and, though they were not to
live idle—yet toil, weariness, and sweat of the brows, were not known in
this state.
5. Man had a life of pure delight, and unalloyed pleasure, in
this state. Rivers of pure pleasure ran through it. The earth, with the
product thereof, was now in its glory; nothing had yet come in to mar the
beauty of the creatures. God placed him, not in a common place of the
earth—but in Eden, a place eminent for pleasantness, as the name of it
imports; nay, not only in Eden—but in the garden of Eden—the most
pleasant spot of that pleasant place; a garden planted by God himself, to
be the mansion-house of this his favorite. When God made the other
living creatures, he said, Let the water bring forth the moving creature,"
Gen. 1:29, and, Let the earth bring forth the living creature," verse 24. But
when man was to be made, he said; "Let us make man," verse 18. So,
when the rest of the earth was to be furnished with herbs and trees, God
said, "Let the earth bring forth grass, and the fruit-tree," etc., verse 11.
But of paradise it is said, "God planted it," Gen. 2:8, which cannot but
denote a singular excellence in that garden, beyond all other parts of the
then beautiful earth.
He was provided with everything necessary and delightful; for there was
"every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food," verse 9. He

knew not those delights which luxury has invented for the gratification of
lust—but his delights were such as came out of the hand of God; without
passing through sinful hands, which always leave marks of impurity on
what they touch. So his delights were pure—his pleasures refined.
Yet may I show you a more excellent way—wisdom had entered into his
heart; surely, then, knowledge was pleasant unto his soul. What delight
do some find in their discoveries of the works of nature, by those scraps
of knowledge they have gathered! but how much more exquisite pleasure
had Adam, while his piercing eyes read the book of God's works, which
God laid before him, to the end he might glorify him in the same; and
therefore had certainly fitted him for the work! But, above all, his
knowledge of God, and that as his God, and the communion which he had
with him, could not but afford him the most refined and exquisite
pleasure in the innermost recesses of his heart. Great is that delight
which the saints find in those views of the glory of God, which their souls
are sometimes let into, while they are compassed about with many
infirmities—and much may well be allowed to sinless Adam; who no
doubt had a peculiar relish of those pleasures.
6. He was immortal. He would never have died—if he had not sinned;
it was in case of sin that death was threatened, Gen. 2:17, which shows it
to be the consequence of sin, and not of the sinless human nature. The
perfect constitution of his body, which came out of God's hand very good,
and the righteousness and holiness of his soul, removed all inward causes
of death; nothing being prepared for the grave's devouring mouth—but
the vile body, Phil. 3:21, and those who have sinned, Job 24:19. And
God's special care of his innocent creature, secured him against outward
violence. The apostle's testimony is express, Romans 5:12, "By one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin." Behold the door by which
death came in! Satan wrought with his lies until he got it opened, and so
death entered; therefore, is he said to have been "a murderer from the
beginning," John 8:44.
Thus have I shown you the holiness and happiness of men in this state. If
any should say, What is all this to us, who never tasted of that holy and
happy state? they must know, it nearly concerns us, as Adam was the root
of all mankind, our common head and representative; who received from

God our inheritance and stock, to keep it for himself and his children, and
to convey it to them. The Lord put all mankind's stock, as it were, in one
ship; and, as we ourselves would have done, he made our common father
the pilot. He put a blessing in the root, to have been, if rightly managed
diffused into all the branches. According to our text, making Adam
upright, he made man upright; and all mankind had that uprightness in
him—for, "if the root be holy, so are the branches." But more of this
afterwards. Had Adam stood, none would have quarreled with the
representation.