PURITAN GOLD -- Institutes of the Christian Religion by John Calvin: Full Audiobook, Book I Chapter 1 of 18
The Connection Between The Knowledge Of God And The Knowledge Of Ourselves


Chapter I. The Connection Between The Knowledge Of God And The Knowledge
Of Ourselves.


True and substantial wisdom principally consists of two parts, the
knowledge of God, and the knowledge of ourselves. But, while these two
branches of knowledge are so intimately connected, which of them precedes
and produces the other, is not easy to discover. For, in the first place,
no man can take a survey of himself but he must immediately turn to the
contemplation of God, in whom he “lives and moves;”(61) since it is
evident that the talents which we possess are not from ourselves, and that
our very existence is nothing but a subsistence in God alone. These
bounties, distilling to us by drops from heaven, form, as it were, so many
streams conducting us to the fountain‐head. Our poverty conduces to a
clearer display of the infinite fulness of God. Especially, the miserable
ruin, into which we have been plunged by the defection of the first man,
compels us to raise our eyes towards heaven, not only as hungry and
famished, to seek thence a supply for our wants, but, aroused with fear,
to learn humility. For, since man is subject to a world of miseries, and
has been spoiled of his divine array, this melancholy exposure discovers
an immense mass of deformity: every one, therefore, must be so impressed
with a consciousness of his own infelicity, as to arrive at some knowledge
of God. Thus a sense of our ignorance, vanity, poverty, infirmity,
depravity, and corruption, leads us to perceive and acknowledge that in
the Lord alone are to be found true wisdom, solid strength, perfect
goodness, and unspotted righteousness; and so, by our imperfections, we
are excited to a consideration of the perfections of God. Nor can we
really aspire toward him, till we have begun to be displeased with
ourselves. For who would not gladly rest satisfied with himself? where is
the man not actually absorbed in self‐complacency, while he remains
unacquainted with his true situation, or content with his own endowments,
and ignorant or forgetful of his own misery? The knowledge of ourselves,
therefore, is not only an incitement to seek after God, but likewise a
considerable assistance towards finding him.

II. On the other hand, it is plain that no man can arrive at the true
knowledge of himself, without having first contemplated the divine
character, and then descended to the consideration of his own. For, such
is the native pride of us all, we invariably esteem ourselves righteous,
innocent, wise, and holy, till we are convinced, by clear proofs, of our
unrighteousness, turpitude, folly, and impurity. But we are never thus
convinced, while we confine our attention to ourselves, and regard not the
Lord, who is the only standard by which this judgment ought to be formed.
Because, from our natural proneness to hypocrisy, any vain appearance of
righteousness abundantly contents us instead of the reality; and, every
thing within and around us being exceedingly defiled, we are delighted
with what is least so, as extremely pure, while we confine our reflections
within the limits of human corruption. So the eye, accustomed to see
nothing but black, judges that to be very white, which is but whitish, or
perhaps brown. Indeed, the senses of our bodies may assist us in
discovering how grossly we err in estimating the powers of the soul. For
if at noon‐day we look either on the ground, or at any surrounding
objects, we conclude our vision to be very strong and piercing; but when
we raise our eyes and steadily look at the sun, they are at once dazzled
and confounded with such a blaze of brightness, and we are constrained to
confess, that our sight, so piercing in viewing terrestrial things, when
directed to the sun, is dimness itself. Thus also it happens in the
consideration of our spiritual endowments. For as long as our views are
bounded by the earth, perfectly content with our own righteousness,
wisdom, and strength, we fondly flatter ourselves, and fancy we are little
less than demigods. But, if we once elevate our thoughts to God, and
consider his nature, and the consummate perfection of his righteousness,
wisdom, and strength, to which we ought to be conformed,—what before
charmed us in ourselves under the false pretext of righteousness, will
soon be loathed as the greatest iniquity; what strangely deceived us under
the title of wisdom, will be despised as extreme folly; and what wore the
appearance of strength, will be proved to be most wretched impotence. So
very remote from the divine purity is what seems in us the highest
perfection.

III. Hence that horror and amazement with which the Scripture always
represents the saints to have been impressed and disturbed, on every
discovery of the presence of God. For when we see those, who before his
appearance stood secure and firm, so astonished and affrighted at the
manifestation of his glory, as to faint and almost expire through fear,—we
must infer that man is never sufficiently affected with a knowledge of his
own meanness, till he has compared himself with the Divine Majesty. Of
this consternation we have frequent examples in the Judges and Prophets;
so that it was a common expression among the Lord’s people—“We shall die,
because we have seen God.”(62) Therefore the history of Job, to humble men
with a consciousness of their pollution, impotence, and folly, derives its
principal argument from a description of the Divine purity, power, and
wisdom. And not without reason. For we see how Abraham, the nearer he
approached to behold the glory of the Lord, the more fully acknowledged
himself to be but “dust and ashes;”(63) and how Elias(64) could not bear
his approach without covering his face, his appearance is so formidable.
And what can man do, all vile and corrupt, when fear constrains even the
cherubim themselves to veil their faces? This is what the prophet Isaiah
speaks of—“the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the
Lord of hosts shall reign:”(65) that is, when he shall make a fuller and
nearer exhibition of his splendour, it shall eclipse the splendour of the
brightest object besides. But, though the knowledge of God and the
knowledge of ourselves be intimately connected, the proper order of
instruction requires us first to treat of the former, and then to proceed
to the discussion of the latter.
