PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 14
The Smoking Flax

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 3. The Smoking Flax.

3. The Smoking Flax
In pursuing his calling, Christ will not quench the smoking flax, or wick,
but will blow it up till it flames. In smoking flax there is but a little light,
and that weak, as being unable to flame, and that little mixed with smoke.
The observations from this are that, in God's children, especially in their
first conversion, there is but a little measure of grace, and that little
mixed with much corruption, which, as smoke, is offensive; but that
Christ will not quench this smoking flax.
GRACE IS LITTLE AT FIRST
There are several ages in Christians, some babes, some young men. Faith
may be as `a grain of mustard seed' (Matt. 17:20). Nothing so little as
grace at first, and nothing more glorious afterward. Things of greatest
perfection are longest in coming to their growth. Man, the most perfect
creature, comes to perfection by little and little; worthless things, as
mushrooms and the like, like Jonah's gourd, soon spring up, and soon
vanish. A new creature is the most excellent creature in all the world,
therefore it grows up by degrees. We see in nature that a mighty oak rises
from an acorn. It is with a Christian as it was with Christ, who sprang out
of the dead stock of Jesse, out of David's family (Isa. 53:2), when it was at
the lowest, but he grew up higher than the heavens. It is not with the
trees of righteousness as it was with the trees of paradise, which were
created all perfect at the first. The seeds of all the creatures in the present
goodly frame of the world were hid in the chaos, in that confused mass at
the first, out of which God commanded all creatures to arise. In the small
seeds of plants lie hidden both bulk and branches, bud and fruit. In a few
principles lie hidden all comfortable conclusions of holy truth. All these
glorious fireworks of zeal and holiness in the saints had their beginning
from a few sparks.

Let us not therefore be discouraged at the small beginnings of grace, but
look on ourselves as elected to be `holy and without blame' (Eph. 1:4).
Let us look on our imperfect beginning only to enforce further striving to
perfection, and to keep us in a low opinion of ourselves. Otherwise, in
case of discouragement, we must consider ourselves as Christ does, who
looks on us as those he intends to fit for himself. Christ values us by what
we shall be, and by what we are elected unto. We call a little plant a tree,
because it is growing up to be so. `Who has despised the day of small
things?' (Zech. 4:10). Christ would not have us despise little things.
The glorious angels disdain not attendance on little ones - little in their
own eyes, and little in the eyes of the world. Grace, though little in
quantity, yet is much in vigor and worth. It is Christ that raises the worth
of little and mean places and persons. Bethlehem was the least (Mic. 5:2;
Matt. 2:6), and yet not the least; the least in itself, not the least in respect
that Christ was born there. The second temple (Hag. 2:9) came short of
the outward magnificence of the former; yet it was more glorious than the
first because Christ came into it. The Lord of the temple came into his
own temple. The pupil of the eye is very little, yet sees a great part of the
heaven at once. A pearl, though little, yet is of much esteem. Nothing in
the world is of so good use as the least grain of grace.
GRACE IS MINGLED WITH CORRUPTION
But grace is not only little, but mingled with corruption; therefore a
Christian is said to be smoking flax. So we see that grace does not do
away with corruption all at once, but some is left for believers to fight
with. The purest actions of the purest men need Christ to perfume them;
and this is his office. When we pray, we need to pray again for Christ to
pardon the defects of our prayers. Consider some instances of this
smoking flax:
Moses at the Red Sea, being in a great perplexity, and knowing not what
to say, or which way to turn, groaned to God. No doubt this was a great
conflict in him. In great distresses we know not what to pray, but the
Spirit makes request with sighs that cannot be expressed (Rom. 8:26).
Broken hearts can yield but broken prayers.

When David was before the king of Gath (1 Sam. 21:13) and disfigured
himself in an uncomely manner, in that smoke there was some fire also.
You may see what an excellent psalm he makes upon that occasion, Psalm
34, in which, on the basis of experience, he says, `The LORD is nigh unto
them that are of a broken heart' (Psa. 34:18). `I said in my haste, I am cut
off from before thine eyes.' There is smoke. `Nevertheless thou heardest
the voice of my supplications' (Psa. 31:22). There is fire. `Lord, save us:
we perish' (Matt. 8:25), cry the disciples. Here is smoke of infidelity, yet
so much light of faith as stirred them up to pray to Christ. `Lord, I
believe.' There is light.
‘Help thou mine unbelief.' There is smoke (Mark 9:24). Jonah cries, `I
am cast out of thy sight.' There is smoke. `Yet I will look again toward thy
holy temple.' There is light (Jon. 2:4).
`O wretched man that I am!', says Paul, with a sense of his corruption.
Yet he breaks out into thanks to God through Jesus Christ our Lord
(Rom. 7:24).
`I sleep,' says the church in the Song of Solomon, `but my heart waketh'
(Song of Sol. 5:2). In the seven churches, which for their light are called
`seven golden candlesticks' (Rev. 2 and 3), most of them had much
smoke with their light.
The reason for this mixture is that we carry about us a double principle,
grace and nature. The end of it is especially to preserve us from those two
dangerous rocks which our natures are prone to dash upon, security and
pride, and to force us to pitch our rest on justification, not sanctification,
which, besides imperfection, has some stains. Our spiritual fire is like our
ordinary fire here below, that is, mixed. Fire is most pure in its own
element above; so shall all our graces be when we are where we would be,
in heaven, which is our proper element.
From this mixture arises the fact that the people of God have so different
judgments of themselves, looking sometimes at the work of grace,
sometimes at the remainder of corruption, and when they look upon that,
then they think they have no grace. Though they love Christ in his
ordinances and children, yet they dare not claim so near acquaintance as

to be his. Even as a candle in the socket sometimes shows its light, and
sometimes the show of light is lost; so sometimes they are well persuaded
of themselves, sometimes at a loss.