PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 10
Keeping the Heart in Prosperity and Adversity

---

Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 3. Keeping the Heart in Prosperity and Adversity.

first, a little care and watchfulness may prevent much mischief now,
which the careless heart not heeding, is brought within the power of
temptation; as the Syrians were brought blindfold into the midst of
Samaria, before they knew where they were.
By this time, reader, I hope thou art fully satisfied how consequential
and necessary a work the keeping of the heart is, it being a duty that
wraps up so many dear interests of the soul in it.
3. Next, according to the method propounded, I proceed to point out
those special seasons in the life of a Christian, which require and call
for our utmost diligence in keeping the heart: for though (as we
observed before) the duty binds ad semper, and there is no time or
condition of life in which we may be excused from this work; yet
there are some signal seasons, critical hours, requiring more than a
common vigilance over the heart.
And the first,

Seasons
Keeping the Heart in the Time of
Prosperity
1. Season. 'Is the time of prosperity, when providence smiles upon us,
and dandles us upon its knee. Now, Christian, keep thy heart with all
diligence; for now it will be exceeding apt to grow secure, proud, and
earthly, Rara virtus est humilitas honorata, (saith Bernard) to see a
man humble under prosperity, is one of the greatest rarities in the
world. Even a good Hezekiah could not hide a vain-glorious temper
under his temptation, and hence that caution to Israel, Deut. 6:10, 11,
12. "And it shall be when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee
into the land which he sware to thy fathers, to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, to give thee great and goodly cities which thou buildest not,

and houses full of all good things which thou filledst not, &c. Then
beware lest thou forget the Lord:" and indeed so it fell out, "for
Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked," Deut. 32:15.'
Now then, the first case will be this, viz.
Case 1. How a Christian may keep his heart from pride and carnal
security, under the smiles of providence, and constancy of creaturecomforts.
There are seven choice helps to secure the heart from the dangerous
snares of prosperity; the first is this,
1. To consider the dangerous ensnaring temptations attending a
pleasant and prosperous condition; few, yea, very few of those that
live in the pleasures and prosperity of this world, escape everlasting
perdition, Mat. 19:24. "It is easier (saith Christ) for a camel to pass
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven;" and 1 Cor. 1:26. "Not many mighty, not many
noble are called." It might justly make us tremble when the scripture
tells us in general, that few shall be saved; much more when it tells
us, that of that rank and sort of which we are speaking, but few shall
be saved. When Joshua called all the tribes of Israel to lot upon them
for the discovery of Achan, doubtless Achan feared; when the tribe of
Judah was taken, his fear increased; but when the family of the
Zarhites was taken, it was time then to tremble. So when the
scripture comes so near as to tell us that of such a sort of men very
few shall escape, it is time to look about; Miror si potest servari
aliquis rectorum, saith Chrysostom; I should wonder if any of the
rulers be saved. O how many have been coached to hell in the
chariots of earthly pleasures, while others have been whipped to
heaven by the rod of affliction! how few, like the daughter of Tyre,
come to Christ with a gift! how few among the rich in treat his
favour!

2. It may keep us yet more humble and watchful in prosperity, if we
consider that among Christians many have been much the worse for
it. How good had it been for some of them, if they had never known
prosperity! When they were in a low condition, how humble,
spiritual, and heavenly, were they! but when advanced, what an
apparent alteration hath been upon their spirits? It was so with
Israel, when they were in a low condition in the wilderness; then
Israel was holiness to the Lord, Jer. 2:23 but when they came into
Canaan, and were fed in a fat pasture, then, "we are lords, we will
come no more unto thee," ver. 31. Outward gains are ordinarily
attended with inward losses; as in a low condition their civil
employments were wont to have a tang and savour of their duties, so
in an exalted condition their duties commonly have a tang of the
world. He indeed is rich in grace, whose graces are not hindered by
his riches; there are but few Jehoshaphats in the world, of whom it is
said, 2 Chron 17:5, 6. "He had silver and gold in abundance, and his
heart was lifted up in the way of God's commands:" Will not this
keep thy heart humble in prosperity, to think how dear many godly
men have paid for their riches, that through them they have lost that
which all the world cannot purchase? Then, in the next place,
3. Keep down thy vain heart by this consideration, that God values
no man a jot the more for these things. God values no man by
outward excellencies, but by inward graces: they are the internal
ornaments of the Spirit, which are of great price in God's eyes, 1 Pet.
3:4. He despises all worldly glory, and accepts no man's person; "but
in every nation, he that feareth God, and worketh righteousness, is
accepted of him," Acts 10:35. Indeed, if the judgment of God went by
the same rule that man's doth, we might value ourselves by these
things, and stand upon them: But as one said (when dying) I shall
not appear before God as a doctor, but as a man; tantus quisque est,
quantus est apud Deum. So much every man is, and no more, as he is
in the judgment of God. Doth thy heart yet swell? And will neither of
the former considerations keep it humble?

4. Then, fourthly, Consider, how bitterly many persons have
bewailed their folly when they came to die, that ever they set their
hearts upon these things, and heartily wished that they had never
known them. What a sad story was that of Pius Quintus, who dying
cried out despairingly, when I was in a low condition, I had some
hopes of salvation; but when I was advanced to be cardinal, I greatly
doubted it; but since I came to the Popedom, I have no hope at all.
Mr. Spencer also tells us a real, but sad story, of a rich oppressor,
who had scraped up a great estate for his only son; when he came to
die, he called his son to him, and said, son; do you indeed love me?
The son answered, that nature, besides his paternal indulgence,
obliged him to that. Then said the father, express it by this; hold thy
finger in the candle as long as I am saying a pater noster: The son
attempted, but could not endure it. Upon that the father broke out
into these expressions, thou canst not suffer the burning of thy finger
for me, but to get this wealth, I have hazarded my soul for thee, and
must burn body and soul in hell for thy sake: Thy pain would have
been but for a moment, but mine will be unquenchable fire.
5. The heart may be kept humble, by considering of what a clogging
nature earthly things are to a sold heartily engaged in the way to
heaven; they shut out much of heaven from us at present, though
they may not shut us out of heaven at last. If thou consider thyself
under the notion of a stranger in this world, travelling for heaven,
and seeking a better country, thou hast then as much reason to be
taken, and delighted with these things, as a weary horse hath with a
heavy clog-bag: There was a serious truth in that atheistical scoff of
Julian when he took away the Christians' estates, and told them it
was to make them fitter for the kingdom of heaven.
6. Is thy spirit, for all this, flatulent and lofty? Then urge upon it the
consideration of that awful day of reckoning, wherein, according to
our receipts of mercies, shall be our accompts for them: And
methinks this should awe and humble the vainest heart that ever was
in the breast of a saint. Know for certain, that the Lord records all the
mercies that ever he gave thee, from the beginning to the end of thy

life. Mic. 6:5. "Remember, O my people, from Shittim unto Gilgal,"
&c. yea, they are exactly numbered, and recorded in order to an
account; and thy account will be suitable. Luke 12:48. "To
whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required." You are
but stewards, and your Lord will come to take an account of you; and
what a great account have you to make, who have much of this world
in your hand? What swift witnesses will your mercies be against you,
if this be the best fruits of them?
7. It is a very humbling consideration, that the mercies of God should
work otherwise upon my spirit, than they use to do upon the spirits
of others to whom they come as sanctified mercies from the love of
God. Ah Lord what a sad consideration is this! enough to lay me in
the dust; when I consider,
(1.) That their mercies have greatly humbled them; the higher God
has raised them, the lower they have laid themselves before God.
Thus did Jacob, when God had given him much substance. Gen.
22:10. "And Jacob said, I am not worthy of the least of all thy
mercies, and of all the truth which thou hast shewed unto thy
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am
become two bands." And thus it was with holy David, 2 Sam. 7:18.
When God had confirmed the promise to him, to build him a house,
and not reject him as he did Saul, he goes in before the Lord, and
saith, "Who am I? and what is my father's house, that thou hast
brought me hitherto?" And so indeed God required, Deut. 26:5 when
Israel was to bring to God the first-fruits of Canaan, they were to say,
"A Syrian ready to perish was my father," &c. Do others raise God the
higher for the raising them? And the more God raises me, the more
shall I abuse him, and exalt myself? O what a sad thing is this!
(2.) Others have freely ascribed the glory of all their enjoyments to
God, and magnified not themselves, but him, for their mercies: So
David, 2 Sam. 7:26. "Let thy name be magnified, and the house of thy
servant be established." He doth not fly upon the mercy, and suck
out the sweetness of it, looking no farther than his own comfort; no,

he cares for no mercy except God be magnified in it. So Psalm 18:2
when God had delivered him from all his enemies, "The Lord (saith
he) is my strength, and my rock, he is become my salvation." They
did not put the crown upon their own heads, as I do.
(3.) The mercies of God have been melting mercies unto others,
melting their souls in love to the God of their mercies. So Hannah, 1
Sam. 2:1 when she received the mercy of a son, "My soul (saith she)
rejoiceth in the Lord;" not in the mercy, but in the God of the mercy.
And so Mary, Luke 1:46. "My soul doth magnify the Lord, my spirit
rejoiceth in God my Saviour." The word signifies to make more room
for God; their hearts were not contracted, but the more enlarged to
God.
(4.) The mercies of God have been mighty restraints to keep others
from sin. So Ezra 9:13. "Seeing thou, our God, hast given us such a
deliverance as this, should we again break thy commandments?"
Ingenuous souls have felt the force of the obligations of love and
mercy upon them.
(5.) To conclude, The mercies of God to others have been as oil to the
wheels of their obedience, and made them fitter for services, 2
Chron. 17:5. Now if mercies work contrarily upon my heart, what
cause have I to be afraid that they come not to me in love? I tell you,
this is enough to damp the spirit of any saint, to see what sweet
effects they have had on others, and what sad effects on him.

Keeping the Heart in the Time of
Adversity
2. Season, 'The second special season in the life of a christian
requiring more than a common diligence to keep his heart, is the
time of adversity; When providence frowns upon you, and blasts
your outward comforts, then look to your hearts, keep them with all
diligence from repining against God, or fainting under his hand; for

troubles though sanctified, are troubles still; even sweet-brier, and
holy thistles, have their prickles. Jonah was a good man, and yet how
pettish was his heart under affliction? Job was the mirror of
patience, yet how was his heart discomposed by trouble? You will
find it as hard to get a composed spirit under great afflictions, as it is
to fix quick-silver. O the hurries and tumults which they occasion
even in the best hearts! Well, then, the second case will be this:'
Case 2. How a Christian under great afflictions may keep his heart
from repining, or desponding under the hand of God? Now there are
nine special helps. I shall here offer, to keep thy heart in this
condition; and the first shall be this, to work upon your hearts this
great truth,
Helps
1. That by these cross providences, God is faithfully pursuing the
great design of electing love upon the souls of his people, and orders
all these afflictions as means sanctified to that end.
Afflictions fall not out by casualty, but by counsel, Job 5:6. Eph. 1:11
by this counsel of God they are ordained as means of much spiritual
good to saints, Isa. 27:9. "By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged," &c. Heb. 12:10. "But he for our profit," &c. Rom. 8:28. "All
things work together for good." They are God's workmen upon our
hearts, to pull down the pride and carnal security of them; and being
so, their nature is changed; they are turned into blessings and
benefits, Psalm. 119:71. "It is good for me that I have been afflicted."
And sure, then, thou hast no reason to quarrel with, but rather to
admire that God should concern himself so much in thy good, to use
any means for the accomplishing of it. Philip. 3:11. "Paul could bless
God, if by any means he might attain the resurrection of the dead.
My brethren, (saith James) count it all joy when you fall into divers
temptations," Jam. 1:2, 3. My father is about a design of love upon
my soul, and do I well to be angry with him? All that he doth is in
pursuance of, and in reference to some eternal, glorious ends upon

my soul. O it is my ignorance of God's design, that makes me quarrel
with him! he saith to thee in this case, as to Peter, "What I do thou
knowest not now, but hereafter thou shalt know it."
Help 2. Though God hath reserved to himself a liberty of afflicting
his people, yet he hath tied up his own hands by promise never to
take away his loving-kindness from them. Can I look that scripture in
the face with a repining, discontented spirit, 2 Sam. 7:14. "I shall be
his father, and he will be my son; if he commit iniquity, I will chasten
him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the children of men:
Nevertheless, my mercy shall not depart away from him." O my
heart! my haughty heart! dost thou well to be discontented, when
God hath given thee the whole tree, with all the clusters of comfort
growing on it, because he suffers the wind to blow down a few leaves;
Christians have two sorts of goods, the goods of the throne, and the
goods of the footstool; moveables, and immoveables: If God have
secured these, never let my heart be troubled at the loss of those;
indeed, if he had cut off his love, or discovenanted my soul, I had
reason to be cast down; but this he hath not, nor can he do it.
Help 3. It is of marvellous efficacy to keep the heart from sinking
under affliction, to call to mind, that thine own father hath the
ordering of them: Not a creature moves hand or tongue against thee,
but by his permission. Suppose the cup be a bitter cup, yet it is the
cup which thy father hath given thee to drink; and canst thou suspect
poison to be in that cup which he delivers thee? Foolish man, put
home the case to thine own heart, consult with thine own bowels;
canst thou find in thy heart to give thy child that which would hurt,
or undo him? No, thou wouldest as soon hurt thyself as him; "If thou
then being evil knowest how to give good, gifts to thy children," how
much more doth God? Matth. 7:11. The very consideration of his
nature, a God of love, pity, and tender mercies, or of his relation to
thee as a Father, Husband, Friend, might be security enough, if he
had not spoken a word, to quiet thee in this case; and yet you have
his word too, Jer. 25:6. I will do you no hurt. You lie too near his
heart to hurt you; nothing grieves him more than your groundless

and unworthy suspicions of his designs do; would it not grieve a
faithful, tender-hearted physician when he hath studied the case of
his patient, prepared the most excellent receipts to save his life, to
hear him cry out, O he hath undone me! he hath poisoned me;
because it gripes and pains him in the operation? O when will you be
ingenious!
Help 4. God respects you as much in a low, as in a high condition;
and therefore it need not so much trouble you to be made low: nay,
to speak home, he manifests, more of his love, grace, and tenderness,
in the time of affliction, than prosperity. As God did not at first
choose you because you were high, so he will not forsake you because
you are low: Men may look shy upon you, and alter their respects, as
your condition is altered. When providence hath blasted your estates,
your summer friends may grow strange, as fearing you may be
troublesome to them; but will God do so? No, no! "I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee," Heb. 13:5. Indeed if adversity and poverty
could bar you from access to God, it were a sad condition; but you
may go to God as freely as ever. "My God (saith the church) will hear
me," Mic. 7:7. Poor David, when stripped of all earthly comforts,
could yet encourage himself in the Lord his God; and why cannot
you? Suppose your husband or child had lost all at sea, and should
come to you in rags; could you deny the relation, or refuse to
entertain him? If you would not, much less would God: Why then are
ye so troubled? Though your condition be changed, your Father's
love and respects are not changed.
Help 5. And what if by the loss of outward comforts, God will
preserve your souls from the ruining power of temptation? Sure
then, you have little cause to sink your hearts by such sad thoughts
about them. Are not these earthly enjoyments the things that made
men shrink and warp in times of trial? For the love of these many
have forsaken Christ in such an hour, Matth. 19:22. "He went away
sorrowful, for he had great possessions." And if this be God's design,
what have I done in quarrelling with him about it? We see mariners
in a storm can throw over-board rich bales of silk, and precious

things, to preserve the vessel and their lives with it, and every one
saith they act prudently; we know it is usual for soldiers in a city
besieged, to batter down, or burn the fairest buildings without the
walls, in which the enemy may shelter in the siege; and no man
doubts but it is wisely done; Such as have gangrened legs or arms,
can willingly stretch them out to be cut off, and not only thank, but
pay the chirurgeon for his pains: And must God only be repined at,
for casting over what will sink you in a storm? For pulling down that
which would advantage your enemy in the siege of temptation? For
cutting off what would endanger your everlasting life? O
inconsiderate, ungrateful man! are not these things, for which thou
grievest, the very things that have ruined thousands of souls? Well,
what Christ doth in this, thou knowest not now, but hereafter thou
mayest.
Help 6. It would much stay the heart under adversity, to consider
That God, by such humbling providences, may be accomplishing that
for which you have long prayed and waited: And should you be
troubled at that? Say, Christian, hast thou not many prayers
depending before God upon such accounts as these: that he would
keep thee from sin, discover to thee the emptiness and insufficiency
of the creature; that he would kill and mortify thy lusts, that thy
heart may never find rest in any enjoyment but Christ? Why now, by
such humbling and impoverishing strokes, God may be fulfilling thy
desire: Wouldst thou be kept from sin? Lo, he hath hedged up thy
way with thorns. Wouldst thou see the creature's vanity? Thy
affliction is a fair glass to discover it; for the vanity of the creature is
never so effectually and sensibly discovered, as in our own
experience of it. Wouldst thou have thy corruptions mortified? This
is the way; now God takes away the food and fuel that maintained
them; for as prosperity begat and fed them, so adversity, when
sanctified, is a mean to kill them. Wouldst thou have thy heart to rest
no where but in the bosom of God? What better way canst thou
imagine providence should take to accomplish thy desire, than by
pulling from under thy head, that soft pillow of creature delights on
which thou restedst before? And yet thou fret at this, peevish child!

how dost thou exercise thy Father's patience? If he delay to answer
thy prayers, thou art ready to say he regards thee not; if he do that
which really answers the scope and main end of them, but not in the
way thou expectedst, thou quarrellest with him for that: as if instead
of answering, he were crossing all thy hopes and aims; is this
ingenuous? Is it not enough that God is so gracious to do what thou
desirest, but thou must be so impudent to expect he should do it in
the way which thou prescribest.
Help 7. Again, It may stay thy heart, if thou consider, That in these
troubles, God is about that work, which if thou didst see the design
of, thy soul would rejoice. We, poor creatures, are bemisted with
much ignorance, and are not able to discern how particular
providences work towards God's end; and therefore, like Israel in the
wilderness, are often murmuring, because Providence leads us about
in a howling desart, where we are exposed to straits; though yet, then
he led them, and is now leading us, by the right way, to a city of
habitations. If you could but see how God, in his secret counsel, hath
exactly laid the whole plot and design of thy salvation, even to the
smallest means and circumstances; this way, and by these means
such a one shall be saved, and by no other; such a number of
afflictions I appoint for this man, at this time, and in this order; they
shall befal him thus, and thus they shall work for him: Could you, I
say, but discern the admirable harmony of divine dispensations,
their mutual relations to each other, together with the general
respect and influence they all have unto the last end; of all the
conditions in the world, you would chuse that you are now in, had
you liberty to make your own choice. Providence is like a curious
piece of arras, made up of a thousand shreds, which single we know
not what to make of, but put together, and stitched up orderly, they
represent a beautiful history to the eye. As God works all things
according to the counsel of his own will, so that the counsel of God
hath ordained this as the best way to bring about thy salvation; Such
a one hath a proud heart, so many humbling providences I appointed
for him: such a one an earthly heart, so many impoverishing

providences for him: Did you but see this, I need say no more to
support the most dejected heart.
Help 8. Farther, It would much conduce to the settlement of your
hearts, to consider, That by fretting and discontent, you do
yourselves more injury than all the afflictions you lie under could do;
your own discontent is that which arms your troubles with a sting; it
is you that make your burden heavy, by struggling under it. Could
you but lie quiet under the hand of God, your condition would be
much easier and sweeter than it is; Impatiens œgrotus crudelem facit
medicum. This makes God lay on more strokes, as a father will upon
a stubborn child that receives not correction.
Besides, it unfits the soul to pray over its troubles, or take in the
sense of that good which God intends by them: Affliction is a pill,
which being wrapt up in patience and quiet submission, may be
easily swallowed; but discontent chews the pill and so embitters the
soul; God throws away some comfort which he saw would hurt you,
and you will throw away your peace after it; he shoots an arrow
which sticks in your clothes, and was never intended to hurt, but only
to fright you from sin: and you will thrust it onward to the piercing of
your very hearts by despondency and discontent.
Help 9. Lastly, If all this will not do, but thy heart, like Rachel, still
refuses to be comforted, or quieted, then consider one thing more,
which, if seriously pondered, will doubtless do the work; and that is
this, Compare the condition thou art now in, and art so much
dissatisfied with, with that condition others are, and thyself
deservest to he in: Others are roaring in flames, howling; under the
scourge of vengeance, and amongst them I deserve to be. O my soul!
is this hell? Is my condition as bad as the damned? O what would
thousands now in hell give to change conditions with me! It is a
famous instance which* Dr. Taylor gives us of the duke of Conde; 'I
have read (saith he) that when the duke of Conde had entered
voluntarily into the incommodities of a religious poverty, he was one
day espied and pitied by a lord of Italy, who out of tenderness wished

him to be more careful and nutritive of his person. The good duke
answered, Sir, be not troubled, and think not that I am ill provided of
conveniences, for I send an harbinger before me, who makes ready
my lodgings, and takes care that I be royally entertained. The lord
asked him who was his harbinger? he answered, The knowledge of
myself, and the consideration of what I deserve for my sins, which is
eternal torments; and when with this knowledge I arrive at my
lodging, how unprovided soever I find it, methinks it is ever better
than I deserve.' Why doth the living man complain? And thus the
heart my be kept from desponding, or repining under adversity.

Keeping the Heart in the Time of Zion's
Troubles
Season 3. 'The third season calling for more than ordinary diligence
to keep the heart, is the time of Zion's troubles: When the church,
like the ship in which Christ and his disciples were, is oppressed, and
ready to perish in the waves of persecution; then good souls are
ready to sink, and be shipwrecked too, upon the billows of their own
fears. I confess most men rather need the spur than the reins in this
case, and yet some sit down as over-weighed with the sense of the
church's troubles. The loss of the ark cost old Eli his life; the sad
posture Jerusalem lay in, made good Nehemiah's countenance
change in the midst of all the pleasures and accommodations of the
court, Neh. 2:2. Ah! this goes close to honest hearts.'
"But though God allow, yea, command the most awakened
apprehensions of these calamities, and in "such a day to call to
mourning, weeping, and girding with sackcloth," Isa. 22:12 and
severely threaten the insensible, Amos 6:1 yet it will not please him
to see you sit like pensive Elijah under the juniper-tree. 1 Kings 19:4.
"Ah Lord God! it is enough, take away my life also." No, mourners in
Zion you may, and ought to be; but self-tormentors you must not be;
complain to God you may, but to complain of God, though but by an
unsuitable carriage, and the language of your actions, you must not.'