PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 13 Of The Wisdom Of God — Of God'S Justice

OF THE WISDOM OF GOD The next attribute is God's wisdom; which is one of the brightest beams of the Godhead, Job. 9:4., "He is wise in heart." The heart is the seat of wisdom; Cor in Hebræo sumitur pro judicio, PINEDA. Among the Hebrews, the heart is put for wisdom, Job 34:34., Let men of understanding tell me,"—in the Hebrew, "Let men of heart tell me." God is wise in heart, that is, he is most wise: 1. God is only wise; he doth solely and wholly possess all wisdom; therefore he is called, "the only wise God," 1 Tim. 1:17. All the treasures of wisdom are locked up in him, and no creature can have any wisdom but as God is pleased to give it out of his treasury.—2. God is perfectly wise; there is no defect in his wisdom. Men may be wise in some things, but in other things may betray imprudence and weakness. But God is the exemplar and pattern of wisdom, and the pattern must be perfect, Matth. 5:48. God's wisdom appears in two things: 1st, His infinite intelligence. 2dly, His exact working. 1st. His infinite intelligence. He knows the most profound, abstruse secrets, Dan. 2:28. He knows the thoughts, which are the most intricate subtle things, Amos 4:13., "He declareth to man what is his thought." Let sin be contrived ever so politically, God will pull off all masks and disguises, and make an heart-anatomy. He knows all future contingencies, et ante intuita, all things are before him in one clear prospect. 2d. His exact curious working. He is wise in heart; his wisdom lies in his works. These works of God are bound up in three great volumes, where we may read his wisdom.

1. The work of creation. The creation, as it is a monument of God's power, so a looking-glass in which we may see his wisdom. None but a wise God could so curiously contrive the world. Behold the earth decked with variety of flowers which are both for beauty and fragrancy,—the heaven bespangled with lights; we may see the glorious wisdom of God blazing in the sun, twinkling in the stars. His wisdom is seen in the marshalling and ordering every thing in its proper place and sphere; if the sun had been set lower, it would have burnt us; if higher, it would not have warmed us with its beams. God's wisdom is seen in appointing the seasons of the year, Ps. 74:17., "Thou hast made summer and winter." If it had been all summer, the heat would have scorched us; if all winter, the cold would have killed us. The wisdom of God is seen in chequering the dark and the light; if it had been all night, there had been no labour, —if all day, there had been no rest. Wisdom is seen in mixing the elements, the earth with the sea; if it had been all sea, then we had wanted bread; if it had been all earth, then we had wanted water. The wisdom of God is seen in preparing and ripening the fruits of the earth; the wind and frost prepare the fruits, the sun and rain ripen the fruits. God's wisdom is seen in setting bounds to the sea, and so wisely contriving it, that though the sea be higher than the earth, yet it should not overflow the earth: so that we may cry out with the Psalmist, Ps. 104:24, "O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all." There is nothing to be seen but miracles of wisdom. God's wisdom is seen in ordering things in the body politic, that one shall have need of another; the poor need the rich man's money, and the rich need the poor man's labour. God makes one trade depend upon another, that one may be helpful to another, and that mutual love may be preserved. 2. The second work wherein God's wisdom shines forth, is the work of redemption: 1. Here was the master-piece of divine wisdom, to

contrive a way to happiness, between the sin of man, and the justice of God. We may cry out with the apostle, Rom. 11:33., "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!" This posed men and angels. If God had put us to find out a way of salvation when we were lost; we could neither have had an head to devise, nor a heart to desire, what God's infinite wisdom had found out for us. Mercy had a mind to save sinners, yet loath that the justice of God should be wronged; "it is a pity," saith Mercy, "that such a noble creature as man should be made to be undone; and yet no reason that God's justice should be a loser. What way then shall be found out? Angels cannot satisfy for the wrong done to God's justice, nor is it fit that one nature should sin, and another nature suffer: what then? Shall man be for ever lost?" Now, while Mercy was thus debating with itself, what to do for the recovery of fallen man, here the Wisdom of God stepped in, and thus the oracle spake, "Let God become man; let the second person in the Trinity be incarnate, and suffer; and so for fitness he shall be man, and for ability he shall be God; thus justice may be satisfied, and man saved." O the depth of the riches of the wisdom of God, thus to make justice and mercy to kiss each other! Great is this mystery, "God manifested in the flesh," 1 Tim. 3:16. What wisdom was this, that Christ should be made sin, yet know no sin; that God should condemn the sin, yet save the sinner? Here was wisdom, to find out the way of salvation.—2. The means by which salvation is applied, set forth God's wisdom; that salvation should be by faith, not by works. Faith is an humble grace, it gives all to Christ; it is an adorer of free grace, and free grace being advanced here, God hath his glory, and it is his highest wisdom to exalt his own glory.—3. The way of working faith declares God's wisdom; it is wrought by the word preached, Rom. 10:17., "Faith cometh by hearing." What is the weak breath of a man to convert a soul? It is like whispering in the ears of a dead man; this is foolishness in the eye of the world; but the Lord loves to shew his

wisdom, by that which seems folly, 1 Cor. 1:27., "He hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise." Why so? v. 29. "That no flesh should glory in his presence." Should God convert by the ministry of angels, then we should have been ready to have gloried in angels, and have given that honour to them which is due to God: but when God works by weak tools, makes use of men who are of like passions with ourselves, and by them converts, now the power is plainly seen to be of God, 2 Cor. 4:7., "We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us." Herein is God's wisdom seen, that no flesh may glory in his presence. 3. The wisdom of God wonderfully appears in the works of his providence. Every providence hath either a mercy or a wonder wrapt up in it. The wisdom of God, in his works of providence, appears: 1. By effecting great things by small contemptible means. He cured the stung Israelites, by a brazen serpent. If some sovereign antidote had been used, if the balm of Gilead had been brought, there had been some likelihood that this should have healed; but what was there in a brazen serpent? It was a mere image, and not applied to him that was wounded, only he was to look upon it, yet this wrought a cure. The less probability in the instrument, the more is God's wisdom seen.—2. The wisdom of God is seen in doing his work by that which to the eye of flesh seems quite contrary: God intended to advance Joseph, and make all his brethren's sheaves bow to his sheaf: now what way doth he take? first Joseph is thrown into the pit, then sold into Egypt: then after that put in prison, Gen. 39:20. And by his imprisonment, God made way for his advancement. For God to save in an ordinary way, wisdom would not be so much taken notice of. But when he goes strangely to work, and saves in that very way in which we think he will destroy; now, his wisdom shines forth in a most glorious conspicuous manner. God would make Israel

victorious, and what way doth he go in? He lessens Gideon's army, Judg. 7:2., "The people that are with thee are too many;" he reduceth the army of two and thirty thousand to three hundred, and by taking away the means of victory, makes Israel victorious. God had a design to bring his people out of Egypt, and a strange course he takes to effect it: he stirred up the hearts of the Egyptians to hate them, Ps. 105:25., "He turned their heart to hate his people." The more they hated and oppressed Israel, the more God plagued the Egyptians, and the more glad they were to let Israel go, Exod. 12:33. The Egyptians were urgent upon Israel, that they might send them out of the land in haste. God had a mind to save Jonah when he was cast into the sea, and he lets the fish swallow him up, and so bring him to the shore. God would save Paul, and all that were in the ship with him, and there was no way to save them, but the ship must break, and they all came safe to land upon the broken pieces of the ship, Acts 27:44. In reference to the church, God oft goes by contrary means,—makes the enemy do his work; he can strike a straight stroke by crooked sticks, God hath oft made his church grow and flourish by persecution. "The showers of blood have made her more fruitful," JULIAN. Exod. 1:10., "Come, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply;" and that way they took to suppress them, made them multiply; v. 12., "The more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied;" like ground, the more it is harrowed, it bears the better crop. The apostles were scattered by reason of persecution, and their scattering was like the scattering of seed; they went up and down, and preached the gospel, and brought daily converts. Paul was put in prison, and his bonds were a means to enlarge the gospel, Phil. 1:12. —3. The wisdom of God is seen in making the most desperate evils turn to the good of his children. As several poisonable ingredients, wisely tempered by the skill of the artist, make a sovereign medicine, so God makes the most deadly afflictions co-operate for the good of his children. He purifies them, and prepares them for heaven, 2 Cor.

4:17. These hard frosts hasten the spring-flowers of glory. The wise God, by a divine chemistry, turns afflictions into cordials. God makes his people gainers by losses, and turns their crosses into blessings.— 4. The wisdom of God is seen in this, that the sins of men shall carry on God's work; yet that he should have no hand in their sin. The Lord permits sin, but doth not approve it. He hath an hand in the action in which sin is, but not in the sin of the action. As in the crucifying of Christ, so far as it was a natural action, God did concur; if he had not given the Jews life and breath, they could not have done it; but, as it was a sinful action, so God abhorred it. A musician plays upon a viol out of tune; the musician is the cause of the sound, but the jarring and discord is from the viol itself; so men's natural motion is from God, but their sinful motion is from themselves. A man that rides on a lame horse, his riding is the cause why the horse goes, but the lameness is from the horse itself. Herein is God's wisdom, the sins of men shall carry on his work, yet he hath no hand in them.—5. The wisdom of God is seen in helping in desperate cases. God loves to shew his wisdom when human help and wisdom fail. Exquisite lawyers love to wrestle with niceties and difficulties in the law, to shew their skill the more. God's wisdom is never at a loss; but when providences are darkest, now appears the morning-star of deliverance: Ps. 136:23., "Who remembered us in our low condition." Sometimes God melts away the spirits of his enemies, Josh. 2:24. Sometimes he finds them other work to do, and sounds a retreat to them, as he did to Saul when he was pursuing David; "The Philistines are in the land." "In the mount will God be seen." When the church seems to be upon the altar,—her peace and liberty ready to be sacrificed,—now comes the angel.—6. God's wisdom is seen in befooling wise men, and making their wisdom a means of their overthrow. Ahithophel had deep policy, 2 Sam. 16:23., "The counsel of Ahithophel, which he counselled, in those days was as if a man had inquired at the oracle of God:" but he consulted his own shame. The

Lord turned his counsel into foolishness, 2 Sam. 17:23.; Job 5:13., "He taketh the wise in their own craftiness;" that is, when they think to deal wisely, he not only disappoints them, but insnares them. The snares they lay for others catch themselves, Ps. 9:15., "In the net which they hid, is their own foot taken." God loves to counterplot politicians; he makes use of their own wit to undo them, and hangs Haman upon his own gallows. Use 1st. Adore the wisdom of God; it is an infinite deep the angels cannot search into, Rom. 11:33., "His ways are past finding out." And as we should adore, so we should rest in the wisdom of God; God sees what condition is best for us. Did we believe the wisdom of God, it would keep us from murmuring. Rest in God's wisdom in several cases: 1. In want of spiritual comfort. God is wise, he sees it good sometimes we should be without comfort. Perhaps we should be lifted up with spiritual enlargements, as Paul with his revelations, 2 Cor. 12:7. It is hard to have the heart low, when comfort is high. God sees humility is better for us than joy. It is better to want comfort, and be humble, than to have it, and be proud.—2 In want of bodily strength, rest in God's wisdom; he sees what is best. Perhaps the less health the more grace; weaker in body, the stronger we are in faith, 2 Cor. 4:16., "Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day." At Rome there were two laurel-trees; when the one withered, the other flourished. The inward man is renewed. When God shakes the tree of the body, he is now gathering the fruits of righteousness, Heb. 12:11. Sickness is God's lance to let out the imposthume of sin, Isa. 27:9.—3. In case of God's providences to his church: we wonder what God is doing with us, and are ready to kill ourselves with care, rest in God's wisdom; he knows best what he hath to do, Ps. 77:19., "Thy footsteps are not known." Trust him where you cannot trace him. God is most in his way, when we think he is most out of the way; when we think God's church is, as it were,

in the grave, and there is a tombstone laid upon her, God's wisdom can roll away the stone from the sepulchre. Christ cometh "leaping over mountains," Cant. 2:8. Either his power can remove the mountain, or his wisdom knows how to leap over it.—4. In case we are low in the world, or have but little oil in our cruse, rest in God's wisdom, he sees it best; it is to cure pride and wantonness. God knew, if thy estate had not been lost, thy soul had been lost. God, he saw riches would be a snare unto thee, 1 Tim. 6:9.: art thou troubled that God hath prevented a snare? God will make thee rich in faith; what thou lackest in temporals shall be made up in spirituals: God will give thee more of his love. Thou art weak in estate, yet God will make thee strong in assurance. O rest in God's wisdom! he will carve the best piece for thee.—5. In case of the loss of dear friends, a wife, or child, or husband,—rest satisfied in God's wisdom. God hath taken away these, because he would have more of your love; he breaks these crutches, that we may live more upon him by faith. God would have us learn to go without crutches. Use 2d. If God be infinitely wise, then let us go to him for wisdom; as Solomon, 1 Kings 3:9, 10., "Give thy servant an understanding heart;" "and the speech pleased the Lord." And there is encouragement for us: "If any one lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who giveth liberally, and upbraideth not," James 1:5. Wisdom is in God, tanquam in fonte,—as in the fountain; his wisdom is imparted, not impaired; his stock is not spent by giving. Go then to God: Lord, do thou light my lamp; in thy light shall I see light; give me wisdom, to know the fallacy of my heart, the subtilties of the old serpent, to walk jealously towards myself, religiously towards thee, prudently towards others; guide me by thy counsel, and afterwards receive me to glory!

OF GOD'S POWER The next attribute is God's power, Job 9:19., "If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong." In this chapter is a magnificent description of God's power: "Lo, he is strong!" The Hebrew word for strong, signifies a conquering, prevailing strength. "He is strong:" the superlative degree is intended here, viz. "He is most strong." He is called, Elshaddai, 'God almighty,' Gen. 17:1. His almightiness lies in this, he can do whatever is feasible. Divines distinguish between authority and power; God hath both. I. He hath a sovereign right and authority over man. He can do with his creatures as he pleases. Who shall dispute with God? who shall ask him a reason of his doings? Dan. 4:35., "He doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?" God sits judge in the highest court, he calls the monarchs of the earth to the bar, and is not bound to give a reason of his proceedings, Ps. 75:5, 7., "He putteth down one, and setteth up another." He hath salvation and damnation in his power. He hath the key of justice in his hand, to lock up whom he will in the fiery prison of hell; and he hath the key of mercy in his hands, to open heaven's gate to whom he pleases. This is the name engraven upon his vesture, "King of kings, and Lord of lords," Rev. 19:16. He sits Lord paramount, and who can call him to an account? Isa. 46:10., "I will do all my pleasure." The world is God's diocese, and shall not he do what he will in his own diocese? He it was that turned king Nebuchadnezzar to eat grass, and threw the angels to hell when they sinned; that broke the head of the Babylonish empire, Isa. 14:11., "How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer! Thy pomp is brought down to the grave;" who sets bounds to the sea, and bridles the

proud waves, Job. 38:11. God is the supreme monarch, all power is seated originally in him; "The powers that be are ordained of God," Rom. 13:1. Kings hold their crowns of him, Prov. 8:15., "By me kings reign." II. As God hath authority, so he hath infinite power. What is authority without power? "He is mighty in strength," Job. 9:4. This power of God is seen, 1. In the creation. To create, requires infinite power; all the world cannot make a fly. God's power in creating is evident: 1. Because he needs no instruments to work with; it is proper to God to work without tools.—2. He needs no matter to work upon; first, he creates matter, and then works upon it.—3. He works without labour, Ps. 33:9., 'He spake and it was done.' 2. The power of God is seen in the conversion of souls. Surely a mighty power went to raise Christ from the grave, Eph. 1:20. 1. The same power goes to draw a sinner to God, as drew Christ out of the grave to heaven. Greater power is put forth in conversion, than in creation. When God made the world, he met with no opposition; as he had nothing to help him, so he had nothing to hinder him; but when he comes to convert a sinner, here he meets with opposition,— Satan opposeth him, and the heart opposeth him; a sinner is angry with converting grace.—2. The world was the "Work of God's fingers," Ps. 8:3. Conversion is the "Work of God's arm," Luke 1:5.— 3. In the creation, God wrought but one miracle, he spake the word; but, in conversion, he works many miracles,—the blind is made to see,—the dead is raised,—the deaf hears the voice of the Son of God. O the infinite power of Jehovah! Before his sceptre, angels vail and prostrate themselves; kings cast their crowns at his feet. Amos 9:5., "He toucheth the land, and it shall melt;" Job 9:6., "Which shaketh

the earth out of her place." An earthquake makes the earth tremble upon her pillars, but God shakes it out of its place; he can remove the earth from its centre. God can do what he will, his power is as large as his will. Were men's power as large as their will, what work would they make in the world! God's power is of equal extent with his will. God can with a word unpin the wheels, and break the axle-tree of the creation. He can do more than we can think, Eph. 3:20. He can suspend natural agents; he sealed up the lions' mouths, made the fire not to burn; he made the waters to stand upon an heap; he caused the sun to go ten degrees backward in Ahaz his dial, Isa. 38:8. What can pose omnipotency? The Lord cuts off the spirit of princes, Ps. 76:12. He counter-works his enemies; he pulls down their flags and banners of pride, infatuates their counsels, breaks their forces; and he doth it with case, with the turning of his hand, Ps. 18:24., "with his breath," Isa. 40:24., "with a look." That is all it needs cost God to destroy his enemies; a look, a cast of his eye, Exod. 14:24., "The Lord looked into the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar of fire, and troubled their host." Who shall stop him in his march? God commands, and all creatures in heaven and earth obey him. Xerxes, the Persian monarch, threw fetters into the sea, when its waves swelled, as if he would have chained up the waters; but when God speaks, the wind and sea obey him; if he say but the word, the stars fight in their courses against Sisera; if he stamp with his foot, an army of angels shall presently be in battalia. What cannot omnipotent power do? "The Lord is a man of war," Exod. 15:3. He hath a mighty arm. Ps. 89:13., "God's power is a glorious power," Col. 1:11. (1.) It is an irresistible power, Rom. 9:19., "Who hath resisted his will?" To contest with him, is as if the thorns should set themselves in battle array against the fire; or, as if an infirm child should fight with an arch-angel. If the sinner be once taken in God's iron net, there is no escaping, Isa. 43:13., "There is none that can deliver out of my hand." (2.) God's power is an inexhaustible power;

it is never spent or wasted. Men, while they exercise their strength, weaken it; but God hath an everlasting spring of strength in him, Isa. 26:4. Though he spends his arrows upon his enemies, Deut. 32:23., yet he doth not spend his strength. Isa. 40:28., "He fainteth not, neither is weary." OBJ. Can God do all things? he cannot deny himself. Ans. Though God can do all things, he cannot do that which stains the glory of his Godhead: he cannot sin; he cannot do that which implies a contradiction. To be a God of truth, and yet deny himself, is a contradiction. Use 1st. If God be so infinite in power, fear this great God. We are apt to fear such as are in power; Jer. 5:22., " 'Fear ye not me?' saith the Lord: 'Will ye not tremble at my presence?' " He hath power to cast our souls and bodies into hell! Ps. 90:11., "Who knows the power of his wrath?" God can with the same breath that made us, dissolve us; "His eyes are as a flame of fire; the rocks are thrown down by him," Nah. 1:6. Solomon saith, "Where the word of a king is, there is power," Eccl. 8:4.; much more where the word of a God is. O let us fear this mighty God! The fear of God will drive out all other base fear. Use 2d. See the deplorable condition of wicked men: 1. This power of God is not for them: 2. It is against them. 1. This power of God, is not for them: they have no union with God, therefore have no warrant to lay claim to his power. His power is no relief to them. He hath power to forgive sins, but he will not put forth his power towards an impenitent sinner. God's power is an eagle's wing to carry the saints to heaven; but what privilege is that to the wicked; though a man will carry his child in his arms over a

dangerous water, yet he will not carry an enemy in his arms. God's power is not engaged to help those that fight against him. Let miseries come upon the wicked, they have none to help them; they are like a ship in a storm without a pilot, driven upon the rocks. 2. This power of God is against the wicked. God's power will not be the sinner's shield to defend him, but a sword to wound him. God's power will bind the sinner in chains. God's power serves to revenge the wrong done to his mercy. God will be Almighty to damn the sinner. Now, in what condition is every unbeliever? God's power is engaged against him, and "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God," Heb. 10:31. Use 3d. It reproves such as do not believe this power of God. We say, we do not doubt of God's power, but his will. But indeed it is God's power that we question. "Is there any thing too hard for me?" Jer. 32:27.; yet we stagger through unbelief, as if the arm of God's power were shrunk, and he could not help in desperate cases. Take away a king's power, and we unking him; take away the Lord's power, and we ungod him; yet how guilty of this are we! Did not Israel question God's power? "Can God furnish a table in the wilderness?" Ps. 78:19. They thought the wilderness was a fitter place for making of graves, than spreading of a table. Did not Martha doubt of Christ's power? John 11:39., "He hath been dead four days." If Christ had been there while Lazarus was sick, or when he had been newly dead, Martha did not question but Christ could have raised him; but he had lain in the grave four days, and now she seemed to question his power. Christ had as much ado to raise her faith, as to raise her dead brother. And Moses, though an holy man, yet limits God's power through unbelief, Numb. 11:21., "The people among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen; and thou hast said, I will give them flesh that they may eat a whole month: shall the flocks and the herds be slain

for them to suffice them? or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered for them to suffice them?" And the Lord said unto Moses, "Is the Lord's hand waxed short?" This is a great affront to God, to go to deny his power. That men doubt of God's power, appears, 1. By their taking indirect courses. Would they defraud in their dealings, use false weights, if they believed the power of God, that he could provide for them? 2. By their depending more upon second causes than upon God, 2 Chron. 16:12., "In his disease, he sought not to the Lord, but to the physicians." Use 4th. If God be infinite in power, then let us take heed of hardening our hearts against God: Job 9:4., "Who hath hardened himself against him, and prospered?" Job sends a challenge to all creatures in heaven and earth. Who is he did ever take up the buckler against God, and came off conqueror? For a person to go on daringly in any sin, is to harden his heart against God, and, as it were, to raise a war against heaven; and let him remember God is El-shaddai,— almighty; he will be too hard for them that oppose him, Job 40:9., "Hast thou an arm like God?" Such as will not bow to his golden sceptre, shall be broken with his iron rod. Julian hardened his heart against God, he opposed him to his face; but what got he at last? did he prosper? Being wounded in battle, he threw up his blood into the air, and said to Christ, vicisti Galilœe,—"O Galilean, thou hast overcome! I acknowledge thy power, whose name and truth I have opposed." Will folly contend with wisdom?—weakness with power?— finite with infinite? O take heed of hardening your heart against God! He can send legions of angels to avenge his quarrel. It is better to meet God with tears in your eyes, than weapons in your hand. You may overcome God sooner by repentance, than by resistance. Use 5th. Get an interest in God, and then this glorious power is engaged for you. God gives it under his hand, that he will put forth

the whole power of his Godhead for the good of his people: 1 Chron. 17:24., "The Lord of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel." This almightiness of God's power is a wonderful support and comfort to every believer. It was Samson's riddle, Judges 14:14., "Out of the strong came forth sweetness:" so out of the attribute of God's power, —out of this strong comes forth sweetness. It is comfort in several cases. 1. In case of strong corruption. My sins, saith a child of God, are potent; I have no power against this army that comes against me; I pray, and humble my soul by fasting, but my sins return upon me. Ay, but dost thou believe the power of God? The strong God can conquer thy strong corruption; though sin be too hard for thee, yet not for him; he can soften hard hearts, and quicken the dead. "Is any thing too hard for the Lord?" Gen. 18:14. Set God's power on work, by faith and prayer. Say, 'Lord! it is not for thy honour that the devil should have so strong a party within me; O break the head of this leviathan! Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee!' 2. In case of strong temptation. Satan is called 'the strong man,' O but remember the power of God: Christ is called, 'The lion of the tribe of Judah;' he hath broken the serpent's head upon the cross. Satan is a chained enemy, and a conquered enemy. Michael is stronger than the dragon. 3. Comfort in case of weakness of grace, and fear of falling away. I pray, but I cannot send out strong cries; I believe, but the hand of my faith doth shake and tremble. Cannot God strengthen weak grace? 2 Cor. 12:9., "My strength is made perfect in weakness: most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me." I fear I shall not hold out. Christian, dost thou believe the power of God? Hath not God preserved thy grace

thus far? Mayest thou not set up thy Ebenezer? God hath kept thy grace hitherto as a spark in the main ocean; and is not he able still to keep thy grace? 1 Pet. 1:5., "Who are kept by the power of God," &c. God's mercy pardons us, but his power preserves us. He who by his power keeps the stars that they do not fall out of their orbs, keeps our grace that it doth not fail or annihilate. 4. Comfort in case of the deficiency in thy estate. God can multiply the oil in the cruse; miraculously he can raise up supplies; God, who provides for the birds of the air, cannot he provide for his children? He that clothes the lilies, cannot he clothe his lambs? 5. Comfort in regard of the resurrection. This seems difficult to believe, that the bodies of men when eaten up by worms, devoured by beasts and fishes, or consumed to ashes, should be raised the same numerical bodies; but if we believe the power of God, it is no great wonder. Which is hardest, to create, or raise the dead? he that can make a body of nothing, can restore it to its parts when mingled and confounded with other substances, Mat. 19:26., "With God all things are possible." If we believe the first article of the creed, that God is almighty, we may quickly believe the other article, the resurrection of the body. God can raise the dead because of his power, and he cannot but raise them because of his truth. 6. It is comfort in reference to the church of God: he can save and deliver it when it is brought low. The enemies have power in their hand, but the remainder of wrath God will restrain, Ps. 76:10. God can either confine the enemies power or confound it. "If God be for us, who can be against us?" God can create Jerusalem a praise, Isa. 65:18. The church in Ezekiel, is compared to dry bones, but God made breath to enter into them, and they lived, Ezek. 37:10. The ship of the church may be tossed, because sin is in it, but it shall not be

overwhelmed, because Christ is in it, Ps. 46:6., Deus in medio. All the
church's pangs shall help forward her deliverance.

OF THE HOLINESS OF GOD The next attribute is God's Holiness, Exod. 15:11., "Glorious in holiness." Holiness is the most sparkling jewel of his crown; it is the name by which God is known, Ps. 111:9., "Holy and reverend is his name." He is the holy One, Job 6:10. Seraphims cry, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory," Isa. 6:3. His power makes him mighty; his holiness makes him glorious, God's holiness consists in his perfect loving of righteousness, and abhorrence of evil, Hab. 1:13., "Of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot look on iniquity." 1st, God is holy intrinsically: 1. He is holy in his nature; his very being is made up of holiness, as light is of the essence of the sun.—2. He is holy in his word; the word bears a stamp of his holiness upon it, as the wax bears an impression of the seal, Ps. 119:140., "Thy word is very pure;" it is compared to silver refined seven times, Ps. 12:6. Every line in the word breathes sanctity, it encourageth nothing but holiness.—3. God is holy in his operations; all God doeth is holy; he cannot act but like himself; he can no more do an unrighteous action, than the sun can darken, Ps. 145:17., "The Lord is holy in all his works." 2dly, God is holy primarily: he is the original and pattern of holiness; holiness began at him who is 'the Ancient of days.'

3dly, God is holy efficiently: he is the cause of all that is holiness in others, James 1:17., "Every good gift, and every perfect gift comes from above." He made the angels holy; he infused all that holiness into Christ's human nature; all the holiness we have is but a crystal stream from this fountain. We borrow all our holiness from God. As the lights of the sanctuary were lighted from the middle lamp, so all the holiness of others is a lamp lighted from heaven, Lev. 20:8., "I am the Lord which sanctify you." God is not only a pattern of holiness, but he is a principle of holiness; his spring feeds all our cisterns, he drops his holy oil of grace upon us. 4thly, God is holy transcendently, 1 Sam. 2:2., "There is none holy as the Lord." No angel in heaven can take the just dimensions of God's holiness; the highest seraphim is too low of stature to measure these pyramids: the holiness in God is far above the holiness in saints or angels. 1. It is above the holiness in saints. 1. It is a pure holiness: the saints' holiness is like gold in the ore, imperfect; their humility is stained with pride; he that hath most faith hath need pray, 'Lord help my unbelief;' but the holiness of God is pure, like wine from the grape; it hath not the least dash or tincture of impurity mixed with it.—2. A more unchangeable holiness: the saints though they cannot lose the habit of holiness (for the seed of God remains), yet they may lose some degrees of their holiness, Rev. 2:4., "Thou hast left thy first love." Grace cannot die, yet the flame of it may go out; holiness in the saints is subject to ebbing, but holiness in God is unchangeable; he never lost a drop of his holiness; as he cannot have more holiness, because he is perfectly holy, so he cannot have less holiness, because he is unchangeably holy.

2. The holiness in God is above the holiness in the angels; holiness in the angels is only a quality, which may be lost, as we see in the fallen angels; but holiness in God is his essence, he is all over holy, and he can as well lose his Godhead as his holiness. OBJ. But is he not privy to all the sins of men? He beholds their impurities; how can this be, and he not defiled? Ans. God sees all the sins of men, but is no more defiled with them than the sun is defiled with the vapours that arise out of the earth. God sees sin, not as a patron to approve it, but as a judge to punish it. Use 1st. Is God so infinitely holy? Then see how unlike to God sin is. Sin is an unclean thing, it is hyperbolically evil, Rom. 1:13. It is called 'an abomination,' Deut. 7:25. God hath no mixture of evil in him; sin hath no mixture of good; it is the spirits and quintescence of evil; it turns good into evil; it hath deflowered the virgin-soul, made it red with guilt, and black with filth; it is called 'the accursed thing,' Josh. 7:11. No wonder, therefore, that God doth so hate sin, being so unlike to him, nay, so contrary to him; it strikes at his holiness; sin doth all it can to spite God; sin would not only unthrone God, but un-god him; if sin could help it, God should be God no longer. Use 2d. Is God the Holy One, and is his holiness his glory? Then how impious are they, 1. That are haters of holiness? As the vulture hates perfumes, so they hate this sweet perfume of holiness in the saints; their hearts rise against holiness; as a man's stomach at a dish he hath an antipathy against. There is not a greater sign of a person devoted to hell, than to hate one for that thing wherein he is most like God, his holiness.—2. That are despisers of holiness: they despise the glory of the Godhead, "Glorious in holiness." The despising of holiness is seen in the deriding of it; is it not sad men

should deride that which should save them? Sure that patient will die that derides the physic. The deriding the grace of the Spirit comes near to the despighting the Spirit of grace. Scoffing Ishmael was cast out of Abraham's house, Gen. 21:9. Such as scoff at holiness shall be cast out of heaven. Use 3d. Of exhortation. Is God so infinitely holy, then let us endeavour to imitate God in holiness: 1 Pet. 1:16., "Be ye holy, for I am holy." There is a twofold holiness,—an holiness of equality,—and an holiness of similitude. An holiness of equality no man or angel can reach to; who can be equally holy with God? Who can parallel him in sanctity? But, 2. There is an holiness of similitude, and that we must aspire after, to have some analogy and resemblance of God's holiness in us,—be as like him in holiness as we can; though a taper doth not give so much light as the sun, yet it doth resemble it. We must imitate God in holiness. QUEST. If we must he like God in holiness, wherein doth our holiness consist? Ans. In two things; 1st, In our suitableness to God's nature. 2dly, Our subjection to his will. 1st. Our holiness stands in our suitableness to the nature of God; hence the saints are said to partake of the divine nature, 2 Pet 1:4., which is not a partaking of his essence, but his image. Herein is the saints' holiness,—when they are the lively pictures of God,—they bear the image of God's meekness, mercifulness, heavenliness,—they are of the same judgment with God, of the same disposition,—they love what he loves, and hate what he hates. 2d. Our holiness consists in our subjection to the will of God: as God's nature is file pattern of holiness, so his will is the rule of

holiness. This is our holiness, 1. When we do his will, Acts 13:22. 2. When we bear his will, Micah 7:9., what he inflicts wisely, we suffer willingly. This is our holiness, when we are suitable to God's nature, and submissive to his will; this should be our great care, to be like God in holiness; our holiness should be so qualified as God's; God's is a real holiness, such should ours be, Eph. 4:24. "Righteousness and true holiness." It should not be only the paint of holiness, but the life of holiness; it should not only be like the Egyptian temples, beautified without, but like Solomon's temple, gold within, Ps. 45:13., "The king's daughter is all glorious within." That I may press you to resemble God in holiness, consider, 1. How illustrious every holy person is; he is a fair glass in which some of the beams of God's holiness shines forth. We read, Aaron put on his garments for glory and beauty, Exod. 28:2. When we wear the embroidered garment of holiness, it is for glory and beauty. A good Christian is ruddy, being sprinkled with Christ's blood; and white, being adorned with holiness. As the diamond to a ring, so is holiness to the soul, that, as Chrysostom saith, they that oppose it cannot but admire it. 2. It is the great design God carries on in the world to make a people like himself in holiness; what are all the showers of the ordinances for, but to rain down righteousness upon us, and make us holy? What are the promises for, but to encourage holiness? What is the sending of the Spirit into the world for, but to anoint us with the holy unction? 1 John 2:20. What are all afflictions for, but to make us partakers of God's holiness? Heb. 12:10. What are mercies for, but loadstones to draw us to holiness? What is the end of Christ's dying, but that his blood might wash away our unholiness? Tit. 2:14., "Who gave himself for us, to purify unto himself a peculiar people." So that if we are not holy, we cross God's great design in the world.

3. It is our holiness draws God's heart to us. Holiness is God's image; God cannot choose but love his image where he sees it. A king loves to see his effigies upon a piece of coin: Ps. 45 v. 7., "Thou lovest righteousness." And where doth righteousness grow, but in an holy heart? Isa. 62:4., "Thou shalt be called Hephzibah, for the Lord delighteth in thee." It was her holiness drew God's love to her. v. 12., "They shall call them the holy people." God values not any by their high birth, but their holiness. 4. Holiness is the only thing that differenceth us from the reprobate part of the world. God's people have his seal upon them, 2 Tim. 2:19., "The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his. And let all that name the name of Christ, depart from iniquity." The people of God are sealed with a double seal: 1. Election, "The Lord knows who are his." 2. Sanctification, "Let every one depart from iniquity." As a nobleman is distinguished from another by his silver star,—as a virtuous woman is distinguished from an harlot by her chastity,—so holiness distinguisheth between the two seeds: all that are of God, as they have Christ for their captain, Heb. 2:10., so holiness is the white colour they wear. 5. Holiness is our honour. Holiness and honour is put together, 1 Thess. 4:4. Dignity goes along with sanctification, Rev. 1:5, 6., "He hath washed us from our sins in his blood, and hath made us kings unto God." When we are washed and made holy, then we are kings and priests to God. The saints are called 'vessels of honour;' they are called 'jewels,' for the sparkling of their holiness, because filled with wine of the Spirit; this makes them earthly angels. 6. Holiness gives us boldness with God, Job 22:26., "Thou shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacle, and shalt lift up thy face unto

God." Lifting up the face is an emblem of boldness. Nothing can make us so ashamed to go to God, as sin: a wicked man in prayer may lift up his hands, but he cannot lift up his face. When Adam had lost his holiness, he lost his confidence,—he hid himself. But the holy person goes to God, as a child to his father; his conscience doth not upbraid him with allowing any sin, therefore he can go boldly to the throne of grace, and have mercy to help in time of need, Heb. 4:16. 7. Holiness gives peace: sin raiseth a storm in the conscience, ubi peccatum ibi procella: Isa. 57:21., "There is no peace saith my God to the wicked." Righteousness and peace are put together. Holiness is the root which bears this sweet fruit of peace; righteousness and peace kiss each other. 8. Holiness leads to heaven; holiness is the king of heaven's highway, Isa. 35:8., "An highway shall be there, and it shall be called the way of holiness." At Rome there was the temple of virtue and honour, and they were to go through the temple of virtue to the temple of honour: so we must go through the temple of holiness to the temple of heaven. Glory begins in virtue: 2 Pet. 1:3., "Who hath called us to glory and virtue?" Happiness is nothing else but the quintessence of holiness; holiness is glory militant, and happiness holiness triumphant. QUEST. What shall we do to resemble God in holiness? Ans. Have recourse to Christ's blood by faith; it is lavacrum animæ; legal purifications were types and emblems of it, 1 John 1:7. The word is a glass to shew us our spots, and Christ's blood is a fountain to wash them away. 2. Pray for an holy heart: Ps. 51:10. "Create in me a clean heart, O God!" Lay thy heart before the Lord, and say, "Lord, my heart is full

of leprosy; it defiles all it toucheth; Lord, I am not fit to live with such an heart, for I cannot honour thee; nor die with such an heart, for I cannot see thee. O create in me a clean heart! Send thy Spirit into me, to refine and purify me, that I may be a temple fit for thee the holy God to inhabit!" 3. Walk with them that are holy, Prov. 13:20., "He that walketh with wise men shall be wise." Be among the spices, and you will smell of them. Association begets assimilation nothing hath a greater power and energy to effect holiness than the communion of saints.

OF GOD'S JUSTICE The next attribute is God's justice. All God's attributes are identical, and are the same with his essence. Though he hath several attributes whereby he is made known to us, yet he hath but one essence. A cedar-tree may have several branches, yet it is but one cedar: so there are several attributes of God whereby we conceive of him, but only one entire essence. Well then, concerning God's justice, Deut. 32:4., "Just and right is he;" Job. 37:23., "Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out; he is excellent in power and in judgment." God is said to dwell in justice, Ps. 89:14., "Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne." In God, power and justice meet. Power holds the sceptre, and justice holds the balance. QUEST. What is God's justice? Ans. Justice is to give every one his due. God's justice is the rectitude of his nature, whereby he is carried to the doing of that which is

righteous and equal: Prov. 24:12., "Shall not he render to every man according to his works?" God is an impartial judge, he judgeth the cause; men oft judge the person, but not the cause, which is not justice, but malice; God judgeth the cause, Gen. 18:21., "I will go down now and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it which is come up unto me." When the Lord is upon a punitive act, he weighs things in the balance; he doth not punish rashly, he doth not go in the way of a riot, but a circuit, against offenders. Concerning God's justice, I shall lay down these six positions. 1st. God cannot be but just. His holiness is the cause of his justice. Holiness will not suffer him to do any thing but what is righteous. He can no more be unjust than he can be unholy. 2d. God's will is the supreme rule of justice; it is the standard of equity. His will is wise and good. God wills nothing but what is just; and therefore it is just because he wills it. 3d. God doth justice voluntarily: justice flows from his nature. Men may act unjustly, because they are bribed or forced: God will not be bribed, because of his justice; he cannot be forced, because of power. He doth justice out of love to justice, Heb. 1:9., "Thou hast loved righteousness." 4th. Justice is the perfection of the Divine nature. Aristotle saith, "justice comprehends in it all virtues." To say God is just, is to say, he is all that is excellent; perfections meet in him, as lines in a centre. He is not only just, but justice itself. 5th. God never did, nor can do, the least wrong to his creatures. God's justice hath been wronged, but never did any wrong. God doth not go according to the summum jus, or rigour of the law; he abates

something of his severity. He might inflict heavier penalties than he doth, Ezra 9:13., "Thou hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve;" our mercies are more than we deserve, and our punishments less. 6th. God's justice is such that it is not fit for any man or angel to expostulate with God, or demand a reason of his actions. God hath not only authority on his side, but equity. He lays "judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet," Isa. 28:17.; and it is below him to give an account to us of his proceedings. Which of these two is fittest to take place,—God's justice, or man's reason? Rom. 9:20., "Who art thou, O man! that repliest against God?" The plumb-line of our reason is too short to fathom the depth of God's justice, Rom. 11:33., "How unsearchable are his judgments!" We are to adore God's justice, where we cannot see a reason of it. Now God's justice runs in two channels. It is seen in two things, the distribution of rewards and punishments. 1. In rewarding the virtuous: Ps. 58:11., "Verily there is a reward for the righteous!" The saints shall not serve him for nought, he will reward præces et lachrymas; though they may be losers for him, they shall not be losers by him, Heb. 6:10., "God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have shewed toward his name." He gives a reward, not that we have deserved it, but because he hath promised it. 2. He is just in punishing offenders. And he is just, 1. Because he punisheth sinners by a law. "Where there is no law there is no transgression," Rom. 4:15. But God hath given men a law, and they break it, therefore he punisheth them justly.—2. God is just in punishing the wicked; because he never punished them, but upon full proof and evidence. What greater evidence than for a man's own

conscience to be witness against him? There is nothing God chargeth upon a sinner, but conscience doth set seal to the truth of it. Use 1st. See here another flower of God's crown; he is just and righteous; he is the exemplar and pattern of justice. OBJ. But how doth it seem to stand with God's justice, that the wicked should prosper in the world? Prov. 12:1., "Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper?" This hath been a great stumbling, and been ready to make many question God's justice. Such as are highest in sin, are highest in power. Diogenes seeing Harpalus a thief go on prosperously, said, "Sure God hath cast off the government of the world, and mindeth not how things go on here below!" Ans. 1. The wicked may be sometimes instruments to do God's work; though they do not design his glory, yet they may promote it. Cyrus (Ezra 1:7.) was instrumental in the building of God's temple in Jerusalem. There is some kind of justice, that they should have a temporal reward; God lets them prosper, under whose wing his people are sheltered. God will not be in any man's debt: Mal. 1:10., "Do ye kindle a fire on mine altar for nought?" A. 2. God lets men go on in sin, and prosper, that he may leave them more inexcusable, Rev. 2:21., "I gave her space to repent of her fornication." God adjourns the sessions, spins out his mercies towards sinners; and if they repent not, his patience will be a witness against them, and his justice will be more cleared in their condemnation, Ps. 51:4., "That thou mightest be justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest."

A. 3. God doth not always let the wicked prosper in their sin; some he doth punish openly, that his justice may be taken notice of, Ps. 9:16., "The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth:" that is, his justice is seen by striking men dead in the very act of sin. Thus he struck Zimri and Cozbi in the act of uncleanness. A. 4. If God do let men prosper a while in their sin, his vial of wrath is all this while filling, his sword is all this time whetting, and though God may forbear men a while, yet long forbearance is no forgiveness. The longer God is in taking his blow, the heavier it will be at last: as long as there is eternity, God hath time enough to reckon with his enemies.—Justice may be as a lion asleep, but at last this lion will awake, and roar upon the sinner. Do not Nero, and Julian, and Cain, now meet with God's justice? OBJ. But God's own people suffer great afflictions; they are injured and persecuted, Ps. 73:14., "All the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning." How doth this stand with God's justice? Ans. 1. That is a true rule of St. Austin,—judicia Dei possunt esse occulta, non injusta,—"God's ways of judgment are sometimes secret, but never unjust." The Lord never afflicts his people without a cause; so that he cannot be unjust. There is some good in the godly, therefore the wicked afflict them; there is some evil in them, therefore God afflicts them. God's own children have their blemishes, 2 Chron. 28:10., "Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord?" These spiritual diamonds, have they no flaws? Do we not read of the spots of God's children? Deut. 32:10. Are not they guilty of much pride, censoriousness, passion, worldliness? Though, by their profession, they seem to resemble the birds of paradise,—to fly above, and feed upon the dew of heaven,—yet, as the serpent, they lick the dust. And these sins of God's people do more provoke God

than others: Deut. 32:19., "Because of the provoking of his sons and of his daughters." The sins of others pierce Christ's side, these wound his heart; therefore is not God just in all the evils that befall them? Amos 3:2., "You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities." I will punish you sooner, surer, sorer, than others. A. 2. The trials and sufferings of the godly are to refine and purify them. God's furnace is in Zion, Isa. 31:9. Is it any injustice in God to put his gold into the furnace to purify it? Is it any injustice in God, by afflicting his people, to make them partakers of his holiness? Heb. 12:10. What doth more proclaim God's faithfulness, than to take such a course with them as may make them better? Ps. 119:75., "In faithfulness thou hast afflicted me." A. 3. What injustice is it in God to inflict a lesser punishment, and prevent a greater? The best of God's children have that in them which is meritorious of hell: now, I pray, doth God do them any wrong, if he useth only the rod, where they have deserved the scorpion? Is the father unjust if he only corrects his child who hath deserved to be disinherited? If God deals so favourably with his children, he only puts wormwood in their cup, whereas he might put fire and brimstone; they are rather to admire his mercy, than complain of his injustice. OBJ. How can it stand with God's justice, that all men being equally guilty by nature, God should pass by one and save another? Why doth not he deal with all alike? Ans. Rom. 9:14., "Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid!" Job. 8:3., "Doth the Almighty pervert justice?"

1. God is not bound to give an account of his actions to his creatures. If none may say to a king, 'What doest thou?' Eccl. 8:4., much less to God. It is sufficient, God is Lord Paramount; he hath a sovereign power over his creatures, therefore can do no injustice, Rom. 9:21, "Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel to honour, and another to dishonour?" God hath a liberty left in his own breast to save one and not another; and his justice is not at all impeached or blemished. If two men owe you money, you may, without any injustice, remit the debt to one, and exact it off the other. If two malefactors be condemned to die, the king may pardon the one, and not the other; he is not unjust if he lets one suffer, because he offended the law; nor if he save the other, because he will make use of his prerogative as he is king.—2. Though some are saved and others perish, yet there is no unrighteousness in God; because, whoever perisheth, his destruction is of himself, Hos. 13:9., "O Israel thou hast destroyed thyself." God offers grace, the sinner refuseth it; is God bound to give grace? If a chirurgeon comes to heal a man's wound, and he will not be healed, but bolts out his chirurgeon, is the chirurgeon bound to heal him? Prov. 1:24., "I have called, and ye refused;" Ps. 81:11., "Israel would none of me." God is not bound to force his mercies upon men: if they wilfully oppose the offer of grace, their sin is to be taxed as the cause of their perishing, and not God's justice. Use 2d. See the difference between God and a great part of the world. They are unjust, 1. In their courts of judicature; they pervert justice, Isa. 10:1., "They decree unrighteous decrees." The Hebrew word for a judge's robe, signifies prevarication, deceit, or injustice: it is oftener true of the judge than of the robe; the judge deserves rather to have that name than the robe. What is a good law, without a good judge? Injustice lies in two things, either not to punish where there is a fault, or, to punish where there is no fault; how frequent! Again, 2.

Unjust in their dealings. This is (1.) Either in using false weights, Hos. 12:7., "The balances of deceit are in his hand." It is sad, to have the Bible in one hand, and false weights in the other. Or, (2.) In adulterating commodities, Isa. 1:22., "Thy wine is mixed with water;" when they mix bad grain with good, yet sell it for pure grain. I can never believe he is good in the first table, who is not good in the second. He cannot be godly who is not just. Though God doth not bid you be omnipotent, as he is, yet he bids you be just, as he is. Use 3d. Imitate God in justice. Let Christ's golden maxim be observed, Matt. 7:12., "What you would have men to do to you, do ye even so to them." You would not have them wrong you, neither do you them; rather suffer wrong than do wrong, 1 Cor. 6:7., "Why do ye not rather take wrong?" O be exemplary for justice! Let justice he your ornament! Job 29:14., "I put on righteousness (viz. justice) as a robe and a diadem." A robe for its graceful beauty; and I put it on,— et induebam justitiam. A judge puts on his robe, and puts it off again at night; but Job did so put on justice, as he did not put it off till death,—semper vestiti. We must not lay off this robe of justice till we lay down our tabernacle. If you have any thing of God in you you will be like him. By every unjust action you do deny yourselves to be Christians, you stain the glory of your profession; heathens will rise up in judgment against you; the sun might sooner alter his course than God could be turned from doing justice. Use 4th. If God be just, there will be a day of judgment. Now things are out of course; sin is rampant, saints are wronged, they are often cast in a righteous cause, they can meet with no justice here, justice is turned into wormwood; but there is a day coming, when God will set things right, he will do every man justice, he will crown the righteous, and condemn the wicked, Acts 17:31., "He hath appointed a day," &c. If God be a just God, he will take vengeance. God hath

given men a law to live by,—they break it; there must be a day for the execution of offenders; a law not executed, is but like a wooden dagger, for a shew. At the last day God's sword shall be drawn out against offenders; then his justice shall be revealed before all the world, "God will judge in righteousness," Acts 17:31. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" Gen. 18:25. The wicked shall drink a sea of wrath, but not sip one drop of injustice. At that day shall all mouths be stopt, and God's justice shall be fully vindicated from all the cavils and clamours of unjust men. Use 5th. Comfort to the true penitent; as God is a just God, he will pardon him. Homo agnoscit, Deus ignoscit. 1 John 1:9., "If we confess our sins, (i.e. confess and forsake), he is just to forgive us our sins." Not only merciful but just. Why just? Because he hath promised to forgive such? Prov. 28:13. If thy heart hath been broken for and from sin, thou mayest not only plead God's mercy, but his justice for the pardoning thy sin. Shew him his hand and seal, he cannot deny himself.
