PURITAN GOLD -- Female Piety by John Angell James: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 13
The Ornaments of a Profession of Religion


Female Piety: or, The Young Woman's Guide Through Life to Immortality. By John Angell James.

Chapter 10. The Ornaments of a Profession of Religion.

THE ORNAMENTS OF A PROFESSION
OF RELIGION
"And I want women to be modest in their appearance. They
should wear decent and appropriate clothing and not draw
attention to themselves by the way they fix their hair or by
wearing gold or pearls or expensive clothes. But they must show
themselves to be entirely trustworthy and good. Then they will
make the teaching about God our Savior attractive in every way."
Titus 2:9-10
"Don't be concerned about the outward beauty that depends on
fancy hairstyles, expensive jewelry, or beautiful clothes. You
should be known for the beauty that comes from within--the
unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is so precious
to God." 1 Peter 3:3-4
There is in human nature an instinctive propensity to 'decoration'.
To whatever principle the taste may be traced, whether to innate
perception of the beautiful, or to a desire to excite admiration--the
fact is indubitable. It is seen equally in savage and civilized nations;
and is manifested by them alike in attention to the decoration of both
their bodies and their dwellings--and indeed in all their social
customs and usages. The string of shells, fish teeth, or bits of bone-around the neck of the Polynesian; and the blaze of diamonds, or
rubies--upon the brow or bosom of the British Queen, indicate the
same instinctive propensity for decoration. This propensity to
decoration, however in many cases it may be altogether corrupted in
its object, wrong in its principle, or excessive in its degree--is in its
own nature an imitation of the workmanship of God, who, "by his

Spirit has garnished the heavens," and covered the earth with beauty.
Who can look over one of creation's lovely scenes, and behold the
display of elegance of form, and beauty of color--in the flowers of the
field and garden--in the plumage of the birds--in the meandering
rivers--and the gentle undulations of the ground--exhibiting forest
and copse, hill and dale--all gilded with the beams of the glorious
sun. I say, who can witness all this without being convinced that God
himself delights in decoration! He has made a world which he has
ornamented so profusely that he has scattered beauties where there
are no eyes but his own to behold them!
"Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed waves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its fragrance on the desert air."
To reject all design and effort to add the lovely to the good, and the
beautiful to the useful--would be to oppose and not to imitate, to
condemn and not to approve--the works of the Great Creator. And
indeed no sect has ever arisen among Christians which has even
pretended to disclaim all attention to what is ornamental. Even those
who conscientiously repudiate the pearl, diamond, and ruby, the
feather, and the flower, erect their buildings, select their furniture,
plant their gardens, and choose their garments, according to their
ideas of taste, and with some regard to the laws of beauty. Hence, I
think that both the apostles who touch on the subject of personal
decoration for Christian women, are to be understood not as
condemning all ornament--but only regulating it.
The propensity to personal decoration is, without all doubt,
peculiarly strong in the female heart. That a maid "should forget her
ornaments, or a bride her attire," is spoken of by the prophet as

unlikely to a proverb. There is nothing wrong in the instinct itself. It
serves important purposes. Its total absence is felt as a serious
interruption to the pleasure of social communion. A sloven is
disagreeable--one habitually negligent of neatness or cleanliness in
personal appearance, is intolerable. Christianity no make war on any
of man's natural propensities--but only on their abuse. Its object is
not to eradicate our instincts, but to prune and train them, and make
them bear good fruit.
Now it is well known that some, in what the apostles say on this
subject, find an absolute prohibition of all ornaments of dress, and
an injunction to wear only the most plain and unadorned apparel. I
think Christian women may fall into much more dangerous
misinterpretations of Scripture than this; yet I have no doubt it is a
misinterpretation. The prohibition seems to be comparative rather
than absolute, and contains an injunction to be far more attentive to
the ornaments of the soul than to those of the body. "I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice," means, "'I prefer mercy to sacrifice." At the
same time, there can be no doubt that in the words of the text it is
taken for granted that women at all times are, and that the women of
those times were, far too much addicted to ornamental dress; that
they trenched both upon modesty and economy by their habits. And
therefore that in these verses the apostle laid down some very
important hints as to the principles on which Christian women
should regulate their attire. They inculcate modesty in opposition to
what is immodest—economy in opposition to extravagance.
"Excessive costliness," says Leighton, on this passage, "argues and
feeds the pride of the heart, and defrauds, if not others of their dues,
yet the poor of their charity, which in God's sight is a due debt. And
far more comfort shall you have on your death-bed, to remember
that at such a time, instead of putting lace on my own back, I helped

clothe a naked back. I abated somewhat of my former extravagances
to supply the poor with necessities. Far sweeter will this be than to
remember that I could needlessly spend large sums of money to
serve my pride, while I grudged a penny to relieve the poor."
Barnes has given, I think, the true meaning of the apostle. "It is not
to be supposed that all use of gold or pearls as articles of dress is here
forbidden; but the idea is that the Christian female is not to seek
these as the adorning which she desires, or is not to imitate the world
in these personal decorations. It may be a difficult question to settle
how much ornament is allowable--and when the true line is passed.
But though this cannot be settled by any exact rule, since much must
depend on age, and on the relative rank in life, and the means which
one may possess; yet there is one general rule which is applicable to
all, and which might regulate all. It is, that the true line is passed
when more is thought of this external adorning, than of the
ornament of the heart. Any external decoration which occupies the
mind, and which engrosses the time and attention more than the
virtues of the heart, we may be certain is wrong. The apparel should
be such as not to attract attention; such as befits our situation; such
as will not be particularly singular; such as will not leave the
impression that the heart is fixed on it. It is a poor ambition to
decorate a dying body with gold and pearls. It should not be
forgotten that it will soon need other clothing--and will occupy a
position where gold and pearls would be a mockery! When the heart
is right, when there is a true and supreme love for religion, it is
usually not difficult to regulate the subject of dress."
It is somewhat remarkable that Plato, the loftiest of all the Grecian
sages, has a passage which strikingly resembles that of the apostle.
"Behavior and not gold is the ornament of a woman. To immoral
women, these things, jewels and ornaments, are advantageous to

their catching more admirers; but for a woman who wishes to enjoy
the favor of one man, good behavior is the proper ornament, and not
dresses. And you should have the blush upon your countenance,
which is the sign of modesty, instead of paint—and worth and
sobriety instead of gold and emeralds." It is impossible not to notice
this similarity between the apostle and the philosopher; and equally
impossible, one would think, not to mark the superiority over the
reason of the one of the inspiration of the other. "The philosopher is
of the earth, earthly—the apostle brings the authority of God, and the
power of the unseen world distinctly into view. While Plato leads
wives to seek exclusively the honor that comes from men, Peter
teaches them to seek the honor which come down from God, the true
Judge of excellence, the great Fountain of honor."
Before we pass from this subject of personal decoration, we will just
notice the very beautiful reference which the apostle makes to that
part of our nature, which it is to be your chief concern to beautify.
"Don't be concerned about the outward beauty that depends on fancy
hairstyles, expensive jewelry, or beautiful clothes. You should be
known for the beauty that comes from within--the unfading beauty
of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is so precious to God." How
exquisitely is this put. How impressive the ideas which are conveyed.
It is the decoration of the soul rather than of the body, about which
Christian women should be chiefly solicitous and concerned. The
soul is indestructible and immortal; so should its ornaments be.
What can jewels of silver or jewels of gold do for this? Can the
diamond sparkle upon the intellect? or the ruby blaze upon the
heart? Or the pearl be set in the conscience? Or the gorgeous robe
clothe the character? Or the feather or the flower wave over the
renewed and holy nature? No! The appropriate ornaments of the
soul are truth, holiness, knowledge, faith, hope, love, joy, humility;
and all the other gifts and graces of the Spirit--wisdom, prudence,

fortitude and gentleness. These are the jewels with which the heart
should be adorned. The outer body is corruptible. Dust it is, and unto
dust it shall return.
That beautiful woman glittering in all the profusion of diamonds-the admiration and envy of the party or the ball room, must before
long be a mass of putrefaction too ghastly to be looked upon--and
then a hideous skeleton, a collection of bones, a heap of dust! And
where will be the immortal spirit? Will it wear the cast-off jewels of
the body? O no! These remain, rescued from the grasp of the 'king of
terrors', but only to ornament other bodies!
But turn now to that other female, the woman who, regardless of the
decoration of the body, was all intent upon the beauty of the soul.
Look at her, who was clothed with the robe of righteousness and the
garment of salvation, and decorated with the ornaments of a meek
and quiet spirit. She too dies; but the indestructible and immortal
spirit over which death has no dominion, goes not unadorned into
the presence of the Eternal; for the jewels with which it decorated
itself on earth are as indestructible as its own nature, and go with it
to shine in the presence of God!
"Men," says Leighton, "think it poor and base to be meek. Nothing is
more exposed to contempt than the spirit of meekness; it is mere
folly with men. But that is no matter of concern—this overweighs all
disesteem, it is with God of great price. And these are indeed as He
values them, and no otherwise. Though it be not the country's
fashion, yet it is the fashion at Heaven's court; yes, it is the King's
own fashion; 'Learn of me,' says he, 'for I am meek and humble in
heart.' Some that are court bred, will send for the prevailing fashions
there, though they live not at court; and though the peasants think
them strange dresses, yet they regard not that, but use them as finest

and best. So care you not what the world says—you are not to stay
long with them. Desire to have both your clothing and your fashions
from heaven. The robe of humility, the garment of meekness, will be
sent to you. Wear them for his sake who sends them to you. He will
be pleased to see you in them, and is not this enough? It is never
right in anything with us until we attain to this--to tread on the
opinion of men, and eye nothing but God's approbation."
But we now pass from the ornaments of the Christian woman's body
to those of her profession, and these indeed are the chief subject of
this chapter. There is something impressive in the exhortation,
"Then they will make the teaching about God our Savior attractive in
every way." Even the great truth of our Divine Savior, the Lord Jesus
Christ, is thus represented as susceptible of decoration on the part of
those who profess it. The sentiment conveyed is that the holy life of a
consistent Christian is an adornment of the profession of this
sublime doctrine. This, more than all splendor of tasteful
architecture, or gorgeous forms, or imposing ceremonies, or
anything else which can appeal to the senses, is the decoration of
Christian doctrine. It is this, as it shines forth in the beauties of
holiness, that truly decorates religion. "Beyond the pomp that
charms the eyes--or rites adorned with gold."
A very large proportion of the members of all Christian churches are
women, and young women too. This, on many accounts, is a very
delightful fact. It has, however, been sometimes complained that like
others, they are not so anxious to sustain their profession well, as to
make it attractive. And it is for their sake, and to lead them to
consider what would set off their profession to the best advantage,
that this chapter is designed. What is really ornamental attracts
attention and excites admiration--these are virtues which Christians

should secure by their conduct. I shall proceed on this subject, into
the four following particulars.
I. The PERSONAL QUALITIES which will make the gospel
attractive. As incongruity of conduct in reference to any profession
whatever, is a blemish and not a beauty, a deformity and not a
decoration--remember that inconsistency would be a blemish and
deformity in you, in reference to religion. Study your profession, and
thoroughly understand what it implies and enjoins. Consider well
what holiness of conduct; what spirituality of mind; what separation
from the world in spirit and taste; what devotional feelings; what
faith, hope, love, and humility; what amiableness of disposition and
kindness of disposition, are included in that declaration you have
actually made--"I am a Christian."
You should not have made such a profession if you did not
understand it--or intend to sustain it. I must remind you, it is a
solemn thing to profess to be a disciple of Christ. It supposes you to
be a new creature, that old things are passed away, and that all things
have become new with you; that you have new principles, new
motives, new ends of life, new tastes and new pleasures. Now, your
profession is to be maintained with a due regard to this. Your
conduct must correspond with it. You must be dissimilar in these
things, quite so, to those who make no such profession. They must
see the difference as well as hear of it. You must commend
yourselves to them as consistent with yourselves. You must compel
them to say, "Well, we do not like her religion, but it is quite in
harmony with her profession." But what is this CONSISTENCY? The
following remarks will perhaps explain it.
There must be EARNESTNESS, without enthusiasm, fanaticism, or
bigotry. Lukewarmness as to any duty is odious. Earnestness on the

other hand excites attention, and sometimes admiration, even where
its object is far from commendable; how much more where that
object is holy, benevolent, and useful. It is a noble and a lofty
spectacle to see amid a race of frivolous mortals, one, who being
immortal, is intent upon its immortality; and though surrounded by
the frivolities of this visible world, is intent upon the realities of the
unseen eternal world!
Nothing can be more dull and repulsive than a lukewarm and
heartless profession of religion--a pale, sickly, and shriveled form,
which has all the decay of consumption, without its hectic flush or
dimmed eye. On the other hand, how impressive a spectacle is it to
behold a young woman amid the wonderment of some of her
companions, and the laughter of others, rising upon the wings of
faith and habitual devotion above the region of their levities, into
that of devotion; to see her eye, as it is upturned to heaven, sparkling
with the beam of eternity that has fallen upon it; and to follow her in
her ardent career, pursuing her seraphic course, undeterred by
contrary examples or opposing influence.
But there must be no 'enthusiasm' leading her to violate the law of
sobriety; no 'fanaticism' leading her to tie down others to all the rules
she has imposed upon herself, and to cherish a hostile, much less a
malignant feeling towards them, because they seem to differ from
her in some things which she deems important. There must be the
most profound humility blended with all this intense earnestness,
and the mildest forbearance towards others, combined with the
utmost conscientiousness as regards the laws which she imposes on
herself.
Earnestness implies a resolute determination never to allow others to
interfere with our convictions; a courage that dares to be singular; a

fortitude which braves opposition, though it should be united with
gentleness even under persecution. Earnestness must be shown by
an intelligent and well-regulated zeal to bring others under that
influence which is the spring of its own energies. Mild in persuasion,
gentle in entreaty, and with a loving insinuating manner, the female
religious professor must aim at the conversion of others. Usefulness,
in the way of holy activity for the temporal and eternal happiness of
mankind, must be a conspicuous trait of her character. Selfishness,
indolence, and inertness, are disfigurements of character--while
benevolent activity is one of its richest ornaments.
There must be seriousness without gloom. On the one hand, she who
is bent upon eternity and anxious for salvation, cannot sink down
into the levity of those who are all taken up with fashion,
amusement, and folly! On the other, true religion includes such an
intelligent joy as makes its possessor satisfied with her own sources
of enjoyment, without running to the amusements of the world for
pleasure and excitement. The young female professor must let it be
seen and felt that her religion is her bliss--and not her penance; that
it is her song and her solace. She must appear as irradiated with sunbeams, and not invested with gloominess. Her countenance must be
the index of a heart at peace--of a bosom serene and happy.
And in addition to all this, there must be a most anxious desire to
cultivate that prime virtue in the composition of womanly and
Christian excellence--GENTLENESS. See how this is commended in
the passage which I have already quoted from the writings of the
apostle Peter—"The unfading beauty of a gentle and quiet spirit,
which is so precious to God." God values gentleness above all gifts of
intellect, delights in it above the most splendid genius, honors it
above all that men delight to honor. Gentleness is woman's ornament
above all others; it is her defense, for who can oppress the gentleness

which never provokes, and can scarcely resist or complain? Who can
wantonly tread on that lowly, lovely floweret, which as it lifts its
unpretending head, silently says, "Can you crush one that hurts
nothing?"
Nothing is more unsightly than the reverse of this--an irritable,
discontented, peevish, domineering woman. Hence the declaration of
the inspired Israelitish sage, "It is better to live alone in the corner of
an attic--than with a contentious wife in a lovely home." "It is better
to dwell in the wilderness--than with a contentious and angry
woman."
Mr. Jay has drawn a beautiful picture of this virtue in his character of
a Christian wife; as one "who can feel neglects and unkindnesses,
and yet retain her composure; who can calmly remonstrate, and
meekly reprove; who can yield and accommodate; who is not 'easily
provoked,' and is 'easily entreated;' who would endure rather than
complain, and would rather suffer in secret, than disturb others with
her grief." Such is gentleness--the highest form of the peculiarly
Christian life--and such the ornament of female Christian profession.
II. The SOCIAL QUALITIES which will make the gospel attractive.
Great injustice has been done to religion, and a great hindrance
thrown in the way of its diffusion, by those descriptions of it, which
represent it as an abstract thing, almost exclusively appertaining to
the Sunday as to time, and to the church as to place; a mere matter of
devotion, a transaction between God and the soul about salvation
and heaven; but having nothing or little to do with secular affairs, the
social relations, and the places of resort in human life; in short, as a
thing which looks entirely heavenward, but which casts no glance
upon earth. This is superstition, and we find enough of it in Popery,
which overlays with a cumbrous ceremonial the moral duties of the

law, as well as the free grace of the gospel; cuts in many instances the
ties of social life, and isolates men and women from their fellows;
and by the devotions of the cloister, the convent, and the church,
supersedes the duties of the house, the shop, and the exchange; thus
setting forth religion, as fitting men for the next world, but having
very little to do with their abode in the present one.
On the contrary, true religion, the religion of the Bible, is seen under
two aspects; one looking up to heaven; the other looking down to
earth. It gathers all the interests of man under its protection and
fostering care. Like the sun, which, though fixed in the heavens,
pours the flood of his light and glory and cherishing influence upon
earth; or like the atmosphere which, though above the earth, enters
into every place upon it, and sustains the insects that creep, as well
as the birds that soar; so religion irradiates with its light, guides by
its revelations, animates with its stimulus, sanctifies by its power,
and blesses with its influence--in all their relations, and all their
interests--all those who yield themselves up to its authority and
government. It goes to palaces and teaches kings; to the legislature
and teaches senators; to the exchange and teaches merchants; to the
cottages and teaches peasants and workmen—instructing all in the
various duties which they owe to God and to their fellow men.
Religion is also a household thing, a family law—it lifts the latch of
the house and goes in and takes its seat at the parental table, and
joins the circle round the hearth, as well as round the altar; it swells
the joys of the domestic fellowship, as well as responds to the
morning prayer, or chants the evening hymn; it founds the duties of
the second table of the law upon those of the first, employs the
loftiest theology to enforce the commonest morality, and enjoins the
most ordinary obligations of social existence by motives drawn from

the cross of Christ. Hence the necessity for professors to pay the
greatest attention to the various duties of social and domestic life.
We are commanded to let our "light shine before men, that they
seeing our good works may glorify God." So in the beautiful passage
quoted from the apostle Peter, where he gives directions to Christian
wives, he says, "Wives, in the same way be submissive to your
husbands so that, if any of them do not believe the word, they may be
won over without words by the behavior of their wives, when they see
the purity and reverence of your lives." Here again is the fact set out,
that religion is intended to regulate the communion, and form the
character, of domestic and social life, and that where its influence so
exerted is seen, it must be beneficial to the observers of it. I wish to
press this most earnestly upon your attention, that the faith of the
gospel is intended and calculated to carry social excellence to the
very highest perfection. It is the soil in which all the seeds of
domestic happiness will best flourish.
It should not be forgotten that social excellence is often seen apart
from religion. Exemplary instances of the home duties of life are
often found in those who make no profession of religion. Good
husbands and wives, parents and children, brothers and sisters, are
found outside the circle of vital piety--a fact which ought to make
those that are within it, still more anxious to be exemplary in the
discharge of their obligations. A real Christian should excel
unconverted people not only in religion, but in morality. She should
not only be more holy, but more socially excellent. She should excel
the worldling in those things which the latter makes her boast, and
rise above the level which she has prescribed as her highest elevation
in moral and social virtue. Select, therefore, the most dutiful and
affectionate daughter, the most kind and attentive sister you can of
this class, and say to yourself, "She makes no profession of religion,

and yet she excels, in a manner worthy of attention and admiration,
in all the duties of domestic life. Now, as I do profess religion, I must
if possible be still more exemplary than she is in all social
obligations, for surely nothing could possibly bring religion into
greater disrepute than for my parents, or my brothers and sisters, or
even the servants, to make a comparison to my disadvantage,
between my conduct and hers."
If you would adorn your profession it must be in this way of domestic
excellence. There may be the most seraphic piety, so far as the
raptures of devotion go; there may be a most punctilious
performance of all the rites and ceremonies of religion; there may be
a most eager and regular attendance upon all the public services of
religion; there may be an ardent zeal for the spread of the religious
peculiarities of your denomination, but if at the same time there be a
deficiency of duty, honor, and obedience to your parents, or of kind
interest and affection for your brothers and sisters, or of humane
consideration for your servants; all this religious profession will only
excite disgust, and raise a suspicion of your sincerity, and a prejudice
against religion itself.
No one can possibly be attracted to, or conciliated by, a religion
which is in any great degree destitute of social and domestic
excellence. It is a terrible taunt to be thrown at any one—"Yes, she is,
if her own profession and supposition be consulted, a very good
Christian; but it is a pity she is not a better daughter, a more kind
sister, and a more accommodating neighbor." The most flaming
profession must be at once thrown into eclipse by such a sarcasm. If
you were to study how most effectually to discredit, not only your
profession of it, but religion itself, you could not be more successful
than by associating with it such a line of conduct as this. I do

therefore most solemnly and anxiously entreat you to enter very
deeply into the subject of the chapter entitled, "The Parental Home."
It is probable that this chapter will be read by some who sustain the
character of female servants. This is a class of people to be found in
all our churches, and in some is very numerous; and I take this
opportunity of saying that I have many such who are among the
brightest ornaments of the church under my care, and who by their
exemplary deportment do much to recommend religion to their
employers. Their honesty, diligence, industry, good disposition, and
obliging, respectful deportment, make them the comfort of the
households in which they live. It is somewhat observable that the text
which speaks of our "adorning the doctrine of God our Savior," was
addressed to servants. And so far as the ornamental parts of religion
are concerned, as well as its substantial elements, none have more
occasions, or more favorable circumstances, for exhibiting them than
female servants. Their humble situation, by testing their good
disposition, devotedness, and submission, gives them an opportunity
of bringing out into bold and beautiful contrast, the most lovely traits
of Christian piety.
On the other, hand, there are some, who by a lamentable deficiency
of these more amiable qualities, though perhaps they may have real
religious principle, have excited much prejudice against genuine
piety, and led their employers to say, "I am not anxious again to have
what are called religious servants, for in most things they are no
better, and in some they are worse than others."
III. There are INTELLECTUAL ornaments of your profession, which
you should seek--both on their own account and on that of religion.
True it is that genuine and consistent religion is its own
recommendation, and depends upon nothing extraneous for its real

value. Still, since there are those who have imbibed prejudices
against it, and have taken up mistaken views of its nature, as if it
were at war with the gifts of the intellect and the graces of the
character--it would be well to disarm their minds, and by reason and
elegance, to convince them that piety is not, as they may suppose,
another name for ignorance, stupidity, and vulgarity. For their sakes,
then, as well as for your own pleasure, cultivate your minds by study.
Acquire an eager thirst for knowledge. Be fond of reading, and of the
best kind of reading. Disprove the slander that girls are only fond of
tales and novels, of stories of love, female adventures or heroism.
Prize knowledge; desire to arrive at truth; be anxious to investigate
the wonders of nature; and covet to enrich your minds with the
treasures dug up and distributed in such abundance in this
wonderful age. Store your minds with this wealth.
But let other faculties be brought into exercise besides your memory;
cultivate your judgment, be inquisitive, reflective, discriminating.
There are many young people whose memory is a storehouse
crowded with facts, names, and dates, but who are lamentably
deficient after all in judgment. They may talk French, quote history,
and display other worldly accomplishments, but their intellect is too
feeble to form, to hold, or to defend, an opinion of their own. We do
not of course expect all women to be profound logicians, but most
tolerably well-educated women may by vigorous and well sustained
efforts arrive at some maturity of sound judgment.
Let it then be seen that the highest kind of wisdom and knowledge
does not lead you to despise the lower kinds; lest those who are
competent only in them, should by what they see in you, despise that
which is the highest. Make it clear that they who are the children of
God are most solicitous to become acquainted with all the works of
their Heavenly Father, not excepting the wonders and glories of

creation. Convince the worshipers of the God of nature, (or rather of
the false god, Nature) that while you are chiefly anxious to pass on
and worship Him who sits enthroned between the cherubim, upon
the mercy seat in the Holy of Holies, you can bow and adore with
them in the vestibule of his temple, and ascend with them to the
highest altitude of earthly subjects and general knowledge; and that
when like birds of weaker pinions, and dimmer vision, they droop
the wing and stop their flight, you, like the eagle soaring still upward
to the sun, can still pursue your heaven-bound course, and rise into
the regions of celestial splendor.
Nearly allied to this, is taste, or a perception and love of the beautiful
and sublime in nature, in literature, in accomplishments, in conduct,
yes, and in Holy Scripture. The Bible is full of instances of this. With
a correct literary taste you will relish more even this bread of life,
that came down from heaven--the Word of God. Inspiration has
garnished its page with beauties that are hidden from eyes whose
vision has not been strengthened by education. The Scripture is a
paradise of flowers to be admired, as well as of fruits to be eaten.
Taste displayed even in what are called accomplishments is
ornamental to piety, when not carried to excess. As I observed, in a
former chapter, these matters of elegance are not to be despised.
True, it is a sin for a Christian woman to spend hours and hours of
each precious day in the fashionable modes of killing time--by
embroidery, crotchet work, painting, languages, and music--to the
neglect of religion, useful reading, and all benevolent effort. It is truly
affecting, to see a rational, immortal, and accountable creature,
dwelling in this world of ignorance, sin, and misery, which she could
do something to enlighten, reform and bless, (and she herself on her
way to eternity and the bar of God,) consuming the best and
preparatory period of her whole existence in this world and the next,

in working figures upon canvass, or drawing them upon paper; or in
playing and singing; or in acquiring German, French, or Italian.
Let me not however be misunderstood. I am not such a rigid
utilitarian as to be the advocate of the merely useful in human
character, for I really love and admire the ornamental. I am not all
for Doric strength, but contend also for Ionic grace and Corinthian
elegance. I am not for young women laying down the needle and the
pencil; or for their leaving the piano silent and untouched; or foreign
languages unlearned. No such thing! Religion forbids not these
matters. Nature, and the Bible too, are full of the sweetest
embroidery and enameling, full of music and painting, and all the
varieties of a language not our own. Instead of forbidding what can
add embellishment to the female character, I enjoin it. Woman,
formed to please, yes, made in Paradise, where beauty was in
perfection, and where your first lessons in taste were taught by the
Great Master of all created beauty, go on to besprinkle your character
and to interweave your conduct with every flower of elegance; and
especially Christian woman, let it be seen by your sex, that you have
not so learned Christ as to throw off all delight in the tasteful, the
decorative, and the picturesque, with which pointing to the lily, the
vine, the birds, and the flocks, he was pleased to enliven and adorn
his own discourses. To me it is always a beautiful sight to behold the
robe of righteousness and the garment of salvation, in which genuine
piety is ever attired, adorned, (not encumbered,) with the jewels of
elegant accomplishments and tasteful decoration.
Now all this is important to you as young unmarried women—and
how is the importance of it augmented by your looking forward and
contemplating yourselves in future life, as wives and mothers!
Without intelligence and taste, are you fitted to be the companion of
a wise and sensible man, or to preside with advantage over the

education of children? Remember the character of the age in which
you live. But even in these days of knowledge and taste we know very
well that the aptness and ability of a good house-wife are always
invaluable—for it is a poor commendation to say of a woman, "She is
exceedingly well informed in all the literature of the day, quite
learned, but she knows very little of household affairs." I believe her
husband often thinks, if he does not say, "I would dispense with a
great deal of her bookishness and her knowledge, if I could have the
house kept in a better condition, and enjoy a little more comfort at
home."
Still, a wife and a mother, to all the household prerequisites, should
and may add intelligence and taste. It is indeed the perfection of
womanly character, at once to "look well to the ways of her
household" and also, to "open her mouth with wisdom." How
impressive and attractive a scene is it to see a pious, well-informed,
accomplished woman, respected as well as beloved by her husband,
as his intelligent companion, esteemed by his guests, and looked up
to with confidence, reverence, and affection by her children, over
whose general education she presides with dignity and ability.
IV. There are some things which are not reducible to either of the
other heads, and which may therefore be called general excellences
of a decorative nature. These have been already dwelt upon in former
discourses, and therefore need only be briefly mentioned here. We
find them set forth in the early character and conduct of Rebekah; in
which we beheld modesty without silliness, frankness without
forwardness, courtesy without affectation, and pleasantness without
servility. In short, all that maidenly reserve which would restrain
whatever is obtrusive, crude, impudent, and bold; and which yet
would allow of an artless, ingenuous, and unembarrassed mode of
communion with the other sex.

I have sometimes seen good women so bold, obtrusive, and
imposing, as to repel and disgust. I could not doubt that they had
really some religious principle within this indecorous outside, but it
could scarcely be seen. In some cases it has happened that even the
very profession of religion, which should have led women to draw
closer the veil of modest reserve, has led them to throw it off
altogether, and they seemed to act as if the Christian name, which
ought to be a guarantee for all that is meek and gentle, was a
sanction for improper forwardness.
On the contrary, there are others, whose profession of religion has so
disfigured them with the airs of assumed sanctity, so stiffened them
into prudish reserve, and so distorted the simplicity of nature with
the formalism of gloomy superstition, that they are repulsive as
spectres, and lead many to exclaim, "If this be religion, it may be
pure, but it is surely unlovely, and, one would imagine, as unfit for
heaven, where all is joyous, as it is for earth, where if happiness be
lacking, this certainly cannot supply it."
Good disposition, or amiability, is essential to the adornment of a
Christian profession. This has been alluded to already in more places
than one, but its importance justifies the repetition. I have already
admitted that there is a great difference in this respect in natural
constitution. Hence it costs some immensely more pains to acquire a
small degree of this excellence, than it does others to manifest ten
times the amount. And really there may be more of principle and
virtue in the small measure of the one, than in the abundance of the
other. Some indulgence should therefore be shown to those who are
born with a crabbed disposition, and they should not be judged too
harshly. We see the fault, but not the contrition with which it is
followed; nor do we witness the deep self-abasement which the
ebullition of the moment inflicts for hours, if not days. But still we

would enjoin on those who are conscious of this infirmity, a most
anxious, earnest, and prayerful attention to the subject.
Let every woman who is troubled with an over-wrought sensibility, a
morbid susceptibility of offence, an unusual liability to passion, put
her heart under discipline, or her constitutional tendency will be a
prolific source of misery to herself, and to others around her. It is
not, however, as a source of disquietude that I now allude to it, but as
a cause of scandal. A bad disposition not only troubles the heart, but
it disfigures the profession. Observers can see nothing to love and
admire in religion, when found in company with so much ill-temper.
There are some people whose bad disposition is unassociated with
piety, or indeed moral worth of any kind, and they are wasps,
hornets, scorpions, all venom and no honey, according to the degree
of malignity they possess. There are others who have real godliness
and some sterling excellence of other kinds, and they resemble bees,
who though they have honey, yet are somewhat irritable, and have
also a sting for those who offend them. Cultivate then a lovely and
amiable disposition as one of the brightest ornaments of religion. It
is to religion what the burnish is to the gold, the polish to the steel,
the fragrance to the rose, the sunshine to the gorgeous scene.
There is one thing which, in addition to all that has been mentioned,
is requisite to give the finishing stroke of ornament to the character
of the young female professors of religion; and that is the virtue that
is sometimes designated good sense, at other times prudence, at
others thoughtfulness. I know such dispositions are thought by some
minds to partake too much of a grave demeanor, to be ornamental in
youth. They may hang like rich ripe clusters round the character of
the matron, but such people think the beauty of youth consists of the
picturesque, the romantic, with a tinge of the wild, the visionary, and
the enthusiastic. There is no poetry they imagine in prudence, no

imagination in good sense, no imaginativeness in thoughtfulness.
True, and I will concede so much as to allow that a precocious
gravity, an anticipation of the sobriety of threescore years and ten, is
not what I enjoin, or wish to see in youthful maidens.
Even religion with all its solemn proprieties, all its heavenly
sanctities, does not extinguish the vivacity, the sprightliness, the
buoyancy of a girl in her teens. I love to see her sparkling eye, her
sun-lit countenance, her elastic step, and to hear the merry note of
her laughter, and the music of her cheerful voice. These are
ornamental, they belong to her age, and the natural flow of her
spirits, and it is only superstition that would turn that young and
joyous creature into the stiff and silent statue, the nun-like figure, or
the unsmiling devotee.
But then, is it any detriment to all this innocent hilarity to have
meditative thoughtfulness, an instinctive sense of propriety, cautious
reserve and accurate discrimination? Is it a blemish rather than a
beauty to be able to consider what in all circumstances is best to be
done, and to be able to do it well? To act from principle rather than
from impulse, and to be guided by reason rather than by feeling? To
weigh words before they are spoken, and estimate actions before they
are performed? Is not propriety beauty? Are notions and caprices,
whims and eccentricities, imprudence and follies, ornaments? Yes, in
the estimation of that silly girl (but in hers alone), who would rather
be smiled at for her wildness and her weakness, than commended for
her more solid excellence. What kind of a mother is this romantic
and wayward creature likely to make? Let the Christian young
woman be very jealous then of this romanticism, and consider it is
not in keeping with the dignity and sanctity of religion. The matrons
are admonished by the apostles to teach the young women to be
sober; a word that refers to a prudent thoughtfulness.

Such then are the ornaments of early female religious profession. It
has been throughout this chapter supposed that there may be real
piety, without some of these accompaniments--a rough unpolished
godliness, true but unadorned religion. One young female may be
sincere in her profession of religion, and yet have an uncorrected
infirmity of disposition—another may be very illiterate or very weakminded—another may be guilty of various little inconsistencies
which tarnish the beauty of her profession—another may be rash,
restless, and imprudent—another may be spiritually proud, and
something like pretended sanctimonious—another may be lacking in
agreeable and accommodating manners or habits at home. In all
these ways and in various others, religion may be disparaged, shorn
of some of its beauty, rendered less attractive, and made even
repulsive to those who observe it.
"Let not your good," says the apostle, "be evil spoken of." Religion is
itself so transcendently excellent, (being the highest glory of man, the
image of God, and the disposition of heaven,) that it should be
exhibited to the greatest possible advantage. Who that wore the
portrait of some dear friend, or suspended a picture of the queen in
their house, would not wish to have it so framed as to be worthy of
the subject? Who would not deprecate the idea of their keeping it
either covered with dust or defilement? True religion is the only
thing that can make people happy in this world, or guide them to
eternal felicity in the world to come. How solemnly, tremblingly
anxious should all who profess it, be to exhibit it in the most
advantageous light, and with the greatest and most powerful
attractions! How deeply solicitous should we be, lest by anything
others see in us, they should take a prejudice against it, and we
should thus cast stumbling blocks in their way! How desirous should
we feel, and how studious should we be, to invest our profession with
whatever things are lovely--that others, beholding our good works,

our peace of mind, our meekness, gentleness, and kindness, our
usefulness and humility, should be won to Christ; that so if they will
not love religion in the first instance for its own sake, they may be
conciliated to it by the ornaments with which, in our case, it is
decorated!
Before this chapter is concluded, I may with great propriety suppose
that some will read it who have not made a profession of religion,
who are not in visible connection with a Christian church, and are
living in the habitual neglect of the Lord's Supper. Making no
profession of religion! How is this? Have you none to profess?
Melancholy idea! No religion! Better, I admit, not to profess at all,
than to profess what you do not possess, and thus add hypocrisy to
your other sins. But is it not painful and fearful to think of a rational,
immortal, sinful being, living without penitence, prayer, faith, and
love? How can you live another hour in such a state? What are all the
intellectual ornaments spoken of above, without personal piety, but a
garland of beautiful flowers round the brow of a corpse; or but as
diamonds sparkling on the bosom of death? Oh, for your soul's sake,
live no longer without remembering your Creator in the days of your
youth.
Others, perhaps, will read this discourse, who, though partakers of
true faith in Christ and love to God, are not yet professors of the
religion they possess. We again say, How is this? Have you pondered
that language of the apostle, "With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation," or that solemn injunction of Christ, when he instituted
the sacred supper, "Do this in remembrance of me." Is this the
command you select from the law of the New Testament as the only
one you feel at liberty to disobey? This one, so tender, so touching, so
loving! This, delivered in sight of the cross, only a few hours before

our Lord endured those agonies by which you are saved! What!
neglect the command of dying love, a command so positive, an
invitation so gracious, an injunction, obedience to which is at once so
honorable, so happy, and so useful! What is your reason for this
neglect? Do you tremble to make a profession because it is so sacred?
Have you not mistaken the design of the Lord's Supper; it is simply a
commemorative ordinance, and are you not deluded and terrified by
the mystery in which priestcraft has sought to envelope it?
But, "you tremble to make a profession lest you should dishonor it,
as so many have done." They have indeed, and the painful fact
should lead to caution, self-examination, and earnest prayer for
grace, that another stumbling-block should not be furnished by you.
But the very fear will, if sincere, be your preservation from the object
of your dread. The path of duty is the way of safety. Besides, are you
less likely to sin outside the pale of communion than within it? We
invite you, therefore, if you are partakers of true faith, to profess, or
to use a scriptural synonym, to confess it. The communion of saints
and the participation of the Lord's Supper will by God's grace,
strengthen the principle, and call forth the exercise, of the Divine life,
and be at once your honor and your joy.
And as to you who are already to be found in the fellowship of the
faithful, I congratulate you on the choice you have made, and on the
decision to which you have come. To your pastors it was a source of
unspeakable pleasure to receive you among the number of the
followers of the Lamb. You, in an especial manner, are their hope,
and joy, and crown of rejoicing, inasmuch as they look to you, and
those who may descend from you, to fill up the places of more aged
disciples, when they, according to the course of nature, shall be
removed to the church triumphant. Acknowledge practically and
gratefully the grace you have received from the Lord, by using your

influence with labor and judgment, to engage other young people,
your relatives and companions, to come and share with you the
privileges, and enjoy the blessings of Christian communion.
And to give effect to your persuasions, exhibit all the beauty of
consistent example. Let religion be seen in you, combining with all
its sanctities and spiritualities, the pleasantness of life, amiability of
disposition, general intelligence, correct taste, and general social
excellence, which shall predispose them in favor of genuine piety.
Make it evident to them that true godliness is as happy a thing as it is
a holy one. Convince them by what they see in you as well as by what
they hear from you, that you have found the secret, and that your
soul has touched the center, of bliss. Let the richest excellences that
can adorn the female character--all the most rare and delicate
beauties that are admired in it--be strung together upon the golden
thread of eminent piety, and be hung like a necklace of heavenly
pearls round your profession. Thus, "make the teaching about God
our Savior attractive in every way."
