PURITAN GOLD -- Religious Affections by Jonathan Edwards: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 11
Part III: Distinguishing Signs IX-X


IX. Gracious affections soften the heart, and are attended and followed with a Christian
tenderness of spirit.
False affections, however persons may seem to be melted by them while they are new, yet
have a tendency in the end to harden the heart. A disposition to some kind of passions may be
established; such as imply self-seeking, self-exaltation, and opposition to others. But false
affections, with the delusion that attends them, finally tend to stupify the mind, and shut it up
against those affections wherein tenderness of heart consists: and the effect of them at last is, that
persons in the settled frame of their minds, become less affected with their present and past sins,
and less conscientious with respect to future sins, less moved with the warnings and cautions of
God's word, or God's chastisements in his providence, more careless of the frame of their hearts,
and the manner and tendency of their behavior, less quicksighted to discern what is sinful, less
afraid of the appearance of evil, than they were while they were under legal awakenings and fears
of hell. Now they have been the subjects of such and such impressions and affections, and have a
high opinion of themselves, and look on their state to be safe; they can be much more easy than
before, in living in the neglect of duties that are troublesome and inconvenient; and are much more
slow and partial in complying with difficult commands; are in no measure so alarmed at the
appearance of their own defects and transgressions; are emboldened to favor themselves more,
with respect to the labor, and painful care and exactness in their walk, and more easily yield to
temptations, and the solicitations of their lusts; and have far less care of their behavior, when they
come into the holy presence of God, in the time of public or private worship. Formerly it may be,
under legal convictions, they took much pains in religion, and denied themselves in many things:
but now they think themselves out of danger of hell, they very much put off the burden of the
cross, and save themselves the trouble of difficult duties, and allow themselves more in the
enjoyment of their ease and their lusts.
Such persons as these, instead of embracing Christ as their Savior from sin, trust in him as
the Savior of their sins; instead of flying to him as their refuge from their spiritual enemies they
make use of him as the defense of their spiritual enemies, from God, and to strengthen them
against him. They make Christ the minister of sin, and great officer and vicegerent of the devil, to
strengthen his interest, and make him above all things in the world strong against Jehovah; so that
they may sin against him with good courage, and without any fear, being effectually secured from
restraints, by his most solemn warnings and most awful threatenings. They trust in Christ to
preserve to them the quiet enjoyment of their sins, and to be their shield to defend them from
God's displeasure; while they come close to him, even to his bosom, the place of his children, to
fight against him, with their mortal weapons, hid under their skirts.67 However, some of these, at
the same time, make a great profession of love to God, and assurance of his favor, and great joy in
tasting the sweetness of his love.
After this manner they trusted in Christ, that the Apostle Jude speaks of, who crept in
among the saints unknown; but were really ungodly men, turning the grace of God into
67"These are hypocrites that believe, but fail in regard of the use of the gospel and of

the Lord Jesus. And these we read of, Jude 3, viz., of some men that did turn grace into
wantonness. For therein appears the exceeding evil of man's heart, that not only the
law, but also the glorious gospel of the Lord Jesus, works in him all manner of
unrighteousness. And it is too common for men at the first work of conversion, Oh
then to cry for grace and Christ, and afterwards grow licentious, live and lie in the
breach of the law, and take their warrant for their course from the gospel!"
Shepard's Parable, Part I. p. 126.

136
lasciviousness, Jude 4. These are they that trust in their being righteous; and because God has
promised that the righteous shall surely live, or certainly be saved, are therefore emboldened to
commit iniquity, whom God threatens in Ezek. 33:13: "When I shall say to the righteous, that he
shall surely live; if he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity; all his righteousness
shall not be remembered, but for his iniquity that he hath committed, he shall die for it."
Gracious affections are of a quite contrary tendency; they turn a heart of stone more and
more into a heart of flesh. A holy love and hope are principles that are vastly more efficacious upon
the heart, to make it tender, and to fill it with a dread of sin, or whatever might displease and
offend God, and to engage it to watchfulness, and care, and strictness, than a slavish fear of hell.
Gracious affections, as was observed before, flow out of a contrite heart, or (as the word signifies)
a bruised heart, bruised and broken with godly sorrow; which makes the heart tender, as bruised
flesh is tender, and easily hurt. Godly sorrow has much greater influence to make the heart tender,
than mere legal sorrow from selfish principles.
The tenderness of the heart of a true Christian, is elegantly signified by our Savior, in his
comparing such a one to a little child. The flesh of a little child is very tender; so is the heart of one
that is new born. This is represented in what we are told of Naaman's cure of his leprosy, by his
washing in Jordan; which was undoubtedly a type of the renewing of the soul, by washing in the
laver of regeneration. We are told, 2 Kings 5:14, "That he went down, and dipped himself seven
times in Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God; and his flesh came again like unto the
flesh of a little child." Not only is the flesh of a little child tender, but his mind is tender. A little
child has his heart easily moved, wrought upon and bowed: so is a Christian in spiritual things. A
little child is apt to be affected with sympathy, to weep with them that weep, and cannot well bear
to see others in distress: so it is with a Christian, John 11:25, Rom. 12:15, 1 Cor. 12:26. A little
child is easily won by kindness: so is a Christian. A little child is easily affected with grief at
temporal evils, and has his heart melted, and falls a weeping: thus tender is the heart of a Christian,
with regard to the evil of sin. A little child is easily affrighted at the appearance of outward evils, or
anything that threatens its hurt: so is a Christian apt to be alarmed at the appearance of moral evil,
and anything that threatens the hurt of the soul. A little child, when it meets enemies, or fierce
beasts, is not apt to trust its own strength, but flies to its parents for refuge: so a saint is not selfconfident in engaging spiritual enemies, but flies to Christ. A little child is apt to be suspicious of
evil in places of danger, afraid in the dark, afraid when left alone, or far from home: so is a saint
apt to be sensible of his spiritual dangers, jealous of himself, full of fear when he cannot see his
way plain before him, afraid to be left alone, and to be at a distance from God: Prov. 28:14,
"Happy is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his heart shall fall into mischief." A
little child is apt to be afraid of superiors, and to dread their anger, and tremble at their frowns and
threatenings: so is a true saint with respect to God: Psal. 119:120, "My flesh trembleth for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments." Isa. 66:2, "To this man will I look, even to him that is
poor, and trembleth at my word." ver. 5, "Hear ye the word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his
word." Ezra. 9:4, "Then were assembled unto me everyone that trembled at the words of the God
of Israel." Chap. 10:3; "According to the counsel of my Lord, and of those that tremble at the
commandment of our God." A little child approaches superiors with awe: so do the saints approach
God with holy awe and reverence: Job 13:2, "Shall not his excellency make you afraid? And his
dread fall upon you?" Holy fear is so much the nature of true godliness, that it is called in Scripture
by no other name more frequently, than the fear of God.
Hence gracious affections do not tend to make men bold, forward, noisy, and boisterous;
but rather to speak trembling: Hos. 13:1, "When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in
Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died;" and to clothe with a kind of holy fear in all their
behavior towards God and man; agreeably to Psal. 2:11, 1 Pet. 3:15, 2 Cor. 7:15, Eph. 6:5, 1 Pet.
3:2, Rom. 11:20.
But here some may object and say, is there no such thing as a holy boldness in prayer, and
the duties of divine worship? I answer, there is doubtless such a thing; and it is chiefly to be found
in eminent saints, persons of great degrees of faith and love. But this holy boldness is not in the
least opposite to reverence; though it be to disunion and servility. It abolishes or lessens that
dispositions which arises from moral distance or alienation; and also distance of relation, as that of
a slave; but not at all, that which becomes the natural distance, whereby we are infinitely inferior.
No boldness in poor sinful worms of the dust, that have a right sight of God and themselves, will
prompt them to approach to God with less fear and reverence, than spotless and glorious angels in

137
heaven, who cover their faces before his throne, Isa. 6, at the beginning. Rebecca (who in her
marriage with Isaac, in almost all its circumstances, was manifestly a great type of the church, the
spouse of Christ) when she meets Isaac, lights off from her camel, and takes a vail and covers
herself; although she was brought to him as his bride, to be with him in the nearest relation, and
most intimate union, that mankind are ever united one to another.68 Elijah, that great prophet, who
had so much holy familiarity with God, at a time of special nearness to God, even when he
conversed with him in the mount, wrapped his face in his mantle. Which was not because he was
terrified with any servile fear, by the terrible wind, and earthquake, and fire; but after these were all
over, and God spake to him as a friend, in a still small voice: 1 Kings 19:12, 13, "And after the
fire, a still small voice; and it was so, when Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his mantle."
And Moses, with whom God spake face to face, as a man speaks with his friend, and was
distinguished from all the prophets, in the familiarity with God that he was admitted to; at a time
when he was brought nearest of all, when God showed him his glory in that same mount where he
afterwards spake to Elijah: "He made haste, and bowed his head towards the earth, and
worshipped," Exod. 34:8. There is in some persons a most unsuitable and unsufferable boldness,
in their addresses to the great Jehovah, in an affectation of a holy boldness, and ostentation of
eminent nearness and familiarity; the very thoughts of which would make them shrink into
nothing, with horror and confusion, if they saw the distance that is between God and them. They
are like the Pharisee, that boldly came up near, in a confidence of his own eminency in holiness.
Whereas, if they saw their vileness, they would be more like the publican, that "stood afar off, and
durst not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven; but smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful
to me a sinner." It becomes such sinful creatures as we, to approach a holy God (although with
faith, and without terror, yet) with contrition, and penitent shame and confusion of face. It is
foretold that this should be the disposition of the church, in the time of her highest privileges on
earth in her latter day of glory, when God should remarkably comfort her, by revealing his
covenant mercy to her, Ezek. 16:60, to the end: "I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.
Then thou shalt remember thy ways and be ashamed.—And I will establish my covenant with thee,
and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; that thou mayest remember and be confounded and never
open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
hast done, saith the Lord God." The woman that we read of in the 7th chapter of Luke, that was an
eminent saint, and had much of that true love which casts out fear, by Christ's own testimony, ver.
47, she approached Christ in an amiable and acceptable manner, when she came with that humble
modesty, reverence and shame, when she stood at his feet, weeping behind him, as not being fit to
appear before his face, and washed his feet with her tears.
One reason why gracious affections are attended with this tenderness of spirit which has
been spoken of, is, that true grace tends to promote convictions of conscience. Persons are wont to
have convictions of conscience before they have any grace: and if afterwards they are truly
converted, and have true repentance, and joy, and peace in believing; this has a tendency to put an
end to errors, but has no tendency to put an end to convictions of sin, but to increase them. It does
not stupify man's conscience; but makes it more sensible, more easily and thoroughly discerning
the sinfulness of that which is sinful, and receiving a greater conviction of the heinous and dreadful
nature of sin, susceptive of a quicker and deeper sense of it, and more convinced of his own
sinfulness and wickedness of his heart; and consequently it has a tendency to make him more
jealous of his heart. Grace tends to give the soul a further and better conviction of the same things
concerning sin, that it was convinced of, under a legal work of the Spirit of God; viz., its great
contrariety to the will, and law, and honor of God, the greatness of God's hatred of it, and
displeasure against it, and the dreadful punishment it exposes to and deserves. And not only so,
but it convinces the soul of something further concerning sin, that it saw nothing of, while only
under legal convictions; and that is the infinitely hateful nature of sin, and its dreadfulness upon
that account. And this makes the heart tender with respect to sin; like David's heart, that smote him
when he had cut off Saul's skirt. The heart of a true penitent is like a burnt child that dreads the
fire. Whereas, on the contrary, he that has had a counterfeit repentance, and false comforts and
joys, is like iron that has been suddenly heated and quenched; it becomes much harder than before.
68Dr. Ames, in his Cases of Conscience, Book III. chap iv., speaks of a holy modesty in

the worship God as one sign of true humility.

138
A false conversion puts an end to convictions of conscience; and so either takes away, or much
diminishes that conscientiousness, which was manifested under a work of the law.
All gracious affections have a tendency to promote this Christian tenderness of heart, that
has been spoken of; not only a godly sorrow, but also a gracious joy: Psal. 2:11, "Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling." As also a gracious hope: Psal. 33:18, "Behold the eye of the
Lord is upon them that fear him; upon them that hope in his mercy." And Psal. 147:11, "The Lord
taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that hope in his mercy." Yea, the most confident and
assured hope, that is truly gracious, has this tendency. The higher a holy hope is raised, the more
there is of this Christian tenderness. The banishing of a servile fear, by a holy assurance, is
attended with a proportionable increase of a reverential fear. The diminishing of the fear of the
fruits of God's displeasure in future punishment, is attended with a proportionable increase of fear
of his displeasure itself; the diminishing of the fear of hell, with an increase of the fear of sin. The
vanishing of jealousies of the person's state, is attended with a proportionable increase of
jealousies of his heart, in a distrust of its strength, wisdom, stability, faithfulness, &c. The less apt
he is to be afraid of natural evil, having his heart fixed, trusting in God, and so not afraid of evil
tidings; the more apt he is to be alarmed, with the appearance of moral evil, or the evil of sin. As he
has more holy boldness, so he has less of self-confidence, and a forward assuming boldness, and
more modesty. As he is more sure than others of deliverance from hell, so he has more of a sense
of the desert of it. He is less apt than others to be shaken in faith; but more apt than others to be
moved with solemn warnings, and with God's frowns, and with the calamities of others. He has
the firmest comfort, but the softest heart: richer than others, but the poorest of all in spirit: the
tallest and strongest saint, but the least and tenderest child among them.
X. Another thing wherein those affections that are truly gracious and holy, differ from
those that are false, is beautiful symmetry and proportion.
Not that the symmetry of the virtues, and gracious affections of the saints, in this life is
perfect: it oftentimes is in many things defective, through the imperfection of grace, for want of
proper instructions, through errors in judgment, or some particular unhappiness of natural temper,
or defects in education, and many other disadvantages that might be mentioned. But yet there is, in
no wise, that monstrous disproportion in gracious affections, and the various parts of true religion
in the saints, that is very commonly to be observed, in the false religion, and counterfeit graces, of
hypocrites.
In the truly holy affections of the saints is found that proportion, which is the natural
consequence of the universality of their sanctification. They have the whole image of Christ upon
them: they have put off the old man, and have put on the new man entire in all its parts and
members. It hath pleased the Father that in Christ all fullness should dwell: there is in him every
grace; he is full of grace and truth: and they that are Christ's, do, "of his fullness receive grace for
grace" (John 1:14, 16); i.e., there is every grace in them which is in Christ; grace for grace; that is,
grace answerable to grace: there is no grace in Christ, but there is its image in believers to answer
it: the image is a true image; and there is something of the same beautiful proportion in the image,
which is in the original; there is feature for feature, and member for member. There is symmetry
and beauty in God's workmanship. The natural body, which God hath made, consists of many
members; and all are in a beautiful proportion: so it is in the new man, consisting of various graces
and affections. The body of one that was born a perfect child, may fail of exact proportion through
distemper, and the weakness and wounds of some of its members; yet the disproportion is in no
measure like that of those that are born monsters.
It is with hypocrites, as it was with Ephraim of old, at a time when God greatly complains
of their hypocrisy, Hos. 7:8: "Ephraim is a cake not turned," half roasted and half raw: there is
commonly no manner of uniformity in their affections.
There is in many of them great partiality with regard to the several kinds of religious
affections; great affections in some things, and no manner of proportion in others. A holy hope and
holy fear go together in the saints, as has been observed from Psal. 33:18, and 147:11. But in
some of these is the most confident hope, while they are void of reverence, self-jealousy and
caution, to a great degree cast off fear. In the saints, joy and holy fear go together, though the joy
be never so great: as it was with the disciples, in that joyful morning of Christ's resurrection, Matt.

139
28:8: "And they departed quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great joy."69 But many of these
rejoice without trembling: their joy is of that sort, that it is truly opposite to godly fear.
But particularly one great difference between saints and hypocrites is this, that the joy and
comfort of the former is attended with godly sorrow and mourning for sin. They have not only
sorrow to prepare them for their first comfort, but after they are comforted, and their joy
established. As it is foretold of the church of God, that they should mourn and loathe themselves
for their sins, after they were returned from the captivity, and were settled in the land of Canaan,
the land of rest, and the land that flows with milk and honey, Ezek. 20:42, 43: "And ye shall know
that I am the Lord, when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country for the which I
lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers. And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your
doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your
evils that ye have committed." As also in Ezek. 16:61, 6S, 63. A true saint is like a little child in
this respect; he never had any godly sorrow before he was born again; but since has it often in
exercise: as a little child, before it is born, and while it remains in darkness, never cries; but as
soon as it sees the light, it begins to cry; and thenceforward is often crying. Although Christ hath
borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, so that we are freed from the sorrow of punishment,
and may now sweetly feed upon the comforts Christ hath purchased for us; yet that hinders not but
that our feeding on these comforts should be attended with the sorrow of repentance. As of old, the
children of Israel were commanded, evermore to feed upon the paschal lamb, with bitter herbs.
True saints are spoken of in Scripture, not only as those that have mourned for sin, but as those
that do mourn, whose manner it is still to mourn: Matt. 5:4, "Blessed are they that mourn; for they
shall be comforted."
Not only is there often in hypocrites an essential deficiency as to the various kinds of
religious affections, but also a strange partiality and disproportion, in the same affections, with
regard to different objects.
Thus, as to the affection of love, some make high pretenses, and a great show of love to
God and Christ, and it may be, have been greatly affected with what they have heard or thought
concerning them: but they have not a spirit of love and benevolence towards men, but are disposed
to contention, envy, revenge, and evil speaking; and will, it may be, suffer an old grudge to rest in
their bosoms towards a neighbor, for seven years together, if not twice seven years; living in real
ill will and bitterness of spirit towards him: and it may be in their dealings with their neighbors, are
not very strict and conscientious in observing the rule of "doing to others as they would that they
should do to them." And, on the other hand, there are others that appear as if they had a great deal
of benevolence to men, are very good natured and generous in their way, but have no love to God.
And as to love to men, there are some that have flowing affections to some; but their love is
far from being of so extensive and universal a nature, as a truly Christian love is. They are full of
dear affections to some, and full of bitterness towards others. They are knit to their own party,
them that approve of them, love them and admire them; but are fierce against those that oppose and
dislike them. Matt. 5:45, 46, "Be like your Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise
upon the evil, and on the good. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? Do not
even the publicans the same?" Some show a great affection to their neighbors, and pretend to be
ravished with the company of the children of God abroad; and at the same time are uncomfortable
and churlish towards their wives and other near relations at home, and are very negligent of relative
duties. And as to the great love to sinners and opposers of religion, and the great concern for their
souls, that there is an appearance of in some, even to extreme distress and agony, singling out a
particular person, from among a multitude, for its object, there being at the same time no general
compassion to sinners, that are in equally miserable circumstances, but what is in a monstrous
disproportion; this seems not to be of the nature of gracious affection. Not that I suppose it to be at
all strange, that pity to the perishing souls of sinners should be to a degree of agony; if other things
are answerable: or that a truly gracious compassion to souls should be exercised much more to
some persons than others that are equally miserable, especially on some particular occasions: there
69"Renewed care and diligence follows the sealings of the Spirit. Now is the soul at

the foot of Christ, as Mary was at the sepulcher, with fear and great joy. He that
travels the road with a rich treasure about him, is afraid of a thief in every bush."
Flavel's Sacramental Meditations, Med. 4.

140
may many things happen to fix the mind, and affect the heart, with respect to a particular person, at
such a juncture; and without doubt some saints have been in great distress for the souls of
particular persons, so as to be as it were in travail for them; but when persons appear, at particular
times, in racking agonies for the soul of some single person, far beyond what has been usually
heard or read of in eminent saints, but appear to be persons that have a spirit of meek and fervent
love, charity, and compassion to mankind in general, in a far less degree than they: I say, such
agonies are greatly to be suspected, for reasons already given; viz., that the Spirit of God is wont
to give graces and gracious affections in a beautiful symmetry and proportion.
And as there is a monstrous disproportion in the love of some, in its exercises towards
different persons, so there is in their seeming exercises of love towards the same persons.—Some
men show a love to others as to their outward man, they are liberal of their worldly substance, and
often give to the poor; but have no love to, or concern for the souls of men. Others pretend a great
love to men's souls, that are not compassionate and charitable towards their bodies. The making a
great show of love, pity and distress for souls, costs them nothing; but in order to show mercy to
men's bodies, they must part with money out of their pockets. But a true Christian love to our
brethren extends both to their souls and bodies; and herein is like the love and compassion of Jesus
Christ. He showed mercy to men's souls, by laboring for them, in preaching the gospel to them;
and showed mercy to their bodies in going about doing good, healing all manner of sickness and
diseases among the people. We have a remarkable instance of Christ's having compassion at once
both to men's souls and bodies, and showing compassion by feeding both, in Mark 6:34, &c.:
"And Jesus when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion towards them,
because they were as sheep not having a shepherd; and he began to teach them many things." Here
was his compassion to their souls. And in the sequel we have an account of his compassion to their
bodies, because they had been a long while having nothing to eat; he fed five thousand of them
with five loaves and two fishes. And if the compassion of professing Christians towards others
does not work in the same ways, it is a sign that it is no true Christian compassion.
And furthermore, it is a sign that affections are not of the right sort, if persons seem to be
much affected with the bad qualities of their fellow Christians as the coldness and lifelessness of
other saints, but are in no proportion affected with their own defects and corruptions. A true
Christian may be affected with the coldness and unsavoriness of other saints, and may mourn
much over it: but at the same time, he is not so apt to be affected with the badness of anybody's
heart, as his own; this is most in his view; this he is most quicksighted to discern; this he sees most
of the aggravations of, and is most ready to lament. And a less degree of virtue will bring him to
pity himself, and be concerned at his own calamities, than rightly to be affected with others'
calamities. And if men have not attained to the less, we may determine they never attained to the
greater.
And here by the way, I would observe, that it may be laid down as a general rule, that if
persons pretend that they come to high attainments in religion, but have never yet arrived to the less
attainments, it is a sign of a vain pretense. As if persons pretend, that they have got beyond mere
morality, to live a spiritual and divine life; but really have not come to be so much as moral
persons: or pretend to be greatly affected with the wickedness of their hearts, and are not affected
with the palpable violations of God's commands in their practice, which is a less attainment: or if
they pretend to be brought to be even willing to be damned for the glory of God, but have no
forwardness to suffer a little in their estates and names, and worldly convenience, for the sake of
their duty: or pretend that they are not afraid to venture their souls upon Christ, and commit their all
to God, trusting to his bare word, and the faithfulness of his promises, for their eternal welfare;
but at the same time, have not confidence enough in God, to dare to trust him with a little of their
estates, bestowed to pious and charitable uses; I say, when it is thus with persons, their pretenses
are manifestly vain. He that is in a journey, and imagines he has got far beyond such a place in his
road, and never yet came to it, must be mistaken; and he is not yet arrived to the top of the hill, that
never yet got half way thither. But this by the way.
The same that has been observed of the affection of love, is also to be observed of other
religious affections. Those that are true, extend in some proportion to the various things that are
their due and proper objects; but when they are false, they are commonly strangely
disproportionate. So it is with religious desires and longings: these in the saints, are to those things
that are spiritual and excellent in general, and that in some proportion to their excellency,
importance or necessity, or their near concern in them; but in false longing it is often far otherwise.

141
They will strangely run, with an impatient vehemence, after something of less importance, when
other things of greater importance are neglected.—Thus for instance, some persons, from time to
time, are attended with a vehement inclination, and unaccountably violent pressure, to declare to
others what they experience, and to exhort others; when there is, at the same time, no inclination,
in any measure equal to it, to other things, that true Christianity has as great, yea, a greater
tendency to; as the pouring out the soul before God in secret, earnest prayer and praise to him, and
more conformity to him, and living more to his glory, &c. We read in Scripture of "groanings that
cannot be uttered, and soul breakings for the longing it hath, and longings, thirstings, and
pantings," much more frequently to these latter things, than the former.
And so as to hatred and zeal; when these are from right principles, they are against sin in
general, in some proportion to the degree of sinfulness: Psal. 119:104, "I hate every false way."
So ver. 128. But a false hatred and zeal against sin, is against some particular sin only. Thus some
seem to be very zealous against profaneness, and pride in apparel, who themselves are notorious
for covetousness, closeness, and it may be backbiting, envy towards superiors, turbulency of
spirit towards rulers, and rooted ill will to them that have injured them. False zeal is against the
sins of others, while men have no zeal against their own sins. But he that has true zeal, exercises it
chiefly against his own sins; though he shows also a proper zeal against prevailing and dangerous
iniquity in others. And some pretend to have a great abhorrence of their own sins of heart, and cry
out much of their inward corruption; and yet make light of sins in practice, and seem to commit
them without much restraint or remorse; though these imply sin both in heart and life.
As there is a much greater disproportion in the exercises of false affections than of true, as
to different objects, so there is also, as to different times. For although true Christians are not
always alike; yea, there is very great difference, at different times, and the best have reason to be
greatly ashamed of their unsteadiness; yet there is in no wise that instability and inconstancy in the
hearts of those who are true virgins, "that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth," which is in
false-hearted professors. The righteous man is truly said to be one whose heart is fixed, trusting in
God, Psal. 112:7, and to have his heart established with grace, Heb. 13:9, and to hold on his way,
Job. 17:9: "The righteous shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean hands shall wax stronger
and stronger." It is spoken of as a note of the hypocrisy of the Jewish church, that they were as a
swift dromedary, traversing her ways.
If therefore persons are religious only by fits and starts; if they now and then seem to be
raised up to the clouds in their affections, and then suddenly fall down again, lose all, and become
quite careless and carnal, and this is their manner of carrying on religion; if they appear greatly
moved, and mightily engaged in religion, only in extraordinary seasons, in the time of a
remarkable outpouring of the Spirit, or other uncommon dispensation of providence, or upon the
real or supposed receipt of some great mercy, when they have received some extraordinary
temporal mercy, or suppose that they are newly converted, or have lately had what they call a great
discovery; but quickly return to such a frame, that their hearts are chiefly upon other things, and
the prevailing bent of their hearts and stream of their affections, is ordinarily towards the things of
this world; when they are like the children of Israel in the wilderness, who had their affections
highly raised by what God had done for them at the Red Sea, and sang his praise, and soon fell a
lusting after the fleshpots of Egypt; but then again, when they came to Mount Sinai, and saw the
great manifestations God made of himself there, seemed to be greatly engaged again, and mightily
forward to enter into covenant with God, saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken will we do, and be
obedient," but then quickly made them a golden calf; I say, when it is thus with persons, it is a
sign of the unsoundness of their affections. 70 They are like the waters in the time of a shower of

70Dr. Owen (on the Spirit, Book III. Chap. 2 Sect. 18), speaking of a common work of

the Spirit, says, "This work operates greatly on the affections: we have given
instances, in fear, sorrow, joy, and delight, about spiritual things, that are stirred up
and acted thereby: but yet it comes short in two things, of a thorough work upon the
affections themselves. For first, it doth not fix them. And secondly, it doth not fill
them."
"There is (says Dr. Preston) a certain love, by fits, which God accepts not: when
men come and offer to God great promises, like the waves of the sea, as big as

142
rain, which, during the shower, and a little after, run like a brook, and flow abundantly; but are
presently quite dry; and when another shower comes, then they will flow again. Whereas a true
saint is like a stream from a living spring; which, though it may be greatly increased by a shower
of rain, and diminished in time of drought, yet constantly runs: John 4:14, "The water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up," &c., or like a tree planted by such a
stream, that has a constant supply at the root, and is always green, even in time of the greatest
drought: Jer. 17:7, 8, "Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.
For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and
shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of
drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit." Many hypocrites are like comets that appear for a
while with a mighty blaze; but are very unsteady and irregular in their motion (and are therefore
called wandering stars, Jude 13), and their blaze soon disappears, and they appear but once in a
great while. But the true saints are like the fixed stars, which, though they rise and set, and are
often clouded, yet are steadfast in their orb, and may truly be said to shine with a constant light.
Hypocritical affections are like a violent motion; like that of the air that is moved with winds (Jude
12), but gracious affections are more a natural motion; like the stream of a river, which, though it
has many turns hither and thither, and may meet with obstacles, and runs more freely and swiftly
in some places than others; yet in the general, with a steady and constant course, tends the same
stay, until it gets to the ocean.
And as there is a strange unevenness and disproportion in false affections, at different
times; so there often is in different places. Some are greatly affected from time to time, when in
company; but have nothing that bears any manner of proportion to it in secret, in close meditations
secret prayer, and conversing with God, when alone, and separated from all the world.71 A true
Christian doubtless delights in religious fellowship, and Christian conversation, and finds much to
affect his heart in it; but he also delights at times to retire from all mankind to converse with God in
solitary places. And this also has its peculiar advantages for fixing his heart, and engaging its
affections. True religion disposes persons to be much alone in solitary places, for holy meditation
and prayer. So it wrought in Isaac, Gen. 24:63. And which is much more, so it wrought in Jesus
Christ. How often do we read of his retiring into mountains and solitary places, for holy converse
with his Father! It is difficult to conceal great affections, but yet gracious affections are of a much
more silent and secret nature, than those that are counterfeit. So it is with the gracious sorrow of
the saints. So it is with their sorrow for their own sins. Thus the future gracious mourning of true
penitents, at the beginning of the latter day glory, is represented as being so secret, as to be hidden
mountains: oh, they think they will do much for God! But their minds change; and
they become as those high waves, which at last fall level with the other waters."
Mr. Flavel, speaking of these changeable professors, says, "These professors
have more of the moon than of the sun: little light, less heat, and many changes.
They deceive many, yea, they deceive themselves, but cannot deceive God. They want
that ballast and establishment in themselves, that would have kept them tight and
steady." Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. 2 Sect. 2.
71The Lord is neglected secretly, yet honored openly; because there is no wind in
their chambers to blow their sails, and therefore there they stand still. Hence many
men keep their profession, when they lose their affection. They have by the one a
name to live (and that is enough) though their hearts be dead. And hence so long as
you love and commend them, so long they love you; but if not, they will forsake you.
They were warm only by another's fire, and hence, having no principle of life
within, soon grow dead. This is the water that turns a Pharisee's mill." Shepard's
Parable, Part I. p. 180.
"The hypocrite (says Mr. Flavel) is not for the closet, but the synagogue, Matt. 6:5, 6.
It is not his meat and drink to retire from the clamor of the world, to enjoy God in
secret." Touchstone of Sincerity, Chap. 7 Sect. 2.
Dr. Ames, in his Cases of Conscience, Lib. III. Chap. v., speaks of it as a thing by
which sincerity may be known, "That persons be obedient in the absence, as well as
in the presence of lookers on; in secret, as well, yea more, than in public:" alleging
Phil. 2:12, and Matt. 6:6.

143
from the companions of their bosom, Zech. 12:12, 13, 14: "And the land shall mourn, every
family apart, the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart: the family of the house
of Nathan apart, and their wives apart: the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart:
the family of Shimei apart, and their wives apart: all the families that remain, every family apart,
and their wives apart." So it is with their sorrow for the sins of others. The saints' pains and
travailing for the souls of sinners are chiefly in secret places: Jer. 13:17, "If ye will not hear it, my
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with
tears, because the Lord's flock is carried away captive." So it is with gracious joys: they are hidden
manna, in this respect, as well as others, Rev. 2:17.
The Psalmist seems to speak of his sweetest comforts, as those that were to be had in
secret: Psal. 63:5, 6, "My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness; and my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips: when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night
watches." Christ calls forth his spouse, away from the world, into retired places, that he may give
her his sweetest love: Cant. 7:11, 12, "Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us
lodge in the villages: Here I will give thee my loves." The most eminent divine favors that the
saints obtained, that we read of in Scripture, were in their retirement. The principal manifestations
that God made of himself, and his covenant mercy to Abraham, were when he was alone, apart
from his numerous family; as anyone will judge that carefully reads his history. Isaac received that
special gift of God to him, Rebekah, who was so great a comfort to him, and by whom he
obtained the promised seed, walking alone meditating in the field. Jacob was retired for secret
prayer, when Christ came to him, and he wrestled with him, and obtained the blessing. God
revealed himself to Moses in the bush, when he was in a solitary place in the desert, in Mount
Horeb, Exod 3 at the beginning. And afterwards, when God showed him his glory, and he was
admitted to the highest degree of communion with God that ever he enjoyed; he was alone, in the
same mountain, and continued there forty days and forty nights, and then came down with his face
shining. God came to those great prophets, Elijah and Elisha, and conversed freely with them,
chiefly in their retirement. Elijah conversed alone with God at Mount Sinai, as Moses did. And
when Jesus Christ had his greatest prelibation of his future glory, when he was transfigured; it was
not when he was with the multitude, or with the twelve disciples, but retired into a solitary place in
a mountain, with only three select disciples, charging then, that they should tell no man until he
was risen from the dead. When the angel Gabriel came to the blessed virgin, and when the Holy
Ghost came upon her, and the power of the Highest overshadowed her, she seems to have been
alone, and to be in this matter hid from the world; her nearest and dearest earthly friend Joseph,
that had betrothed her (though a just man), knew nothing of the matter. And she that first partook
of the joy of Christ's resurrection, was alone with Christ at the sepulcher, John 20. And when the
beloved disciple was favored with those wonderful visions of Christ and his future dispensations
towards the church and the world, he was alone in the isle of Patmos. Not but that we have also
instances of great privileges that the saints have received when with others; or that there is not
much in Christian conversation, and social and public worship, tending greatly to refresh and
rejoice the hearts of the saints. But this is all that I aim at by what has been said, to show that it is
the nature of true grace, that however it loves Christian society in its place, yet it in a peculiar
manner delights in retirement, and secret converse with God. So that if persons appear greatly
engaged in social religion, and but little in the religion of the closet, and are often highly affected
when with others, and but little moved when they have none but God and Christ to converse with,
it looks very darkly upon their religion.
