PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 28
The Minister's Ordinary Conversation


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 12. The Minister's Ordinary Conversation.

LECTURE XII
THE MINISTER'S ORDINARY CONVERSATION
Our subject is to be the minister's common conversation when he
mingles with men in general, and is supposed to be quite at his ease.
How shall he order his speech among his fellow-men? First and
foremost, let me say, let him give himself no ministerial airs, but
avoid everything which is stilted, official, fussy, and pretentious.
"The Son of Man" is a noble title; it was given to Ezekiel, and to a

greater than he: let not the ambassador of heaven be other than a son
of man. In fact, let him remember that the more simple and
unaffected he is, the more closely will he resemble that child-man,
the holy child Jesus. There is such a thing as trying to be too much a
minister, and becoming too little a man; though the more of a true
man you are, the more truly will you be what a servant of the Lord
should be. Schoolmasters and ministers have generally an
appearance peculiarly their own; in the wrong sense, they "are not as
other men are." They are too often speckled birds, looking as if they
were not at home among the other inhabitants of the country, but
awkward and peculiar. When I have seen a flamingo gravely stalking
along, an owl blinking in the shade, or a stork demurely lost in
thought, I have been irresistibly led to remember some of my
dignified brethren of the teaching and preaching fraternity, who are
so marvellously proper at all times that they are just a shade
amusing. Their very respectable, stilted, dignified, important, selfrestrained manner is easily acquired; but is it worth acquiring?
Theodore Hook once stepped up to a gentleman who was parading
the street with great pomposity, and said to him, "Sir, are you not a
person of great importance?" and one has felt half inclined to do the
same with certain brethren of the cloth. I know brethren who, from
head to foot, in garb, tone, manner, necktie, and boots, are so utterly
parsonic that no particle of manhood is visible. One young sprig of
divinity must needs go through the streets in a gown, and another of
the High Church order has recorded it in the newspapers with much
complacency that he traversed Switzerland and Italy, wearing in all
places his biretta; few boys would have been so proud of a fool's cap.
None of us are likely to go as far as that in our apparel; but we may
do the like by our mannerism. Some men appear to have a white
cravat twisted round their souls, their manhood is throttled with that
starched rag. Certain brethren maintain an air of superiority which
they think impressive, but which is simply offensive, and eminently
opposed to their pretensions as followers of the lowly Jesus. The
proud Duke of Somerset intimated his commands to his servants by
signs, not condescending to speak to such base beings; his children

never sat down in his presence, and when he slept in the afternoon
one of his daughters stood on each side of him during his august
slumbers. When proud Somersets get into the ministry, they affect
dignity in other ways almost equally absurd. "Stand by, I am holier
than thou," is written across their foreheads.
A well-known minister was once rebuked by a sublime brother for
his indulgence in a certain luxury, and the expense was made a great
argument. "Well, well," he replied, "there may be something in that;
but remember, I do not spend half so much upon my weakness as
you do in starch." That is the article I am deprecating, that dreadful
ministerial starch. If you have indulged in it, I would earnestly advise
you to "go and wash in Jordan seven times," and get it out of you,
every particle of it. I am persuaded that one reason why our workingmen so universally keep clear of ministers is because they abhor their
artificial and unmanly ways. If they saw us, in the pulpit and out of it,
acting like real men, and speaking naturally, like honest men, they
would come around us. Baxter's remark still holds good: "The want
of a familiar tone and expression is a great fault in most of our
deliveries, and that which we should be very careful to amend." The
vice of the ministry is that ministers will parsonificate the gospel. We
must have humanity along with our divinity if we would win the
masses. Everybody can see through affectations, and people are not
likely to be taken in by them. Fling away your stilts, brethren, and
walk on your feet; doff your ecclesiasticism, and array yourselves in
truth.
Still, a minister, wherever he is, is a minister, and should recollect
that he is on duty. A policeman or a soldier may be off duty, but a
minister never is. Even in our recreations we should still pursue the
great object of our lives; for we are called to be diligent "in season
and out of season." There is no position in which we may be placed
but the Lord may come with the question, "What doest thou here,
Elijah?" and we ought to be able at once to answer, "I have
something to do for thee even here, and I am trying to do it." The
bow, of course, must be at times unstrung, or else it will lose its

elasticity; but there is no need to cut the string. I am speaking at this
time of the minister in times of relaxation; and I say that even then
he should conduct himself as the ambassador of God, and seize
opportunities of doing good: this will not mar his rest, but sanctify it.
A minister should be like a certain chamber which I saw at Beaulieu,
in the New Forest, in which a cobweb is never seen, It is a large
lumber-room, and is never swept; yet no spider ever defiles it with
the emblems of neglect. It is roofed with chestnut, and for some
reason, I know not what, spiders will not come near that wood by the
year together. The same thing was mentioned to me in the corridors
of Winchester School: I was told, "No spiders ever come here." Our
minds should be equally clear of idle habits.
On our public rests for porters in the City of London you may read
the words, "Rest, but do not loiter"; and they contain advice worthy
of our attention. I do not call the dolce far niente laziness; there is a
sweet doing of nothing which is just the finest medicine in the world
for a jaded mind. When the mind gets fatigued and out of order, to
rest it is no more idleness than sleep is idleness; and no man is called
lazy for sleeping the proper time. It is far better to be industriously
asleep than lazily awake. Be ready to do good even in your resting
times and in your leisure hours; and so be really a minister, and
there will be no need for you to proclaim that you are so.
The Christian minister out of the pulpit should be a sociable man.
He is not sent into the world to be a hermit, or a monk of La Trappe.
It is not his vocation to stand on a pillar all day, above his fellow
men, like that hare-brained Simon Stylites of olden time. You are not
to warble from the top of a tree, like an invisible nightingale; but to
be a man among men, saying to them, "I also am as you are in all that
relates to man." Salt is of no use in the box; it must be rubbed into
the meat; and our personal influence must penetrate and season
society. Keep aloof from others, and how can you benefit them? Our
Master went to a wedding, and ate bread with publicans and sinners,
and yet was far more pure than those sanctimonious Pharisees,
whose glory was that they were separate from their fellow-men.

Some ministers need to be told that they are of the same species as
their hearers. It is a remarkable fact, but we may as well state it, that
bishops, canons, archdeacons, prebendaries, rural deans, rectors,
vicars and even archbishops, are only men after all; and God has not
railed off a holy corner of the earth to serve as a chancel for them, to
abide therein by themselves.
It would not be amiss if there could be a revival of holy talk in the
churchyard and the meeting-yard. I like to see the big yew-trees
outside our ancient churches with seats all round them. They seem to
say: "Sit down here, neighbour, and talk upon the sermon; here
comes the pastor; he will join us, and we shall have a pleasant, holy
chat." It is not every preacher we would care to talk with; but there
are some whom one would give a fortune to converse with for an
hour. I love a minister whose face invites me to make him my friend-a man upon whose doorstep you read, "Salve," "Welcome"; and feel
that there is no need of that Pompeian warning, "Cave Canem,"
"Beware of the dog." Give me the man around whom the children
come, like flies around a honey-pot: they are first-class judges of a
good man. When Solomon was tried by the Queen of Sheba, as to his
wisdom, the rabbis tell us that she brought some artificial flowers
with her, beautifully made and delicately scented, so as to be
facsimiles of real flowers. She asked Solomon to discover which were
artificial and which were real. The wise man bade his servants open
the window, and when the bees came in they flew at once to the
natural flowers, and cared nothing for the artificial. So you will find
that children have their instincts, and discover very speedily who is
their friend, and depend upon it the children's friend is one who will
be worth knowing. Have a good word to say to each and every
member of the family--the big boys, and the young ladies, and the
little girls, and everybody. No one knows what a smile and a hearty
sentence may do. A man who is to do much with men must love
them, and feel at home with them. An individual who has no
geniality about him had better be an undertaker, and bury the dead,
for he will never succeed in influencing the living. I have met

somewhere with the observation that to be a popular preacher one
must have bowels. I fear that the observation was meant as a mild
criticism upon the bulk to which certain brethren have attained: but
there is truth in it. A man must have a great heart if he would have a
great congregation. His heart should be as capacious as those noble
harbours along our coast, which contain sea-room for a fleet. When a
man has a large, loving heart, men go to him as ships to a haven, and
feel at peace when they have anchored under the lee of his
friendship. Such a man is hearty in private as well as in public; his
blood is not cold and fishy, but he is warm as your own fireside. No
pride and selfishness chill you when you. approach him; he has his
doors all open to receive you, and you are at home with him at once.
Such men I would persuade you to be, every one of you.
The Christian minister should also be very cheerful. I don't believe
in going about like certain monks whom I saw in Rome, who salute
each other in sepulchral tones, and convey the pleasant information,
"Brother, we must die:" to which lively salutation each lively brother
of the order replies, "Yes, brother, we must die." I was glad to be
assured upon such good authority that all these lazy fellows are
about to die; upon the whole, it is about the best thing they can do;
but till that event occurs, they might use some more comfortable
form of salutation.
No doubt there are some people who will be impressed by the very
solemn appearance of ministers. I have heard of one who felt
convinced that there must be something in the Roman Catholic
religion, from the extremely starved and pinched appearance of a
certain ecclesiastic. "Look," said he, "how the man is worn to a
skeleton by his daily fastings and nightly vigils! How he must mortity
his flesh!" Now, the probabilities are that the emaciated priest was
labouring under some internal disease, which he would have been
heartily glad to be rid of, and it was not conquest of appetite, but
failure in digestion, which had so reduced him; or possibly a troubled
conscience, which made him fret himself down to the light weights.
Certainly, I have never met with a text which mentions prominence

of bone as an evidence of grace. If so, "The Living Skeleton" should
have been exhibited, not merely as a natural curiosity, but as the
standard of virtue. Some of the biggest rogues in the world have been
as mortified in appearance as if they had lived on locusts and wild
honey. It is a very vulgar error to suppose that a melancholy
countenance is the index of a gracious heart. I commend
cheerfulness to all who would win souls; not levity and frothiness,
but a genial happy spirit. There are more flies caught with honey
than with vinegar, and there will be more souls led to heaven by a
man who wears heaven in his face than by one who bears Tartarus in
his looks.
Young ministers, and, indeed, all others, when they are in company,
should take care not to engross all the conversation. They are quite
qualified to do so, no doubt; I mean from their capacity to instruct,
and readiness of utterance; but they must remember that people do
not care to be perpetually instructed; they like to take a turn in the
conversation themselves. Nothing pleases some people so much as to
let them talk, and it may be for their good to let them be pleased. I
spent an hour one evening with a person who did me the honour to
say that he found me a very charming companion, and most
instructive in conversation, yet I do not hesitate to confess that I said
scarcely anything at all, but allowed him to have the talk to himself.
By exercising patience I gained his good opinion, and an opportunity
to address him on other occasions. A man has no more right at table
to talk all than to eat all. We are not to think ourselves Sir Oracle,
before whom no dog must open his mouth. No; let all the company
contribute of their stores, and they will think all the better of the
godly words with which you try to season the discourse.
There are some companies into which you will go, especially when
you are first settled, where everybody will be awed by the majesty of
your presence, and people will be invited because the new minister is
to be there. Such a position reminds me of the choicest statuary in
the Vatican. A little room is screened off, a curtain is drawn, and lo!
before you stands the great Apollo! If it be your trying lot to be the

Apollo of the little party, put an end to the nonsense. If I were the
Apollo, I should like to step right off the pedestal and shake hands all
round, and you had better do the same; for sooner or later the fuss
they make about you will come to an end, and the wisest course is to
end it yourself. Hero-worship is a kind of idolatry, and must not be
encouraged. Heroes do well when they, like the apostles at Lystra,
are horrified at the honours done to them, and run in among the
people crying, "Sirs, why do ye these things? We also are men of like
passions with you." Ministers will not have to do it long; for their
foolish admirers are very apt to turn round upon them, and if they do
not stone them nearly to death, they will go as far as they dare in
unkindness and contempt.
While I say, "Do not talk all, and assume an importance which is
mere imosture;" still, do not be a dummy. People will form their
estimate of you and your ministry by what they see of you in private
as well as by your public deliverances. Many young men have ruined
themselves in the pulpit by being indiscreet in the parlour, and have
lost all hope of doing good by their stupidity or frivolity in company.
Don't be an inanimate log. At Antwerp Fair, among many curiosities
advertised by huge paintings and big drums, I observed a booth
containing "a great wonder," to be seen for a penny a head; it was a
petrified man. I did not expend the amount required for admission,
for I had seen so many petrified men for nothing, both in and out of
the pulpit--lifeless, careless, destitute of common sense, and
altogether inert, though occupied with the weightiest business which
man could undertake.
Try to turn the conversation to profitable use. Be sociable and
cheerful and all that, but labour to accomplish something. Why
should you sow the wind, or plough a rock? Consider yourself, after
all, as being very much responsible for the conversation which goes
on where you are; for such is the esteem in which you will usually be
held, that you will be the helmsman of the conversation. Therefore,
steer it into a good channel. Do this without roughness or force. Keep
the points of the line in good order, and the train will run on to your

rails without a jerk. Be ready to seize opportunities adroitly, and lead
on imperceptibly in the desired track. If your heart is in it and your
wits are awake, this will be easy enough, especially if you breathe a
prayer for guidance.
I shall never forget the manner in which a thirsty individual once
begged of me upon Clapham Common. I saw him with a very large
truck, in which he was carrying an extremely small parcel, and I
wondered why he had not put the parcel into his pocket, and left the
machine at home. I said, "It looks odd to see so large a truck for such
a small load." He stopped, and looking me seriously in the face, he
said, "Yes, sir, it is a very odd thing; but, do you know, I have met
with an odder thing than that this very day. I've been about, working
and sweating all this 'ere blessed day, and till now I haven't met a
single gentleman that looked as if he'd give me a pint of beer, till I
saw you." I considered that turn of the conversation very neatly
managed, and we, with a far better subject upon our minds, ought to
be equally able to introduce the topic upon which our heart is set.
There was an ease in the man's manner which I envied, for I did not
find it quite so simple a matter to introduce my own topic to his
notice; yet if I had been thinking as much about how I could do him
good as he had upon how to obtain a drink, I feel sure I should have
succeeded in reaching my point. If by any means we may save some,
we must, like our Lord, talk at table to good purpose--yes, and on the
margin of the well, and by the road, and on the sea-shore, and in the
house, and in the field. To be a holy talker for Jesus might be almost
as fruitful an office as to be a faithful preacher. Aim at excellence in
both exercises, and if the Holy Spirit's aid be called in, you will attain
your desire.
Here, perhaps, I may insert a canon, which nevertheless I believe to
be quite needless, in reference to each one of the honourable
brethren whom I am now addressing. Do not frequent rich men's
tables to gain their countenance, and never make yourself a sort of
general hanger-on at tea-parties and entertainments. Who are you
that you should be dancing attendance upon this wealthy man and

the other, when the Lord's poor, his sick people, and his wandering
sheep require you? To sacrifice the study to the parlour is criminal.
To be a tout for your church, and waylay people at their homes to
draw them to fill your pews, is a degradation to which no man should
submit. To see ministers of different sects fluttering round a wealthy
man, like vultures round a dead camel, is sickening. Deliciously
sarcastic was that famous letter "from an old and beloved minister to
his dear son" upon his entrance into the ministry, the following
extract from which hits our present point. It is said to have been
copied from the Smellfungus Gazette, but I suspect our friend
Paxton Hood knows all about its authorship: "Keep also a watchful
eye on all likely persons, especially wealthy or influential, who may
come to your town; call upon them, and attempt to win them over by
the devotions of the drawing-room to your cause. Thus you may most
efficiently serve the Master's interests. People need looking after, and
the result of a long experience goes to confirm my conviction, long
cherished, that the power of the pulpit is trifling compared with the
power of the parlour. We must imitate and sanctify, by the word of
God and prayer, the exercises of the Jesuits. They succeeded not by
the pulpit so much as by the parlour. In the parlour you can whisper-you can meet people on all their little personal private ideas. The
pulpit is a very unpleasant place; of course it is the great power of
God, and so on, but it is the parlour that tells, and a minister has not
the same chance of success if he be a good preacher as if he is a
perfect gentleman; nor in cultivated society has any man a legitimate
prospect of success if he is not, whatever he may be, a gentleman. I
have always admired Lord Shaftesbury's character of St. Paul in his
'Characteristics'--that he was a fine gentleman. And I would say to
you, be a gentleman. Not that I need to say so, but am persuaded that
only in this way can we hope for the conversion of our growing
wealthy middle classes. We must show that our religion is the
religion of good sense and good taste; that we disapprove of strong
excitements and strong stimulants; and oh, my dear boy, if you
would be useful, often in your closet make it a matter of earnest
prayer that you may be proper. If I were asked what is your first duty,
be proper; and your second, be proper; and your third, be proper."

Those who remember a class of preachers who flourished fifty years
ago will see the keenness of the satire in this extract. The evil is
greatly mitigated now; in fact, I fear we may be drifting into another
extreme.
In all probability, sensible conversation will sometimes drift into
controversy, and here many a good man runs upon a snag. The
sensible minister will be particularly gentle in argument. He, above
all men, should not make the mistake of fancying that there is force
in temper, and power in speaking angrily. A heathen who stood in a
crowd in Calcutta, listening to a missionary disputing with a
Brahmin, said he knew which was right though he did not
understand the language--he knew that he was in the wrong who lost
his temper first. For the most part, that is a very accurate way of
judging. Try to avoid debating with people. State your opinion and
let them state theirs. If you see that a stick is crooked, and you want
people to see how crooked it is, lay a straight rod down beside it; that
will be quite enough. But if you are drawn into controversy, use very
hard arguments and very soft words. Frequently you cannot convince
a man by tugging at his reason, but you can persuade him by winning
his affections. The other day I had the misery to need a pair of new
boots, and though I bade the fellow make them as large as canoes, I
had to labour fearfully to get them on. With a pair of boot-hooks I
toiled like the men on board the vessel with Jonah, but all in vain.
Just then my friend put in my way a little French chalk, and the work
was done in a moment. Wonderfully coaxing was that French chalk.
Gentlemen, always carry a little French chalk with you into society, a
neat packet of Christian persuasiveness, and you will soon discover
the virtues of it.
And lastly, with all his amiability, the minister should be firm for his
principles, and bold to avow and defend them in all companies.
When a fair opportunity occurs, or he has managed to create one, let
him not be slow to make use of it. Strong in his principles, earnest in
his tone, and affectionate in heart, let him speak out like a man and
thank God for the privilege. There need be no reticence--there should

be none. The maddest romances of Spiritualists, the wildest dreams
of Utopian reformers, the silliest chit-chat of the town, and the
vainest nonsense of the frivolous world, demand a hearing and get it.
And shall not Christ be heard? Shall His message of love remain
untold, for fear we should be charged with intrusion or accused of
cant? Is religion to be tabooed--the best and noblest of all themes
forbidden? If this be the rule of any society, we will not comply with
it. If we cannot break it down, we will leave the society to itself, as
men desert a house smitten with leprosy. We cannot consent to be
gagged. There is no reason why we should be. We will go to no place
where we cannot take our Master with us. While others take liberty
to sin, we shall not renounce our liberty to rebuke and warn them.
Wisely used, our common conversation may be a potent means for
good. Trains of thought may be started by a single sentence which
may lead to the conversion of persons whom our sermons have never
reached. The method of button-holing people, or bringing the truth
before them individually, has been greatly successful: this is another
subject, and can hardly come under the head of Common
Conversation; but we will close by saying that it is to be hoped that
we shall never, in our ordinary talk, any more than in the pulpit, be
looked upon as nice sort of persons, whose business it is to make
things agreeable all round, and who never by any possibility cause
uneasiness to any one, however ungodly their lives may be. Such
persons go in and out among the families of their hearers, and make
merry with them, when they ought to be mourning over them. They
sit down at their tables and feast at their ease, when they ought to be
warning them to flee from the wrath to come. They are like that
American alarum I have heard of, which was warranted not to wake
you if you did not wish it to do so.
Be it ours to sow, not only on the honest and good soil, but on the
rock and on the highway, and at the last great day to reap a glad
harvest. May the bread which we cast upon the waters in odd times
and strange occasions be found again after many days.
