PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 14
Christ Will Not Break the Bruised Reed


The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 2. Christ Will Not Break the Bruised Reed.

2. Christ Will Not Break the Bruised Reed
In pursuing his calling, Christ will not break the bruised reed, nor quench

the smoking flax, in which more is meant than spoken, for he will not
only not break nor quench, but he will cherish those with whom he so
deals.
CHRIST'S DEALINGS WITH THE BRUISED REED
Physicians, though they put their patients to much pain, will not destroy
nature, but raise it up by degrees. Surgeons will lance and cut, but not
dismember. A mother who has a sick and self willed child will not
therefore cast it away. And shall there be more mercy in the stream than
in the spring? Shall we think there is more mercy in ourselves than in
God, who plants the affection of mercy in us?
But for further declaration of Christ's mercy to all bruised reeds, consider
the comfortable relationships he has taken upon himself of husband,
shepherd and brother, which he will discharge to the utmost. Shall others
by his grace fulfill what he calls them unto, and not he who, out of his
love, has taken upon him these relationships, so thoroughly founded
upon his Father's assignment, and his own voluntary undertaking?
Consider the names he has borrowed from the mildest creatures, such as
lamb and hen, to show his tender care. Consider his very name Jesus, a
Saviour, given him by God himself. Consider his office answerable to his
name, which is that he should `bind up the broken hearted' (Isa. 61:1). At
his baptism the Holy Ghost rested on him in the shape of a dove, to show
that he should be a dove like, gentle Mediator.
See the gracious way he executes his offices. As a prophet, he came with
blessing in his mouth, `Blessed are the poor in spirit' (Matt. 5:3), and
invited those to come to him whose hearts suggested most exceptions
against themselves, `Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy
laden' (Matt. 11:28). How did his heart yearn when he saw the people `as
sheep having no shepherd' (Matt. 9:36)! He never turned any back again
that came to him, though some went away of themselves. He came to die
as a priest for his enemies. In the days of his flesh he dictated a form of
prayer unto his disciples, and put petitions unto God into their mouths,
and his Spirit to intercede in their hearts. He shed tears for those that
shed his blood, and now he makes intercession in heaven for weak
Christians, standing between them and God's anger. He is a meek king;

he will admit mourners into his presence, a king of poor and afflicted
persons. As he has beams of majesty, so he has a heart of mercy and
compassion. He is the prince of peace (Isa. 9:6). Why was he tempted, but
that he might `succor them that are tempted' (Heb. 2:18)? What mercy
may we not expect from so gracious a Mediator (1 Tim. 2:5) who took our
nature upon him that he might be gracious? He is a physician good at all
diseases, especially at the binding up of a broken heart. He died that he
might heal our souls with a plaster of his own blood, and by that death
save us, which we were the procurers of ourselves, by our own sins. And
has he not the same heart in heaven? 'Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me?' cried the Head in heaven, when the foot on earth was trodden on
(Acts 9:4). His advancement has not made him forget his own flesh.
Though it has freed him from passion, yet not from compassion towards
us. The lion of the tribe of Judah will only tear in pieces those that `will
not have him rule over them' (Luke 19:14). He will not show his strength
against those who prostrate themselves before him.
FOR OURSELVES
1. What should we learn from this, but to `come boldly to the throne of
grace' (Heb. 4:16) in all our grievances? Shall our sins discourage us,
when he appears there only for sinners? Are you bruised? Be of good
comfort, he calls you. Conceal not your wounds, open all before him and
take not Satan's counsel. Go to Christ, although trembling, as the poor
woman who said, `If I may but touch his garment' (Matt. 9:21). We shall
be healed and have a gracious answer. Go boldly to God in our flesh; he is
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone for this reason, that we might go
boldly to him. Never fear to go to God, since we have such a Mediator
with him, who is not only our friend but our brother and husband. Well
might the angel proclaim from heaven, `Behold, I bring you good tidings
of great joy' (Luke 2:10). Well might the apostle stir us up to `rejoice in
the Lord alway: and again I say, Rejoice' (Phil. 4:4). Paul was well advised
upon what grounds he did it. Peace and joy are two main fruits of Christ's
kingdom. Let the world be as it will, if we cannot rejoice in the world, yet
we may rejoice in the Lord. His presence makes any condition
comfortable. `Be not afraid,' says he to his disciples, when they were
afraid, as if they had seen a ghost, `It is I' (Matt. 14:27), as if there were

no cause of fear where he was present.
2. Let this support us when we feel ourselves bruised. Christ's way is first
to wound, then to heal. No sound, whole soul shall ever enter into heaven.
Think when in temptation, Christ was tempted for me; according to my
trials will be my graces and comforts. If Christ be so merciful as not to
break me, I will not break myself by despair, nor yield myself over to the
roaring lion, Satan, to break me in pieces.
3. See the contrary disposition of Christ on the one hand and Satan and
his instruments on the other. Satan sets upon us when we are weakest, as
Simeon and Levi upon the Shechemites, `when they were sore' (Gen.
34:25), but Christ will make up in us all the breaches which sin and Satan
have made. He `binds up the broken hearted' (Isa. 61:1). As a mother is
tenderest to the most diseased and weakest child, so does Christ most
mercifully incline to the weakest. Likewise he puts an instinct into the
weakest things to rely upon something stronger than themselves for
support. The vine stays itself upon the elm, and the weakest creatures
often have the strongest shelters. The consciousness of the church's
weakness makes her willing to lean on her beloved, and to hide herself
under his wing.
WHO ARE THE BRUISED REEDS?
But how shall we know whether we are such as may expect mercy ?
Answer: (1) By the bruised here is not meant those that are brought low
only by crosses, but such as, by them, are brought to see their sin, which
bruises most of all. When conscience is under the guilt of sin, then every
judgment brings a report of God's anger to the soul, and all lesser
troubles run into this great trouble of conscience for sin. As all corrupt
humours run to the diseased and bruised part of the body, and as every
creditor falls upon the debtor when he is once arrested, so when
conscience is once awakened, all former sins and present crosses join
together to make the bruise the more painful. Now, he that is thus
bruised will be content with nothing but with mercy from him who has
bruised him. He has wounded, and he must heal (Hos. 6:1). The Lord
who has bruised me deservedly for my sins must bind up my heart again.

(2) Again, a man truly bruised judges sin the greatest evil, and the favor
of God the greatest good. (3) He would rather hear of mercy than of a
kingdom. (4) He has poor opinions of himself, and thinks that he is not
worth the earth he treads on. (5) Towards others he is not censorious, as
being taken up at home, but is full of sympathy and compassion to those
who are under God's hand. (6) He thinks that those who walk in the
comforts of God's Spirit are the happiest men in the world. (7) He
trembles at the Word of God (Isa. 66:2), and honours the very feet of
those blessed instruments that bring peace unto him (Rom. 10:15). (8) He
is more taken up with the inward exercises of a broken heart than with
formality, and is yet careful to use all sanctified means to convey comfort.
But how shall we come to this state of mind?
Answer: First, we must conceive of bruising either as a state into which
God brings us, or as a duty to be performed by us. Both are here meant.
We must join with God in bruising ourselves. When he humbles us, let us
humble ourselves, and not stand out against him, for then he will
redouble his strokes. Let us justify Christ in all his chastisements,
knowing that all his dealing towards us is to cause us to return into our
own hearts. His work in bruising tends to our work in bruising ourselves.
Let us lament our own perversity, and say: Lord, what a heart have I that
needs all this, that none of this could be spared! We must lay siege to the
hardness of our own hearts, and aggravate sin all we can. We must look
on Christ, who was bruised for us, look on him whom we have pierced
with our sins. But all directions will not prevail, unless God by his Spirit
convinces us deeply, setting our sins before us, and driving us to a
standstill. Then we will cry out for mercy. Conviction will breed
contrition, and this leads to humiliation. Therefore desire God that he
would bring a clear and a strong light into all the corners of our souls, and
accompany it with a spirit of power to lay our hearts low.
A set measure of bruising of ourselves cannot be prescribed, but it must
be so far as (1) that we may prize Christ above all, and see that a Saviour
must be had; and (2) that we reform that which is amiss, though it be to
the cutting off of our right hand, or pulling out of our right eye. There is a
dangerous slighting of the work of humiliation, some alleging this for a
pretence for their casual dealing with their own hearts, that Christ will

not break the bruised reed; but such must know that every sudden terror
and short grief is not that which makes us bruised reeds; not a little
`bowing down our heads like a bulrush' (Isa. 58:5), but a working our
hearts to such a grief as will make sin more odious unto us than
punishment, until we offer a `holy violence' against it. Else, favouring
ourselves, we make work for God to bruise us, and for sharp repentance
afterwards. It is dangerous, I confess, in some cases, with some spirits, to
press too much and too long this bruising, because they may die under
the wound and burden before they be raised up again. Therefore it is
good in mixed assemblies to mingle comfort that every soul may have its
due portion. But if we have this for a foundation truth, that there is more
mercy in Christ than sin in us, there can be no danger in thorough
dealing. It is better to go bruised to heaven than sound to hell. Therefore
let us not take off ourselves too soon, nor pull off the plaster before the
cure be wrought, but keep ourselves under this work till sin be the
sourest, and Christ the sweetest, of all things. And when God's hand is
upon us in any way, it is good to divert our sorrow for other things to the
root of all, which is sin. Let our grief run most in that channel, that as sin
bred grief, so grief may consume sin.
But are we not bruised unless we grieve more for sin than we do for
punishment ?
Answer: Sometimes our grief from outward grievances may lie heavier
upon the soul than grief for God's displeasure, because, in such cases, the
grief works upon the whole man, both outward and inward, and has
nothing to support it, but a little spark of faith. This faith, by reason of the
violent impression of the grievance, is suspended in the exercises of it.
This is most felt in sudden distresses which come upon the soul as a
torrent or land flood, and especially in bodily sicknesses which, by reason
of the sympathy between the soul and the body, work upon the soul so far
as to hinder not only the spiritual, but often the natural acts. Therefore,
James wishes us in affliction to pray ourselves, but in case of sickness to
`send for the elders' (James 5:14). These may, as those in the Gospels,
offer up to God in their prayers the sick person who is unable to present
his own case. Hereupon God admits of such a plea from the sharpness
and bitterness of the grievance, as in David (Psa. 6). The Lord knows our
frame; he remembers that we are but dust (Psa. 103:14), that our strength

is not the strength of steel.
This is a branch of his faithfulness to us as his creatures, whence he is
called `a faithful Creator' (1 Pet. 4:19). `God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able' (1 Cor. 10:13). There were
certain commandments which the Jews called the hedges of the law. So
as to fence men off from cruelty, God commanded that they should not
take the dame with the young, nor `seethe a kid in his mother's milk'
(Exod. 23:19), nor `muzzle the mouth of the ox' (1 Cor. 9:9). Does God
take care of beasts, and not of his more noble creature? And therefore we
ought to judge charitably of the complaints of God's people which are
wrung from them in such cases. Job had the esteem with God of a patient
man, notwithstanding those passionate complaints. Faith overborne for
the present will gain ground again; and grief for sin, although it come
short of grief for misery in terms of violence, yet it goes beyond it in
constancy; as a running stream fed with a spring holds out, when a
sudden swelling brook fails.
For the concluding of this point, and our encouragement to a thorough
work of bruising, and patience under God's bruising of us, let all know
that none are fitter for comfort than those that think themselves furthest
off. Men, for the most part, are not lost enough in their own feeling for a
Saviour. A holy despair in ourselves is the ground of true hope. In God
the fatherless find mercy (Hos. 14:3); if men were more fatherless, they
should feel more God's fatherly affection from heaven, for the God who
dwells in the highest heavens dwells likewise in the lowest soul (Isa.
57:15). Christ's sheep are weak sheep, and lacking in something or other;
he therefore applies himself to the necessities of every sheep. He seeks
that which was lost, and brings again that which was driven out of the
way, and binds up that which was broken, and strengthens the weak
(Ezek. 34:16). His tenderest care is over the weakest. The lambs he carries
in his bosom (Isa. 40:11). He says to Peter, `Feed my lambs' (John 21:15).
He was most familiar and open to troubled souls. How careful he was that
Peter and the rest of the apostles should not be too much dejected after
his resurrection! `Go your way, tell his disciples and Peter' (Mark 16:7).
Christ knew that guilt of their unkindness in leaving of him had dejected
their spirits. How gently did he endure the unbelief of Thomas and

stooped so far unto his weakness, as to suffer him to thrust his hand into
his side.
