PURITAN GOLD -- Religious Affections by Jonathan Edwards: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 11
Part III: Distinguishing Signs V-VI


V. Truly gracious affections are attended with a reasonable and spiritual conviction of the
judgment, of the reality and certainty of divine things.
This seems to be implied in the text that was laid as the foundation of this discourse:
"Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory."
All those who are truly gracious persons have a solid, full, thorough and effectual
conviction of the truth of the great things of the gospel; I mean, that they no longer halt between
two opinions; the great doctrines of the gospel cease to be any longer doubtful things, or matters of
opinion, which, though probable, are yet disputable; but with them, they are points settled and
determined, as undoubted and indisputable, so that they are not afraid to venture their all upon their
truth. Their conviction is an effectual conviction; so that the great spiritual mysterious and invisible
things of the gospel, have the influence of real and certain things upon them; they have the weight
and power of real things in their hearts; and accordingly rule in their affections, and govern them
through the course of their lives. With respect to Christ's being the Son of God, and Savior of the
world, and the great things he has revealed concerning himself, and his Father, and another world,
they have not only a predominating opinion that these things are true, and so yield their assent, as
they do in many other matters of doubtful speculation; but they see that it is really so; their eyes are
opened, so that they see that really Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the living God. And as to the
things which Christ has revealed, of God's eternal purposes and designs, concerning fallen man,
and the glorious and everlasting things prepared for the saints in another world, they see that they
are so indeed; and therefore these things are of great weight with them, and have a mighty power
upon their hearts, and influence over their practice, in some measure answerable to their infinite
importance.
That all true Christians have such a kind of conviction of the truth of the things of the
gospel, is abundantly manifest from the Holy Scriptures. I will mention a few places of many:
Matt. 16:15, 16, 17, "But whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon
Barjona;—My Father which is in heaven hath revealed it unto thee." John 6:68, 69 "Thou hast the
words of eternal life. And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the son of the living
God." John 17:6, 7, 8, "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the
world. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me, are of thee. For I
have given unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have
known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send me." Acts
8:37, "If thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayest." 2. Cor. 4:11, 12, 13, 14, "We which live,
are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake.—Death worketh in us.—We having the spirit of

103
faith, according as it is written, I believed, and therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and
therefore speak; knowing, that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus,
and shall present us with you." Together with ver. 16, "For which cause we faint not." And ver.
18 "While we look not at the things which are seen," &c. And chap. 5:1, "For we know, that if
our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God." And ver. 6, 7, 8,
"Therefore we are always confident, knowing that whilst we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord; for we walk by faith, not by sight. We are confident, I say, and willing
rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord." 2 Tim. 1:12, "For the which cause I
also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and I
am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day." Heb.
3:6, "Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto
the end." Heb. 11:1, "Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things
not seen;" together with that whole chapter. 1 John 4:13, 14, 15, 16, "Hereby know we that we
dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen, and do
testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. Whosoever shall confess that
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God. And we have known and believed
the love that God hath to us." Chap. 5:4, 5, "For whatsoever is born of God, overcometh the
world; and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he that overcometh
the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God?"
Therefore truly gracious affections are attended with such a kind of conviction and
persuasion of the truth of the things of the gospel, and sight of their evidence and reality, as these
and other Scriptures speak of.
There are many religious affections, which are not attended with such a conviction of the
judgment. There are many apprehensions and ideas which some have, that they call divine
discoveries, which are affecting, but not convincing. Though for a little while they may seem to be
more persuaded of the truth of the things of religion than they used to be, and may yield a forward
assent, like many of Christ's hearers, who believed for a while; yet they have no thorough and
effectual conviction; nor is there any great abiding change in them, in this respect, that whereas
formerly they did not realize the great things of the gospel, now these things, with regard to reality
and certainty, appear new to them, and they behold them, quite in another view than they used to
do. There are many persons who have been exceedingly raised with religious affections, and think
they have been converted, that do not go about the world any more convinced of the truth of the
gospel, than they used to be; or at least, there is no remarkable alteration: they are not men who live
under the influence and power of a realizing conviction of the infinite and eternal things which the
gospel reveals; if they were, it would be impossible for them to live as they do. Because their
affections are not attended with a thorough conviction of the mind, they are not at all to be
depended on; however great a show and noise they make, it is like the blaze of tow, or crackling of
thorns, or like the forward flourishing blade on stony ground, that has no root, nor deepness of
earth to maintain its life.
Some persons, under high affections, and a confident persuasion of their good estate, have
that, which they very ignorantly call a seeing the truth of the word of God, and which is very far
from it, after this manner; they have some text of Scripture coming to their minds in a sudden and
extraordinary manner, immediately declaring unto them (as they suppose) that their sins are
forgiven, or that God loves them, and will save them; and it may be, have a chain of Scriptures
coming one after another, to the same purpose; and they are convinced that it is truth; i.e., they are
confident that it is certainly so, that their sins are forgiven, and God does love them, &c.—they
say they know it is so; and when the words of Scripture are suggested to them, and as they
suppose immediately spoken to them by God, in this meaning, they are ready to cry out, Truth,
truth! It is certainly so! The word of God is true! And this they call a seeing the truth of the word
of God. Whereas the whole of their faith amounts to no more, than only a strong confidence of
their own good estate, and so a confidence that these words are true, which they suppose tell them
they are in a good estate: when indeed (as was shown before) there is no Scripture which declares
that any person is in a good estate directly, or any other way than by consequence. So that this,
instead of being a real sight of the truth of the word of God, is a sight of nothing but a phantom,
and is wholly a delusion. Truly to see the truth of the word of God, is to see the truth of the
gospel; which is the glorious doctrine the word of God contains, concerning God, and Jesus
Christ, and the way of salvation by him, and the world of glory that he is entered into, and

104
purchased for all them who believe; and not a revelation that such and such particular persons are
true Christians, and shall go to heaven. Therefore those affections which arise from no other
persuasion of the truth of the word of God than this, arise from delusion, and not true conviction;
and consequently are themselves delusive and vain.
But if the religious affections that persons have, do indeed arise from a strong persuasion
of the truth of the Christian religion, their affections are not the better, unless their persuasion be a
reasonable persuasion or conviction. By a reasonable conviction, I mean, a conviction founded on
real evidence, or upon that which is a good reason, or just ground of conviction. Men may have a
strong persuasion that the Christian religion is true, when their persuasion is not at all built on
evidence, but altogether on education, and the opinion of others; as many Mahometans are strongly
persuaded of the truth of the Mahometan religion, because their fathers, and neighbors, and nation
believe it. That belief of the troth of the Christian religion, which is built on the very same grounds
with a Mahometan's belief of the Mahometan religion, is the same sort of belief. And though the
thing believed happens to be better, yet that does not make the belief itself to be of a better sort; for
though the thing believed happens to be true, yet the belief of it is not owing to this truth, but to
education. So that as the conviction is no better than the Mahometan's conviction; so the affections
that flow from it, are no better in themselves, than the religious affections of Mahometans.
But if that belief of Christian doctrines, which persons' affections arise from, be not merely
from education, but indeed from reasons and arguments which are offered, it will not from thence
necessarily follow, that their affections are truly gracious: for in order to that, it is requisite not
only that the belief which their affections arise from, should be a reasonable, but also a spiritual
belief or conviction. I suppose none will doubt but that some natural men do yield a kind of assent
of their judgments to the truth of the Christian religion, from the rational proofs or arguments that
are offered to evince it. Judas, without doubt, thought Jesus to be the Messiah, from the things
which he saw and heard; but yet all along was a devil. So in John 2:23, 24, 25, we read of many
that believed in Christ's name, when they saw the miracles that he did; whom yet Christ knew had
not that within them, which was to be depended on. So Simon the sorcerer believed, when he
beheld the miracles and signs which were done; but yet remained in the gall of bitterness, and bond
of iniquity, Acts 8:13, 23. And if there is such a belief or assent of the judgment in some natural
men, none can doubt but that religious affections may arise from that assent or belief; as we read of
some who believed for a while, that were greatly affected, and anon with joy received the word.
It is evident that there is such a thing as a spiritual belief or conviction of the truth of the
things of the gospel, or a belief that is peculiar to those who are spiritual, or who are regenerated,
and have the Spirit of God, in his holy communications, and dwelling in them as a vital principle.
So that the conviction they have, does not only differ from that which natural men have, in its
concomitants, in that it is accompanied with good works; but the belief itself is diverse, the assent
and conviction of the judgment is of a kind peculiar to those who are spiritual, and that which
natural men are wholly destitute of. This is evident by the Scripture, if anything at all is so: John
17:8, "They have believed that thou didst send me." Tit. 1:1, "According to the faith of God's
elect, and the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness." John 16:27, "The Father
himself loveth you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out from God." 1
John 4:15, "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in
God." Chap. 5:1, "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God." Ver. 10, "He
that believeth on the Son of God, hath the witness in himself."
What a spiritual conviction of the judgment is, we are naturally led to determine from what
has been said already under the former head of a spiritual understanding. The conviction of the
judgment arises from the illumination of the understanding; the passing of a right judgment on
things, depends on having aright apprehension or idea of things. And therefore it follows, that a
spiritual conviction of the truth of the great things of the gospel, is such a conviction, as arises
from having a spiritual view or apprehension of those things in the mind. And this is also evident
from the Scripture, which often represents, that a saving belief of the reality and divinity of the
things proposed and exhibited to us in the gospel, is from the Spirit of God's enlightening the
mind, to have right apprehensions of the nature of those things, and so as it were unveiling things,
or revealing them, and enabling the mind to view them and see them as they are. Luke 10:21, 22,
"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from the wise and
prudent and hast revealed them unto babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. All
things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father;

105
and who the Father is, but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him." John 6:40, "And
this is the will of him that sent me, that everyone which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may
have everlasting life." Where it is plain, that true faith arises from a spiritual sight of Christ. And
John 17:6, 7, 8, "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world.
Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou hast given me, are of thee. For I have given
unto them the words which thou gavest me; and they have received them, and have known surely
that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou didst send one." Where Christ's
manifesting God's name to the disciples, or giving them a true apprehension and view of divine
things, was that whereby they knew that Christ's doctrine was of God, and that Christ himself was
of him, and was sent by him: Matt. 16:16, 17, "Simon Peter said, Thou art Christ, the Son of the
living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh
and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven." 1 John 5:10, "He that
believeth on the Son of God, hath the witness in himself." Gal. 1:14, 16, 16, "Being more
exceedingly zealous of the traditions of my fathers. But when it pleased God, who separated me
from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach
him among the heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood."
If it be so, that that is a spiritual conviction of the divinity and reality of the things exhibited
in the gospel, which arises from a spiritual understanding of those things; I have shown already
what that is, viz., a sense and taste of the divine, supreme, and holy excellency and beauty of those
things. So that then is the mind spiritually convinced of the divinity and truth of the great things of
the gospel, when that conviction arises, either directly or remotely, from such a sense or view of
their divine excellency and glory as is there exhibited. This clearly follows, from things that have
been already said: and for this the Scripture is very plain and express, 2 Cor. 4:3-6: "But if our
gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of this world hath blinded the minds
of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them. For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves
your servants for Jesus' sake. For God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ." Together with the last verse of the foregoing chapter, which introduces this, "but we all,
with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." Nothing can be more evident, than that a
saving belief of the gospel is here spoken of, by the apostle, as arising from the mind's being
enlightened to behold the divine glory of the things it exhibits.
This view or sense of the divine glory, and unparalleled beauty of the things exhibited to us
in the gospel, has a tendency to convince the mind of their divinity, two ways; directly, and more
indirectly, and remotely. 1. A view of this divine glory directly convinces the mind of the divinity
of these things, as this glory is in itself a direct, clear, and all-conquering evidence of it; especially
when clearly discovered, or when this supernatural sense is given in a good degree.
He that has his judgment thus directly convinced and assured of the divinity of the things of
the gospel, by a clear view of their divine glory, has a reasonable conviction; his belief and
assurance is altogether agreeable to reason; because the divine glory and beauty of divine things is,
in itself, real evidence of the divinity, and the most direct and strong evidence. He that truly sees
the divine transcendent, supreme glory of those things which are divine, does as it were know their
divinity intuitively: he not only argues that they are divine, but he sees that they are divine; he sees
that in them wherein divinity chiefly consists, for in this glory which is so vastly and inexpressibly
distinguished from the glory of artificial things, and all other glory, does mainly consist the true
notion of divinity. God is God, and distinguished from all other beings, and exalted above them,
chiefly by his divine beauty, which is infinitely diverse from all other beauty.—They therefore that
see the stamp of this glory in divine things, they see divinity in them, they see God in them, and
see them to be divine; because they see that in them wherein the truest idea of divinity does consist.
Thus a soul may have a kind of intuitive knowledge of the divinity of the things exhibited in the
gospel; not that he judges the doctrines of the gospel to be from God, without any argument or
deduction at all; but it is without any long chain of arguments; the argument is but one, and the
evidence direct; the mind ascends to the truth of the gospel but by one step, and that is its divine
glory.
It would be very strange, if any professing Christian should deny it to be possible, that
there should be an excellency in divine things, which is so transcendent, and exceedingly different

106
from what is in other things, that if it were seen, would evidently distinguish them. We cannot
rationally doubt, but that things that are divine, that appertain to the Supreme Being, are vastly
different from things that are human: that there is a Godlike, high, and glorious excellency in them,
that does so distinguish them from the things which are of men, that the difference is inevitable;
and therefore such as, if seen, will have a most convincing, satisfying influence upon anyone, that
they are what they are, viz., divine. Doubtless there is that glory and excellency in the divine
Being, by which he is so infinitely distinguished from all other beings, that if it were seen, he
might be known by it. It would therefore be very unreasonable to deny, that it is possible for God
to give manifestations of this distinguishing excellency, in things by which he is pleased to make
himself known; and that this distinguishing excellency may be clearly seen in them. There are
natural excellencies, that are very evidently distinguishing of the subjects or authors, to anyone
who beholds them. How vastly is the speech of an understanding man different from that of a little
child! And how greatly distinguished is the speech of some men of great genius, as Homer,
Cicero, Milton, Locke, Addison, and others, from that of many other understanding men! There
are no limits to be set to the degrees of manifestation of mental excellency, that there may be in
speech. But the appearances of the natural perfections of God, in the manifestations he makes of
himself, may doubtless be unspeakably more evidently distinguishing, than the appearances of
those excellencies of worms of the dust, in which they differ one from another. He that is well
acquainted with mankind, and their works, by viewing the sun, may know it is no human work.
And it is reasonable to suppose, that when Christ comes at the end of the world, in the glory of his
Father, it will be with such ineffable appearances of divinity, as will leave no doubt to the
inhabitants of the world, even the most obstinate infidels, that he who appears is a divine person.
But above all, do the manifestations of the moral and spiritual glory of the divine Being (which is
the proper beauty of the divinity) bring their own evidence, and tend to assure the heart. Thus the
disciples were assured that Jesus was the Son of God, "for they beheld his glory, as the glory of
the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth," John 1:14. When Christ appeared in the
glory of his transfiguration to his disciples, with that outward glory to their bodily eyes, which
was a sweet and admirable symbol and semblance of his spiritual glory, together with his spiritual
glory itself, manifested to their minds; the manifestation of glory was such, as did perfectly, and
with good reason, assure them of his divinity; as appears by what one of them, viz., the Apostle
Peter, says concerning it, 2 Pet. 1:16, 17, 18, "For we have not followed cunningly devised
fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were
eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there
came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy
mount." The apostle calls that mount, the holy mount, because the manifestations of Christ which
were there made to their minds, and which their minds were especially impressed and ravished
with, were the glory of his holiness, or the beauty of his moral excellency; or, as another of these
disciples, who saw it, expresses it, "his glory, as full of grace and truth."
Now this distinguishing glory of the divine Being has its brightest appearance and
manifestation, in the things proposed and exhibited to us in the gospel, the doctrines there taught,
the word there spoken, and the divine counsels, acts and works there revealed. These things have
the clearest, most admirable, and distinguishing representations and exhibitions of the glory of
God's moral perfections, that ever were made to the world. And if there be such a distinguishing,
evidential manifestation of divine glory in the gospel, it is reasonable to suppose that there may be
such a thing as seeing it. What should hinder but that it may be seen? It is no argument that it
cannot be seen, that some do not see it; though they may be discerning men in temporal matters. If
there be such ineffable, distinguishing, evidential excellencies in the gospel, it is reasonable to
suppose, that they are such as are not to be discerned, but by the special influence and
enlightenings of the Spirit of God. There is need of uncommon force of mind to discern the
distinguishing excellencies of the works of authors of great genius: those things in Milton, which,
to mean judges, appear tasteless and imperfections, are his inimitable excellencies in the eyes of
those, who are of greater discerning and better taste. And if there be a book, which God is the
author of, it is most reasonable to suppose, that the distinguishing glories of his word are of such a
kinds as that the corruption of men's hearts, which above all things alienates men from the Deity,
and makes the heart dull and stupid to any sense or taste of those things wherein the moral glory of
the divine perfections consists: I say, it is but reasonable to suppose, that this would blind men

107
from discerning the beauties of such a book; and that therefore they will not see them, but as God
is pleased to enlighten them, and restore a holy taste, to discern and relish divine beauties.
This sense of the spiritual excellency and beauty of divine things, does also tend directly to
convince the mind of the truth of the gospel, as there are very many of the most important things
declared in the gospel, that are hid from the eyes of natural men, the truth of which does in effect
consist in this excellency, or does so immediately depend upon it, and result from it, that in this
excellency's being seen, the truth of those things is seen. As soon as ever the eyes are opened to
behold the holy beauty and amiableness that is in divine things, a multitude of most important
doctrines of the gospel that depend upon it (which all appear strange and dark to natural men) are at
once seen to be true. As for instance, hereby appears the truth of what the word of God declares
concerning the exceeding evil of sin; for the same eye that discerns the transcendent beauty of
holiness, necessarily therein sees the exceeding odiousness of sin: the same taste which relishes the
sweetness of true moral good, tastes the bitterness of moral evil. And by this means a man sees his
own sinfulness and loathsomeness; for he has now a sense to discern objects of this nature; and so
sees the truth of what the word of God declares concerning the exceeding sinfulness of mankind,
which before he did not see. He now sees the dreadful pollution of his heart, and the desperate
depravity of his nature, in a new manner; for his soul has now a sense given it to feel the pain of
such a disease; and this shows him the truth of what the Scripture reveals concerning the
corruption of man's nature, his original sin, and the ruinous, undone condition man is in, and his
need of a Savior, his need of the mighty power of God to renew his heart and change his nature.
Men, by seeing the true excellency of holiness, do see the glory of all those things, which both
reason and Scripture show to be in the divine Being; for it has been shown, that the glory of them
depends on this: and hereby they see the truth of all that the Scripture declares concerning: God's
glorious excellency and majesty, his being the fountain of all good, the only happiness of the
creature, &c. And this again shows the mind the truth of what the Scripture teaches concerning the
evil of sin against so glorious a God; and also the truth of what it teaches concerning sin's just
desert of that dreadful punishment which it reveals; and also concerning the impossibility of our
offering any satisfaction, or sufficient atonement for that which is so infinitely evil and heinous.
And this again shows the truth of what the Scripture reveals concerning the necessity of a Savior,
to offer an atonement of infinite value for sin. And this sense of spiritual beauty that has been
spoken of, enables the soul to see the glory of those things which the gospel reveals concerning the
person of Christ; and so enables to see the exceeding beauty and dignity of his person, appearing
in what the gospel exhibits of his word, works, acts, and life: and this apprehension of the
superlative dignity of his person shows the truth of what the gospel declares concerning the value
of his blood and righteousness, and so the infinite excellency of that offering he has made to God
for us, and so its sufficiency to atone for our sins, and recommend us to God. And thus the Spirit
of God discovers the way of salvation by Christ; thus the soul sees the fitness and suitableness of
this way of salvation, the admirable wisdom of the contrivance, and the perfect answerableness of
the provision that the gospel exhibits (as made for us) to our necessities. A sense of true divine
beauty being given to the soul, the soul discerns the beauty of every part of the gospel scheme.
This also shows the soul the truth of what the word of God declares concerning man's chief
happiness, as consisting in holy exercises and enjoyments. This shows the truth of what the gospel
declares concerning the unspeakable glory of the heavenly state. And what the prophecies of the
Old Testaments and the writings of the apostles declare concerning the glory of the Messiah's
kingdom, is now all plain; and also what the Scripture teaches concerning the reasons and grounds
of our duty. The truth of all these things revealed in the Scripture, and many more that might be
mentioned, appears to the soul, only by imparting that spiritual taste of divine beauty, which has
been spoken of; they being hidden things to the soul before.
And besides all this, the truth of all those things which the Scripture says about
experimental religion, is hereby known; for they are now experienced. And this convinces the
soul, that one who knew the heart of man, better than we know our own hearts, and perfectly
knew the nature of virtue and holiness, was the author of the Scriptures. And the opening to view,
with such clearness, such a world of wonderful and glorious truth in the gospel, that before was
unknown, being quite above the view of a natural eye, but now appearing so clear and bright, has
a powerful and invincible influence on the soul, to persuade of the divinity of the gospel.
Unless men may come to a reasonable, solid persuasion and conviction of the truth of the
gospel, by the internal evidences of it, in the way that has been spoken, viz., by a sight of its

108
glory; it is impossible that those who are illiterate, and unacquainted with history, should have any
thorough and effectual conviction of it at all. They may without this, see a great deal of probability
of it; it may be reasonable for them to give much credit to what learned men and historians tell
them; and they may tell them so much, that it may look very probable and rational to them, that the
Christian religion is true; and so much that they would be very unreasonable not to entertain this
opinion. But to have a conviction, so clear, and evident, and assuring, as to be sufficient to induce
them, with boldness to sell all, confidently and fearlessly to run the venture of the loss of all
things, and of enduring the most exquisite and long continued torments, and to trample the world
under foot, and count all things but dung for Christ, the evidence they can have from history,
cannot be sufficient. It is impossible that men, who have not something of a general view of the
historical world, or the series of history from age to age, should come at the force of arguments for
the truth of Christianity, drawn from history, to that degree, as effectually to induce them to
venture their all upon it. After all that learned men have said to them, there will remain innumerable
doubts on their minds; they will be ready, when pinched with some great trial of their faith, to say,
"How do I know this, or that? How do I know when these histories were written? Learned men
tell me these histories were so and so attested in the day of them; but how do I know that there
were such attestations then? They tell me there is equal reason to believe these facts, as any
whatsoever that are related at such a distance; but how do I know that other facts which are related
of those ages, ever were? Those who have not something of a general view of the series of
historical events, and of the state of mankind from age to age, cannot see the clear evidence from
history of the truth of facts, in distant ages; but there will endless doubts and scruples remain.
But the gospel was not given only for learned men. There are at least nineteen in twenty, if
not ninety-nine in a hundred, of those for whom the Scriptures were written, that are not capable of
any certain or effectual conviction of the divine authority of the Scriptures, by such arguments as
learned men make use of. If men who have been brought up in Heathenism, must wait for a clear
and certain conviction of the truth of Christianity, until they have learning and acquaintance with
the histories of politer nations, enough to see clearly the force of such kind of arguments; it will
make the evidence of the gospel to then immensely cumbersome, and will render the propagation
of the gospel among them infinitely difficult. Miserable is the condition of the Houssatunnuck
Indians, and others, who have lately manifested a desire to be instructed in Christianity, if they can
come at no evidence of the truth of Christianity, sufficient to induce them to sell all for Christ, in
any other way but this.
It is unreasonable to suppose, that God has provided for his people no more than probable
evidence of the truth of the gospel. He has with great care, abundantly provided, and given them,
the most convicting, assuring, satisfying and manifold evidence of his faithfulness in the covenant
of grace; and as David says, "made a covenant, ordered in all things and sure." Therefore it is
rational to suppose, that at the same time, he would not fail of ordering the matter so, that there
should not be wanting, as great, and clear evidence, that this is his covenant, and that these
promises are his promises; or, which is the same thing, that the Christian religion is true, and that
the gospel is his word. Otherwise in vain are those great assurances he has given of his
faithfulness in his covenant, by confirming it with his oath, and so variously establishing it by
seals and pledges. For the evidence that it is his covenant, is properly the foundation on which all
the force and effect of those other assurances do stand. We may therefore undoubtedly suppose
and conclude, that there is some sort of evidence which God has given, that this covenant, and
these promises are his, beyond all mere probability; that there are some grounds of assurance of it
held forth, which, if we were not blind to them, tend to give a higher persuasion, than any arguing
from history, human traditions &c., which the illiterate and unacquainted with history are capable
of; yea, that which is good ground of the highest and most perfect assurance, that mankind have in
any case whatsoever, agreeable to those high expressions which the apostle uses, Heb. 10:22, "Let
us draw near in full assurance of faith." And Col. 2:2, "That their hearts might be comforted, being
knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ." It is reasonable to
suppose, that God would give the greatest evidence of those things which are greatest, and the
truth of which is of greatest importance to us: and that we therefore, if we are wise, and act
rationally, shall have the greatest desire of having full, undoubting and perfect assurance of. But it
is certain, that such an assurance is not to be attained by the greater part of them who live under the
gospel, by arguments fetched from ancient traditions, histories, and monuments.

109
And if we come to fact and experience, there is not the least reason to suppose, that one in a
hundred of those who have been sincere Christians, and have had a heart to sell all for Christ, have
come by their convection of the truth of the gospel this way. If we read over the histories of the
many thousands that died martyrs for Christ, since the beginning of the Reformation, and have
cheerfully undergone extreme tortures in a confidence of the truth of the gospel, and consider their
circumstances and advantages; how few of them were there, that we can reasonably suppose, ever
came by their assured persuasion this way; or indeed for whom it was possible, reasonably to
receive so full and strong an assurance, from such arguments! Many of them were weak women
and children, and the greater part of them illiterate persons, many of whom had been brought up in
popish ignorance and darkness, and were but newly come out of it, and lived and died in times
wherein those arguments for the truth of Christianity, from antiquity and history had been but very
imperfectly handled. And indeed, it is but very lately that these arguments have been set in a clear
and convincing light, even by learned men themselves: and since it has been done, there never
were fewer thorough believers among those who have been educated in the true religion; infidelity
never prevailed so much, in any age, as in this, wherein these arguments are handled to the greatest
advantage.
The true martyrs of Jesus Christ, are not those who have only been strong in opinion that
the gospel of Christ is true, but those that have seen the truth of it; as the very name of martyrs or
witnesses (by which they are called in Scripture) implies. Those are very improperly called
witnesses of the truth of any them, who only declare they are very much of opinion that such a
thing is true. Those only are proper witnesses, who can, and do testify, that they have seen the
truth of the thing they assert: John 3:11, "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have
seen." John 1:34, "And I saw and bare record that this is the Son of God." 1 John 4:14, "And we
have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world." Acts 22:14, 15,
"The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst know his will, and see that just one,
and shouldst hear the voice of his mouth; for thou shalt be his witness unto all men, of what thou
hast seen and heard." But the true martyrs of Jesus Christ are called his witnesses; and all the
saints, who by their holy practice under great trials, declare that faith, which is the substance of
things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, are called witnesses, Heb. 11:1, and 12:1,
because by their profession and practice, they declare their assurance of the truth and divinity of the
gospel, having had the eyes of their minds enlightened to see divinity in the gospel, or to behold
that unparalleled, ineffably excellent, and truly divine glory shining in it, which is altogether
distinguishing, evidential, and convincing: so that they may truly be said to have seen God in it,
and to have seen that it is indeed divine; and so can speak in the style of witnesses; and not only
say, that they think the gospel is divine, but say, that it is divine, giving it in as their testimony,
because they have seen it to be so. Doubtless Peter, James and John, after they had seen that
excellent glory of Christ in the mount, would have been ready, when they came down, to speak in
the language of witnesses, and to say positively that Jesus is the Son of God; as Peter says, they
were eyewitnesses, 2 Pet. 1:16. And so all nations will be ready positively to say this, when they
shall behold his glory at the day of judgment; though what will be universally seen, will be only
his natural glory, and not his moral and spiritual glory, which is much more distinguishing. But
yet it must be noted, that among those who have a spiritual sight of the divine glory of the gospel,
there is a great variety of decrees of strength of faith, as there is a vast variety of the degrees of
clearness of views of this glory: but there is no true and saving faith, or spiritual conviction of the
judgment, of the truth of the gospel, that has nothing in it, of this manifestation of its internal
evidence in some degree. The gospel of the blessed God does not go abroad a begging for its
evidence, so much as some think; it has its highest and most proper evidence in itself. Though
great use may be made of external arguments, they are not to be neglected, but highly prized and
valued; for they may be greatly serviceable to awaken unbelievers, and bring them to serious
consideration, and to confirm the faith of true saints; yea, they may be in some respect subservient
to the begetting of a saving faith in men. Though what was said before remains true, that there is
no spiritual conviction of the judgment, but what arises from an apprehension of the spiritual
beauty and glory of divine things: for, as has been observed, this apprehension or view has a
tendency to convince the mind of the truth of the gospel, two ways, either directly or indirectly.
Having therefore already observed how it does this directly, I proceed now,
2. To observe how a view of this divine glory does convince the mind of the truth of
Christianity, more indirectly.

110
First, it doth so, as the prejudices of the heart against the truth of divine things are hereby
removed, so that the mind thereby lies open to the force of the reasons which are offered. The
mind of man is naturally full of enmity against the doctrines of the gospel; which is a disadvantage
to those arguments that prove their truth, and causes them to lose their force upon the mind; but
when a person has discovered to him the divine excellency of Christian doctrines, this destroys that
enmity, and removes the prejudices, and sanctifies the reason, and causes it to be open and free.
Hence is a vast difference, as to the force that arguments have to convince the mind. Hence was the
very different effect, which Christ's miracles had to convince the disciples, from what they had to
convince the Scribes and Pharisees: not that they had a stronger reasons or had their reason more
improved; but their reason was sanctified, and those blinding prejudices, which the Scribes and
Pharisees were under, were removed by the sense they had of the excellency of Christ and his
doctrine.
Secondly, It not only removes the hinderances of reason, but positively helps reason. It
makes even the speculative notions more lively. It assists and engages the attention of the mind to
that kind of objects which causes it to have a clearer view of them, and more clearly to see their
mutual relations. The ideas themselves, which otherwise are dim and obscure, by this means have
a light cast upon them, and are impressed with greater strength, so that the mind can better judge of
them; as he that beholds the objects on the face of the earth, when the light of the sun is cast upon
them, is under greater advantage to discern them, in their true forms, and mutual relations, and to
see the evidences of divine wisdom and skill in their contrivance, than he that sees them in a dim
starlight, or twilight.
What has been said, may serve in some measure to show the nature of a spiritual conviction
of the judgment of the truth and reality of divine things; and so to distinguish truly gracious
affections from others; for gracious affections are evermore attended with such a conviction of the
judgment.
But before I dismiss this head, it will be needful to observe the ways whereby some are
deceived, with respect to this matter; and take notice of several things, that are sometimes taken for
a spiritual and saving belief of the truth of the things of religion, which are indeed very diverse
from it.
1. There is a degree of conviction of the truth of the great things of religion, that arises
from the common enlightenings of the Spirit of God. That more lively and sensible apprehension
of the things of religion, with respect to what is natural in them, such as natural men have who are
under awakenings and common illuminations, will give some degree of conviction of the truth of
divine things, beyond what they had before they were thus enlightened. For hereby they see the
manifestations there are, in the revelation made in the holy Scriptures, and things exhibited in that
revelation, of the natural perfections of God; such as his greatness, power, and awful majesty;
which tends to convince the minds that this is the word of a great and terrible God. From the
tokens there are of God's greatness and majesty in his word and works, which they have a great
sense of, from the common influence of the Spirit of God, they may have a much greater
conviction that these are indeed the words and works of a very great invisible Being. And the lively
apprehension of the greatness of God, which natural men may have, tends to make them sensible
of the great guilt which sin against such a God brings, and the dreadfulness of his wrath for sin.
And this tends to cause them more easily and fully to believe the revelation the Scripture makes of
another world, and of the extreme misery it threatens there to be indicted on sinners. And so from
that sense of the great natural good there is in the things of religion, which is sometimes given in
common illuminations, men may be the more induced to believe the truth of religion. These things
persons may have, and yet have no sense of the beauty and amiableness of the moral and holy
excellency that is in the things of religion; and therefore no spiritual conviction of their truth. But
yet such convictions are sometimes mistaken for saving convictions, and the affections flowing
from them, for saving affections.
2. The extraordinary impressions which are made on the imaginations of some persons, in
the visions and immediate strong impulses and suggestions that they have, as though they saw
sights, and had words spoken to them, may, and often do beget a strong persuasion of the truth of
invisible things. Though the general tendency of such things, in their final issue, is to draw men
off from the word of God, and to cause them to reject the gospel, and to establish unbelief and
Atheism; yet for the present, they may, and often do beget a confident persuasion of the truth of
some things that are revealed in the Scriptures; however their confidence is founded in delusion,

111
and so nothing worth. As for instance, if a person has by some invisible agent, immediately and
strongly impressed on his imagination, the appearance of a bright light, and glorious form of a
person seated on a throne, with great external majesty and beauty, uttering some remarkable
words, with great force and energy; the person who is the subject of such an operation, may be
from hence confident, that there are invisible agents, spiritual beings, from what he has
experienced, knowing that he had no hand himself in this extraordinary effect, which he has
experienced: and he may also be confident, that this is Christ whom he saw and heard speaking:
and this may make him confident that there is a Christ, and that Christ reigns on a throne in
heaven, as he saw him; and may be confident that the words which he heard him speak are true,
&c.—In the same manner, as the lying miracles of the Papists may, for the present, beget in the
minds of the ignorant deluded people, a strong persuasion of the truth of many things declared in
the New Testament. Thus when the images of Christ, in Popish churches, are on some
extraordinary occasions, made by priestcraft to appear to the people as if they wept, and shed fresh
blood, and moved, and uttered such and such words; the people may be verily persuaded that it is a
miracle wrought by Christ himself; and from thence may be confident there is a Christ, and that
what they are told of his death and sufferings, and resurrection, and ascension, and present
government or the world is true; for they may look upon this miracle, as a certain evidence of all
these things, and a kind of ocular demonstration of them. This may be the influence of these lying
wonders for the present; though the general tendency of them is not to convince that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, but finally to promote Atheism. Even the intercourse which Satan has with
witches, and their often experiencing his immediate power, has a tendency to convince them of the
truth of some of the doctrines of religion; as particularly the reality of an invisible world, or world
of spirits, contrary to the doctrine of the Sadducees. The general tendency of Satan's influence is
delusion: but yet he may mix some truth with his lies, that his lies may not be so easily discovered.
There are multitudes that are deluded with a counterfeit faith, from impressions on their
imagination, in the manner which has been now spoken of. They say they know that there is a
God, for they have seen him; they know that Christ is the Son of God, for they have seen him in
his glory; they know that Christ died for sinners, for they have seen him hanging on the cross, and
his blood running from his wounds; they know there is a heaven and a hell, for they have seen the
misery of the damned souls in hell, and the glory of saints and angels in heaven (meaning some
external representations strongly impressed on their imagination); they know that the Scriptures are
the word of God, and that such and such promises in particular are his word, for they have heard
him speak them to them, they came to their minds suddenly and immediately from God, without
their having any hand in it.
3. Persons may seem to have their belief of the truth of the things of religion greatly
increased, when the foundation of it is only a persuasion they have received of their interest in
them. They first, by some means or other, take up a confidence, that if there be a Christ and
heaven, they are theirs; and this prejudices them more in favor of the truth of them. When they hear
of the great and glorious things of religion, it is with this notion, that all these things belong to
them; and hence easily become confident that they are true; they look upon it to be greatly for their
interest that they should be true. It is very obvious what a strong influence men's interest and
inclinations have on their judgments. While a natural man thinks, that if there be a heaven and hell,
the latter, and not the former, belongs to him; then he will be hardly persuaded that there is a
heaven or hell: but when he comes to be persuaded, that hell belongs only to other folks, and not to
him, then he can easily allow the reality of hell, and cry out of others' senselessness and
sottishness in neglecting means of escape from it: and being confident that he is a child of God,
and that God has promised heaven to him, he may seem strong in the faith of its reality, and may
have a great zeal against that infidelity which denies it.
But I proceed to another distinguishing sign of gracious affections.
VI. Gracious affections are attended with evangelical humiliation. Evangelicalhumiliation
is a sense that a Christian has of his own utter insufficiency, despicableness, and odiousnesss,
with an answerable frame of heart.
There is a distinction to be made between a legal and evangelical humiliation. The former is
what men may be the subjects of, while they are yet in a state of nature, and have no gracious
affections; the latter is peculiar to true saints: the former is from the common influence of the Spirit
of God, assisting natural principles, and especially natural conscience; the latter is from the special
influences of the Spirit of God, implanting and exercising supernatural and divine principles: the

112
former is from the mind's being assisted to a greater sense of the things of religion, as to their
natural properties and qualities, and particularly of the natural perfections of God, such as his
greatness, terrible majesty, &c., which were manifested to the congregation of Israel, in giving the
law at mount Sinai; the latter is from a sense of the transcendent beauty of divine things in their
moral qualities: in the former, a sense of the awful greatness, and natural perfections of God, and
of the strictness of his law, convinces men that they are exceeding sinful, and guilty, and exposed
to the wrath of God, as it will wicked men and devils at the day of judgment; but they do not see
their own odiousness on the account of sin; they do not see the hateful nature of sin; a sense of this
is given in evangelical humiliation, by a discovery of the beauty of God's holiness and moral
perfection. In a legal humiliation, men are made sensible that they are little and nothing before the
great and terrible God, and that they are undone, and wholly insufficient to help themselves; as
wicked men will be at the day of judgment: but they have not an answerable frame of heart,
consisting in a disposition to abase themselves, and exalt God alone; this disposition is given only
in evangelical humiliation, by overcoming the heart, and changing its inclination, by a discovery of
God's holy beauty: in a legal humiliation, the conscience is convinced; as the consciences of all
will be most perfectly at the day of judgment; but because there is no spiritual understanding, the
will is not bowed, nor the inclination altered: this is done only in evangelical humiliation. In legal
humiliation, men are brought to despair of helping themselves; in evangelical, they are brought
voluntarily to deny and renounce themselves: in the former, they are subdued and forced to the
ground; in the latter, they are brought sweetly to yield, and freely and with delight to prostrate
themselves at the feet of God.
Legal humiliation has in it no spiritual good, nothing of the nature of true virtue; whereas
evangelical humiliation is that wherein the excellent beauty of Christian grace does very much
consist. Legal humiliation is useful, as a means in order to evangelical; as a common knowledge of
the things of religion is a means requisite in order to spiritual knowledge. Men may be legally
humbled and have no humility: as the wicked at the day of judgment will be thoroughly convinced
that they have no righteousness, but are altogether sinful, and exceedingly guilty, and justly
exposed to eternal damnation, and be fully sensible of their own helplessness, without the least
mortification of the pride of their hearts: but the essence of evangelical humiliation consists in such
humility, as becomes a creature, in itself exceeding sinful, under a dispensation of grace;
consisting in a mean esteem of himself, as in himself nothing, and altogether contemptible and
odious; attended with a mortification of a disposition to exalt himself, and a free renunciation of his
own glory.
This is a great and most essential thing in true religion. The whole frame of the gospel, and
everything appertaining to the new covenant, and all God's dispensations towards fallen man, are
calculated to bring to pass this effect in the hearts of men. They that are destitute of this, have no
true religion, whatever profession they may make, and how high soever their religious affections
may be: Hab. 2:4, "Behold, his soul which is lifted up, is not upright in him; but the just shall live
by his faith;" i.e., he shall live by his faith on God's righteousness and grace, and not his own
goodness and excellency. God has abundantly manifested in his word, that this is what he has a
peculiar respect to in his saints, and that nothing is acceptable to him without it. Psalm 34:18, "The
Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart, and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit." Psalm
51:17, "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt
not despise." Psalm 138:6, "Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly." Prov.
3:34, "He giveth grace unto the lowly." Isa. 57:15, "Thus saith the high and lofty One who
inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of
a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite
ones." Isa. 66:1, 2, "Thus saith the Lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool:
but to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my
word." Micah 6:8, "He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord thy God
require of thee; but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?" Matt. 5:3,
"Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of God." Matt. 18:3, 4, "Verily I say unto
you, except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the
kingdom of heaven." Mark 10:15, "Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein." The centurion, that we have an account
of, Luke 7, acknowledged that he was not worthy that Christ should enter under his roof, and that

113
he was not worthy to come to him. See the manner of the woman's coming to Christ, that was a
sinner, Luke 7:37, &c.: "And behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she knew
that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at
his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the
hairs of her head." She did not think the hair of her head, which is the natural crown and glory of a
woman (1 Cor. 11:15), too good to wipe the feet of Christ withal. Jesus most graciously accepted
her, and says to her, "thy faith hath saved thee, go in peace." The woman of Canaan submitted to
Christ, in his saying, "it is not meet to take the children's bread and cast it to dogs," and did as it
were own that she was worthy to be called a dog; whereupon Christ says unto her, "O woman,
great is thy faith; be it unto thee, even as thou wilt," Matt. 15:26, 27, 28. The prodigal son said, "I
will arise and go to my father, and I will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants,"
Luke 15:18, &c. See also Luke 18:9, &c.: "And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in
themselves that they were righteous, and despised others, &c. The publican, standing afar off,
would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other:
for everyone that exalteth himself, shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself, shall be exalted."
Matt. 28:9, "And they came, and held him by the feet and worshipped him." Col. 3:12, "Put ye
on, as the elect of God, humbleness of mind." Ezek. 20:41, 42, "I will accept you with your sweet
savor, when I bring you out from the people, &c. And there shall ye remember your ways, and all
your doings, wherein ye have been defiled, and ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight, for
all your evils that ye have committed." Chap. 36:26, 27, 31, "A new heart also will I give unto
you—and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, &c. Then shall ye
remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in
your own sight, for your iniquities, and for your abominations." Chap. 16:63, "That thou mayest
remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I
am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the Lord." Job 42:6, "I abhor myself, and
repent in dust and ashes."
As we would therefore make the holy Scriptures our rule in judging of the nature of true
religion, and judging of our own religious qualifications and state; it concerns us greatly to look at
this humiliation, as one of the most essential things pertaining to true Christianity.56 This is the
principal part of the great Christian duty of self-denial. That duty consists in two things, viz., first,
in a man's denying his worldly inclinations, and in forsaking and renouncing all worldly objects
and enjoyments; and, secondly, in denying his natural self-exaltation, and renouncing his own
dignity and glory and in being emptied of himself; so that he does freely and from his very heart,
as it were renounce himself, and annihilate himself. Thus the Christian doth in evangelical
humiliation. And this latter is the greatest and most difficult part of self-denial: although they
always go together, and one never truly is, where the other is not; yet natural men can come much
nearer to the former than the latter. Many Anchorites and Recluses have abandoned (though
without any true mortification) the wealth, and pleasures, and common enjoyments of the world,
who were far from renouncing their own dignity and righteousness; they never denied themselves
for Christ, but only sold one lust to feed another, sold a beastly lust to pamper a devilish one; and
so were never the better, but their latter end was worse than their beginning; they turned out one
black devil, to let in seven white ones, that were worse than the first, though of a fairer
countenance. It is inexpressible, and almost inconceivable, how strong a self-righteous, selfexalting disposition is naturally in man; and what he will not do and suffer to feed and gratify it:
and what lengths have been gone in a seeming self-denial in other respects, by Essenes and
56Calvin in his Institutions, Book II chap. 2. § 11, says "I was always exceedingly

pleased with that saying of Chrysostom. "The foundation of our philosophy is
humility;" and yet more pleased with that of Augustine: "As," says he, "the
rhetorician being asked, what was the first thing in the rules of eloquence, he
answered, pronunciation; what was the second, pronunciation; what was the third,
still he answered, pronunciation. So if you shall ask me concerning the precept of
the Christian religion, I would answer, firstly, secondly, and thirdly, and forever,
humility."

114
Pharisees among the Jews, and by Papists, many sects of heretics, and enthusiasts, among
professing Christians; and by many Mahometans; and by Pythagorean philosophers, and others
among the Heathen; and all to do sacrifice to this Moloch of spiritual pride or self-righteousness;
and that they may have something wherein to exalt themselves before God, and above their fellow
creatures.
That humiliation which has been spoken of, is what all the most glorious hypocrites, who
make the most splendid show of mortification to the world, and high religious affection, do
grossly fail in. Were it not that this is so much insisted on in Scripture, as a most essential thing in
true grace, one would be tempted to think that many of the heathen philosophers were truly
gracious, in whom was so bright an appearance of many virtues, and also great illuminations, and
inward fervors and elevations of mind, as though they were truly the subjects of divine illapses and
heavenly communications.57 It is true, that many hypocrites make great pretenses to humility, as
well as other graces; and very often there is nothing whatsoever which they make a higher
profession of. They endeavor to make a great show of humility in speech and behavior; but they
commonly make bungling work of it, though glorious work in their own eyes. They cannot find
out what a humble speech and behavior is, or how to speak and act so that there may indeed be a
savor of Christian humility in what they say and do: that sweet humble air and mien is beyond their
art, being not led by the Spirit, or naturally guided to a behavior becoming holy humility, by the
vigor of a lowly spirit within them. And therefore they have no other way, many of them, but only
to be much in declaring that they be humble, and telling how they were humbled to the dust at such
and such times, and abounding in very bad expressions which they use about themselves; such as,
"I am the least of all saints, I am a poor vile creature, I am not worthy of the least mercy, or that
God should look upon me! Oh, I have a dreadful wicked heart! My heart is worse than the devil!
Oh, this cursed heart of mine," &c. Such expressions are very often used, not with a heart that is
broken, not with spiritual mourning, not with the tears of her that washed Jesus's feet, not as
"remembering and being confounded, and never opening their mouth more because of their shame,
when God is pacified," as the expression is, Ezek. 16:63, but with a light air, with smiles in the
countenance, or with a pharisaical affectation: and we must believe that they are thus humble, and
see themselves so vile, upon the credit of their say so; for there is nothing appears in them of any
savor of humility, in the manner of their deportment and deeds that they do. There are many that
are full of expressions of their own vileness, who yet expect to be looked upon as eminent and
bright saints by others, as their due; and it is dangerous for any, so much as to hint the contrary, or
to carry it towards them any otherwise, than as if we looked upon them as some of the chief of
57Albeit the Pythagoreans were thus famous for Judaic mysterious wisdom, and many

moral, as well as natural accomplishments, yet were they not exempted from boasting
and pride; which was indeed a vice most epidemic, and as is were congenial, among
all the philosophers; but in a more particular manner, among the Pythagoreans. So
Hornius Hist. Philosoph. L. III. chap. 11. The manners of the Pythagoreans were not
free from boasting. They were all such as abounded in the sense and commendation
of their own excellencies, and boasting even almost to the degree of immodesty and
impudence, as great Heinsius, ad Horat. has rightly observed. Thus indeed does proud
nature delight to walk in the sparks of its own fire. And although many of these old
philosophers could, by the strength of their own lights and heats, together with some
common elevations and raisures of spirit (peradventure from a more than ordinary,
though not special and saving assistance of the Spirit), abandon many grosser vices;
yet they were all deeply immersed in that miserable cursed abyss of spiritual pride,
so that all their natural, and moral, and philosophic attainments, did feed, nourish,
strengthen, and render most inveterate, this hell-bred pest of their hearts. Yea, those
of them that seemed most modest, as the Academics, who professed they knew
nothing, and the Cynics, who greatly decried, both in words and habits, the pride of
others, yet even they abounded in the most notorious and visible pride. So connatural
and morally essential to corrupt nature, is this envenomed root, fountain, and plague
of spiritual pride; especially where there is any natural, moral, or philosophic
excellence to feed the same. Whence, Austin rightly judged all these philosophic
virtues to be but splendid sins. Gale's Court of the Gentiles, Part II. B. II. chap. 10:§ 17.

115
Christians. There are many that are much in crying out of their wicked hearts, and their great short
comings, and unprofitableness, and speaking as though they looked on themselves as the meanest
of the saints; who yet, if a minister should seriously tell them the same things in private, and
should signify, that he feared they were very low and weak Christians, and thought they had
reason solemnly to consider of their great barrenness and unprofitableness, and falling so much
short of many others, it would be more than they could digest; they would think themselves highly
injured; and there would be a danger of a rooted prejudice in them against such a minister.
There are some that are abundant in talking against legal doctrines, legal preaching, and a
legal spirit, who do but little understand the thing they talk against. A legal spirit is a more subtle
thing than they imagine; it is too subtle for them. It lurks, and operates, and prevails in their hearts,
and they are most notoriously guilty of it, at the same time, when they are inveighing against it. So
far as a man is not emptied of himself, and of his own righteousness and goodness, in whatever
form or shape, so far he is of a legal spirit. A spirit of pride of man's own righteousness, morality,
holiness, affection, experience, faith, humiliation, or any goodness whatsoever, is a legal spirit. It
was no pride in Adam before the fall, to be of a legal spirit; because of his circumstances, he might
seek acceptance by his own righteousness. But a legal spirit in a fallen, sinful creature, can be
nothing else but spiritual pride; and reciprocally, a spiritually proud spirit is a legal spirit. There is
no man living that is lifted up with a conceit of his own experiences and discoveries, and upon the
account of them glisters in his own eyes, but what trusts in his experiences, and makes a
righteousness of them; however he may use humble terms, and speak of his experiences as of the
great things God has done for him, and it may be calls upon others to glorify God for them; yet he
that is proud of his experiences, arrogates something to himself, as though his experiences were
some dignity of his. And if he looks on them as his own dignity, he necessarily thinks that God
looks on them so too; for he necessarily thinks his own opinion of then, to be true; and
consequently judges that God looks on them as he does; and so unavoidably imagines that God
looks on his experiences as a dignity in him, as he looks on them himself; and that he glisters as
much in God's eyes, as he does in his own. And thus he trusts in what is inherent in him, to make
him shine in God's sight, and recommend him to God: and with this encouragement he goes
before God in prayer; and this makes him expect much from God; and this makes him think that
Christ loves him, and that he is willing clothe him with his righteousness; because he supposes that
he is taken with his experiences and graces. And this is a high degree of living on his own
righteousness; and such persons are in the high road to hell. Poor deluded wretches, who think
they look so glistering in God's eyes, when they are smoke in his nose, and are many of them
more odious to him, than the most impure beast in Sodom, that makes no pretense to religion! To
do as these do, is to live upon experiences, according to the true notion of it; and not to do as those
who only make use of spiritual experiences, as evidences of a state of grace, and in that way
receive hope and comfort from them.
There is a sort of men, who indeed abundantly cry down works, and cry up faith in
opposition to works, and set up themselves very much as evangelical persons, in opposition to
those that are of a legal spirit, and make a fair show of advancing Christ and the gospel, and the
way of free grace; who are indeed some of the greatest enemies to the gospel way of free grace,
and the most dangerous opposers of pure humble Christianity.
There is a pretended great humiliation, and being dead to the law, and emptied of self,
which is one of the biggest and most elated things in the world. Some there are, who have made
great profession of experience of a thorough work of the law on their hearts, and of being brought
fully off from works; whose conversation has savored most of a self-righteous spirit of any that
ever I had opportunity to observe. And some who think themselves quite emptied of themselves,
and are confident that they are abased in the dust, are full as they can hold with the glory of their
own humility, and lifted up to heaven with a high opinion of their own abasement. Their humility
is a swelling, self-conceited, confident, showy, noisy, assuming humility. It seems to be the
nature of spiritual pride to make men conceited and ostentatious of their humility. This appears in
that first born of pride among the children of men, that would be called his holiness, even the man
of sin, that exalts himself above all that is called God or is worshipped; he styles himself Servant
of servants; and to make a show of humility, washes the feet of a number of poor men at his
inauguration.
For persons to be truly emptied of themselves, and to be poor in spirit, and broken in heart,
is quite another thing, and has other effects, than many imagine. It is astonishing how greatly

116
many are deceived about themselves as to this matter, imagining themselves most humble, when
they are most proud, and their behavior is really the most haughty. The deceitfulness of the heart of
man appears in no one thing so much as this of spiritual pride and self-righteousness. The subtlety
of Satan appears in its height, in his managing of persons with respect to this sin. And perhaps one
reason may be, that here he has most experience; he knows the way of its coming in; he is
acquainted with the secret springs of it: it was his own sin.—Experience gives vast advantage in
leading souls, either in good or evil.
But though spiritual pride be so subtle and secret an iniquity, and commonly appears under
a pretext of great humility; yet there are two things by which it may (perhaps universally and
surely) be discovered and distinguished.
The first thing is this; he that is under the prevalence of this distemper, is apt to think highly
of his attainments in religion, as comparing himself with others. It is natural for him to fall into that
thought of himself, that he is an eminent saint, that he is very high amongst the saints, and has
distinguishingly good and great experiences. That is the secret language of his heart: Luke 18:11,
"God, I thank thee that I am not as other men." And Isa. 65:5, "I am holier than thou." Hence such
are apt to put themselves forward among God's people, and as it were to take a high seat among
them, as if there was no doubt of it but it belonged to them. They, as it were, naturally do that
which Christ condemns, Luke 14:7, &c., take the highest room. This they do, by being forward to
take upon them the place and business of the chief; to guide, teach, direct, and manage; "they are
confident that they are guides to the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, instructors of the
foolish, teachers of babes," Rom. 2:19, 20. It is natural for them to take it for granted, that it
belongs to them to do the part of dictators and masters in matters of religion; and so they implicitly
affect to be called of men Rabbi, which is by interpretation Master, as the Pharisees did, Matt.
23:6, 7, i.e., they are yet apt to expect that others should regard them, and yield to them, as
masters in matters of religion.58
But he whose heart is under the power of Christian humility, is of a contrary disposition. If
the Scriptures are at all to be relied on, such a one is apt to think his attainments in religion to be
comparatively mean, and to esteem himself low among the saints, and one of the least of saints.
Humility, or true lowliness of mind, disposes persons to think others better than themselves: Phil.
2:3, "In lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better than themselves." Hence they are apt to
think the lowest room belongs to them, and their inward disposition naturally leads them to obey
that precept of our Savior, Luke 14:10. It is not natural to them to take it upon them to do the part
of teachers; but on the contrary, they are disposed to think that they are not the persons, that others
are fitter for it than they; as it was with Moses and Jeremiah (Exod. 3:11, Jer. 1:6), though they
were such eminent saints, and of great knowledge. It is not natural to them to think that it belongs
to them to teach, but to be taught; they are much more eager to hear, and to receive instruction from
others, than to dictate to others: Jam. 1:19, "Be ye swift to hear, slow to speak." And when they
do speak, it is not natural to them to speak with a bold, masterly air; but humility disposes them
rather to speak, trembling. Hos. 13:1, "When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in
Israel; but when he offended in Baal, he died." They are not apt to assume authority, and to take
upon them to be chief managers and masters; but rather to be subject to others: Jam. 3:1, 2, "Be
not many masters." 1 Pet. 5:5, "All of you be subject one to another, and be clothed with
humility." Eph. 5:21, "Submitting yourselves one to another in the fear of God."
There are some persons' experiences that naturally work that way, to make them think
highly of them; and they do often themselves speak of their experiences as very great and
extraordinary; they freely speak of the great things they have met with. This may be spoken and
meant in a good sense. In one sense, every degree of saving mercy is a great thing: it is indeed a
thing great, yea, infinitely great, for God to bestow the least crumb of children's bread on such
dogs as we are in ourselves; and the more humble a person is that hopes that God has bestowed
such mercy on him, the more apt will he be to call it a great thing that he has met with in this sense.
But if by great things which they have experienced they mean comparatively great spiritual
58"There be two things wherein it appears that a man has only common gifts, and no

inward principle. 1. These gifts ever puff up, and make a man something in his own
eyes, as the Corinthian knowledge did, and many a private man thinks himself fit to
be a minister." Shepard's Parable Part 1. p.181, 182.

117
experiences, or great compared with others' experiences, or beyond what is ordinary, which is
evidently oftentimes the case; then for a person to say, I have met with great things, is the very
same thing as to say, I am an eminent saint, and have more grace than ordinary: for to have great
experiences, if the experiences be true and worth the telling of, is the same thing as to have great
grace: there is no true experience, but the exercise of grace; and exactly according to the degree of
true experience, is the degree of grace and holiness. The persons that talk thus about their
experiences, when they give an account of them, expect that others should admire them. Indeed
they do not call it boasting to talk after this manner about their experiences, nor do they look upon
it as any sign of pride; because they say, "they know that it was not they that did it, it was free
grace, they are things that God has done for them, they would acknowledge the great mercy God
has shown them, and not make light of it." But so it was with the Pharisee that Christ tells us of,
Luke 18. He in words gave God the glory of making him to differ from other men; God, I thank
thee, says he, that I am not as other men.59 Their verbally ascribing it to the grace of God, that
they are holier than other saints, does not hinder their forwardness to think so highly of their
holiness, being a sure evidence of the pride and vanity of their minds. If they were under the
influence of a humble spirit, their attainments in religion would not be so apt to shine in their own
eyes, nor would they be so much in admiring their own beauty. The Christians that are really the
most eminent saints, and therefore have the most excellent experiences, and are the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven, humble themselves as a little child, Matt. 8:4; because they look on themselves
as but little children in grace, and their attainments to be but the attainments of babes in Christ, and
are astonished at, and ashamed of the low degrees of their love, and their thankfulness, and their
little knowledge of God. Moses, when he had been conversing with God in the mount, and his
face shone so bright in the eyes of others as to dazzle their eyes, wist not that his face shone. There
are some persons that go by the name of high professors, and some will own themselves to be
high professors: but eminently humble saints, that will shine brightest in heaven, are not at all apt
to profess high. I do not believe there is an eminent saint in the world that is a high professor.
Such will be much more likely to profess themselves to be least of all saints, and to think that every
saint's attainments and experiences are higher than his.60
Such is the nature of grace, and of true spiritual light, that they naturally dispose the saints
in the present state, to look upon their grace and goodness little, and their deformity great. And
they that have the most grace and spiritual light, of any in this world, have most of this disposition.
As will appear most clear and evident to anyone that soberly and thoroughly weighs the nature and
reason of things, and considers the things following.
That grace and holiness is worthy to be called little, that is, little in comparison of what it
ought to be. And so it seems to one that is truly gracious: for such a one has his eye upon the rule
59Calvin, in his Institutions, B. III. chap. 12 § 7, speaking of this Pharisee, observed

"That in his outward confession, he acknowledges that the righteousness that he has,
is the gift of God but (says he) because he trusts that he is righteous, he goes away out
of the presence of God, unacceptable and odious."
60Luther, as his words are cited by Rutherford, in his Display of the Spiritual
Antichrist, p. 143, 144, says thus: "So is the life of a Christian, that he that has begun,
seems to himself to have nothing; but strives and presses forward, that he may
apprehend: whence Paul says, I count not myself to have apprehended. For indeed
nothing is more pernicious to a believer, than that presumption, that he has already
apprehended, and has no further need of seeking. Hence also many fall back, and
pine away in spiritual security and slothfulness. So Bernard says, 'To stand still in
God's way, is to go back.' Wherefore this remains to him that has begun to be a
Christian, to think that he is not yet a Christian, but to seek that he may be a
Christian, that he may glory with Paul, 'I am not, but I desire to be;' a Christian not
yet finished, but only in his beginnings. Therefore he is not a Christian, that is a
Christian, that is, he that thinks himself a finished Christian, is not sensible how he
falls short. We reach after heaven, but we are not in heaven. Woe to him that is
wholly renewed, that is, that thinks himself to be so. That man, without doubt, has
never so much as begun to be renewed, nor did he ever taste what it is to be a
Christian.

118
of his duty; a conformity to that is that he aims at; it is what his soul struggles and reaches after;
and it is by that that he estimates and judges of what he does, and what he has. To a gracious soul,
and especially to one eminently gracious, that holiness appears little, which is little of what it
should be; little of what he sees infinite reason for, and obligation to. If his holiness appears to him
to be at a vast distance from this, it naturally appears despicable in his eyes, and not worthy to be
mentioned as any beauty or amiableness in him. For the like reason as a hungry man naturally
accounts that which is set before him, but a little food, a small matter, not worth mentioning, that is
nothing in comparison of his appetite. Or as the child of a great prince, that is jealous for the honor
of his father, and beholds He respect which men show him, naturally looks on that honor and
respect very little, and not worthy to be regarded, which is nothing in comparison of that which the
dignity of his father requires.
But that is the nature of true grace and spiritual light, that it opens to a person's view the
infinite reason there is that he should be holy in a high degree. And the more grace he has, the
more this is opened to view, the greater sense he has of the infinite excellency and glory of the
divine Being, and of the infinite dignity of the person of Christ, and the boundless length and
breadth, and depth and height, of the love of Christ to sinners. And as grace increases, the field
opens more and more to a distant view, until the soul is swallowed up with the vastness of the
object, and the person is astonished to think how much it becomes him to love this God, and this
glorious Redeemer, that has so loved man, and how little he does love. And so the more he
apprehends, the more the smallness of his grace and love appears strange and wonderful: and
therefore is more ready to think that others are beyond him. For wondering at the littleness of his
own grace, he can scarcely believe that so strange a thing happens to other saints: it is amazing to
him, that one that is really a child of God, and that has actually received the saving benefits of that
unspeakable love of Christ, should love no more: and he is apt to look upon it as a thing peculiar to
himself, a strange and exempt instance; for he sees only the outside of other Christians, but he sees
his own inside.
Here the reader may possibly object, that love to God is really increased in proportion as
the knowledge of God is increased; and therefore how should an increase of knowledge in a saint
make his love appear less, in comparison of what is known? To which I answer, that although
grace and the love of God in the saints, be answerable to the degree of knowledge or sight of God;
yet it is not in proportion to the object seen and known. The soul of a saint, by having something
of God opened to sight, is convinced of much more than is seen. There is something that is seen,
that is wonderful; and that sight brings with it a strong conviction of something vastly beyond, that
is not immediately seen. So that the soul, at the same time, is astonished at its ignorance, and that it
knows so little, as well as that it loves so little. And as the soul, in a spiritual view, is convinced of
infinitely more in the object, yet beyond sight; so it is convinced of the capacity of the soul, of
knowing vastly more, if the clouds and darkness were but removed. Which causes the soul, in the
enjoyment of a spiritual view, to complain greatly of spiritual ignorance, and want of love, and to
long and reach after more knowledge and more love.
Grace and the love of God in the most eminent saints in this world, is truly very little in
comparison of what it ought to be. Because the highest love that ever any attain to in this life, is
poor, cold, exceedingly low, and not worthy to be named in comparison of what our obligations
appear to be, from the joint consideration of these two things, viz.: 1. The reason God has given
us to love him, in the manifestations he has made of his infinite glory, in his word, and in his
works; and particularly in the gospel of his Son, and what he has done for sinful man by him.
And, 2. The capacity there is in the soul of man, by those intellectual faculties which God has
given it, of seeing and understanding these reasons, which God has given us to love him. How
small indeed is the love of the most eminent saint on earth, in comparison of what these things,
jointly considered, do require! And this grace tends to convince men of this, and especially eminent
grace; for grace is of the nature of light, and brings truth to view. And therefore he that has much
grace, apprehends much more than others that great height to which his love ought to ascend; and
he sees better than others, how little a way he has risen towards that height. And therefore
estimating his love by the whole height of his duty, hence it appears astonishingly little and low in
his eyes.
And the eminent saint, having such a conviction of the high degree in which he ought to
love God, this shows him, not only the littleness of his grace, but the greatness of his remaining
corruption. In order to judge how much corruption or sin we have remaining in us, we must take

119
our measure from that height to which the rule of our duty extends: the whole of the distance we
are at from that height, is sin: for failing of duty is sin; otherwise our duty is not our duty, and by
how much the more we fall short of our duty, so much the more sin have we. Sin is no other than
disagreeableness, in a moral agent, to the law or rule of his duty. And therefore the degree of sin is
to be judged of by the rule: so much disagreeableness to the rule, so much sin, whether it be in
defect or excess. Therefore if men, in their love to God, do not come up half way to that height
which duty requires, then they have more corruption in their hearts than grace; because there is
more goodness wanting, than is there: and all that is wanting is sin: it is an abominable defect; and
appears so to the saints; especially those that are eminent; it appears exceeding abominable to them,
that Christ should be loved so little, and thanked so little for his dying love: it is in their eyes
hateful ingratitude.
And then the increase of grace has a tendency another way, to cause the saints to think their
deformity vastly more than their goodness: it not only tends to convince them that their corruption
is much greater than their goodness, which is indeed the case; but it also tends to cause the
deformity that there is in the least sin, or the least degree of corruption, to appear so great as vastly
to outweigh all the beauty there is in their greatest holiness; for this also is indeed the case. For the
least sin against an infinite God, has an infinite hatefulness or deformity in it, but the highest
degree of holiness in a creature, has not an infinite loveliness in it: and therefore the loveliness of it
is as nothings, in comparison of the deformity of the least sin. That every sin has infinite deformity
and hatefulness in it, is most demonstrably evident; because what the evil, or iniquity, or
hatefulness of sin consists in, is the violating of an obligation, or the being or doing contrary to
what we should be or do, or are obliged to. And therefore by how much the greater the obligation
is that is violated, so much the greater is the iniquity and hatefulness of the violation. But certainly
our obligation to love and honor any being is in some proportion to his loveliness and
honorableness, or to his worthiness to be loved and honored by us; which is the same thing. We
are surely under greater obligation to love a more lovely being, than a less lovely; and if a Being be
infinitely lovely or worthy to be loved by us, then our obligations to love him are infinitely great;
and therefore, whatever is contrary to this love, has in it infinite iniquity, deformity, and
unworthiness. But on the other hand, with respect to our holiness or love to God, there is not an
infinite worthiness in that. The sin of the creature against God, is in deserving and hateful in
proportion to the distance there is between God and the creature: the greatness of the object, and
the meanness and inferiority of the subject, aggravates it. But it is the reverse with regard to the
worthiness of the respect of the creature to God; it is worthless, and not worthy, in proportion to
the meanness of the subject. So much the greater the distance between God and the creature, so
much the less is the creature's respect worthy of God's notice or regard. The great degree of
superiority increases the obligation on the inferior to regard the superior; and so makes the want of
regard more hateful. But the great degree of inferiority diminishes the worth of the regard of the
interior; because the more he is inferior, the less he is worthy of notice; the less he is, the less is
what he can offer worth; for he can offer no more than himself, in offering his best respect; and
therefore as he is little, and little worth, so is his respect little worth. And the more a person has of
true grace and spiritual light, the more will it appear thus to him; the more will he appear to himself
infinitely deformed by reason of sin, and the less will the goodness that is in his grace, or good
experience, appear in proportion to it. For indeed it is nothing to it; it is less than a drop to the
ocean; for finite bears no proportion at all to that which is infinite. But the more a person has of
spiritual light, the more do things appear to him, in this respect, as they are indeed.—Hence it most
demonstrably appears, that true grace is of that nature, that the more a person has of it, with
remaining corruption, the less does his goodness and holiness appear, in proportion to his
deformity; and not only to his past deformity, but to his present deformity, in the sin that now
appears in his heart, and the abominable defects of his highest and best affections, and brightest
experiences.
The nature of many high and religious affections, and great discoveries (as they are called)
in many persons that I have been acquainted with, is to hide and cover over the corruption of their
hearts, and to make it seem to them as if all their sin was gone, and to leave them without
complaints of any hateful evil left in them (though it may be they cry out much of their past
unworthiness); a sure and certain evidence that their discoveries (as they call them) are darkness
and not light. It is darkness that hides men's pollution and deformity; but light let into the heart
discovers it, searches it out in its secret corners, and makes it plainly to appear; especially that

120
penetrating, all searching light of God's holiness and glory. It is true, that saving discoveries may
for the present hide corruption in one sense; they restrain the positive exercises of it, such as
malice, envy, covetousness, lasciviousness, murmuring, &c., but they bring corruption to light, in
that which is privative, viz., that there is no more love, no more humility, no more thankfulness.
Which defects appear most hateful in the eyes of those who have the most eminent exercises of
grace; and are very burdensome, and cause the saints to cry out of their leanness, and odious pride
and ingratitude. And whatever positive exercises of corruption at any time arise, and mingle
themselves with eminent actings of grace, grace will exceedingly magnify the view of them, and
render their appearance far more heinous and horrible.
The more eminent saints are, and the more they have of the light of heaven in their souls,
the more do they appear to themselves, as the most eminent saints in this world do to the saints and
angels in heaven. How can we rationally suppose the most eminent saints on earth appear to them,
if beheld any otherwise than covered over with the righteousness of Christ, and their deformities
swallowed up and hid in the coruscation of the beams of his abundant glory and love? How can we
suppose our most ardent love and praises appear to them, that do behold the beauty and glory of
God without a vail? How does our highest thankfulness for the dying love of Christ appear to
them, who see Christ as he is, who know as they are known, and see the glory of the person of
him that died, and the wonders of his dying love, without any cloud of darkness? And how do
they look on the deepest reverence and humility, with which worms of the dust on earth approach
that infinite Majesty which they behold? Do they appear great to them, or so much as worthy of the
name of reverence and humility, in those that they see to be at such an infinite distance from that
great and holy God, in whose glorious presence they are? The reason why the highest attainments
of the saints on earth appear so mean to them, is because they dwell in the light of God's glory,
and see God as he is. And it is in this respect with the saints on earth, as it is with the saints in
heaven, in proportion as they are more eminent in grace.
I would not be understood, that the saints on earth have in all respects the worst opinion of
themselves, when they have most of the exercises of grace. In many respects it is otherwise. With
respect to the positive exercises of corruption, they may appear to themselves freest and best when
grace is most in exercise, and worst when the actings of grace are lowest. And when they compare
themselves with themselves at different times, they may know, when grace is in lively exercise,
that it is better with them than it was before (though before, in the time of it, they did not see so
much badness as they see now) and when afterwards they sink again in the frame of their minds,
they may know that they sink, and have a new argument of their great remaining corruption, and a
rational conviction of a greater vileness than they saw before; and many have more of a sense of
guilt, and a kind of legal sense of their sinfulness by far, than when in the lively exercise of grace.
But yet it is true, and demonstrable from the forementioned considerations, that the children of
God never have so much of a sensible and spiritual conviction of their deformity, and so great, and
quick and abasing a sense of their present vileness and odiousness, as when they are highest in the
exercise of true and pure grace; and never are they so much disposed to set themselves low among
Christians as then. And thus he that is greatest in the kingdom, or most eminent in the church of
Christ, is the same that humbles himself, as the least infant among them; agreeable to that great
saying of Christ, Matt. 18:4.
A true saint may know that he has some true grace: and the more grace there is, the more
easily is it known, as was observed and proved before. But yet it does not follow, that an eminent
saint is easily sensible that he is an eminent saint, when compared with others. I will not deny that
it is possible, that he that has much grace, and is an eminent saint, may know it. But he will not be
apt to know it; it will not be a thing obvious to him: that he is better than others, and has higher
experiences and attainments, is not a foremost thought; nor is it that which, from time to time
readily offers itself; it is a thing that is not in his way, but lies far out of sight; he must take pains to
convince himself of it; there will be need of a great command of reason, and a high degree of
strictness and care in arguing, to convince himself. And if he be rationally convinced by a very
strict consideration of his own experiences compared with the great appearances of low degrees of
grace in some other saints, it will hardly seem real to him, that he has more grace than they; and he
will be apt to lose the conviction that he has by pains obtained: nor will it seem at all natural to him
to act upon that supposition. And this may be laid down as an infallible thing, "that the person who
is apt to think that he, as compared with others, is a very eminent saint, much distinguished in
Christian experience, in whom this is a first thoughts that rises of itself, and naturally offers itself;

121
he is certainly mistaken; he is no eminent saint, but under the great prevailings of a proud and selfrighteous spirit." And if this be habitual with the man, and is steadily the prevailing temper of his
mind, he is no saint at all; he has not the least degree of any true Christian experience; so surely as
the word of God is true.
And that sort of experiences that appears to be of that tendency, and is found from time to
time to have that effect, to elevate the subject of them with a great conceit of those experiences, is
certainly vain and delusive. Those supposed discoveries that naturally blow up the person with an
admiration of the eminency of his discoveries, and fill him with conceit that now he has seen, and
knows more than most other Christians, have nothing of the nature of true spiritual light in them.
All true spiritual knowledge is of that nature, that the more a person has of it, the more is he
sensible of his own ignorance; as is evident by 1 Cor. 8:2: "He that thinketh he knoweth any thing,
he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know." Agur, when he had a great discovery of God, and
sense of the wonderful height of his glory, and of his marvellous works, and cries out of his
greatness and incomprehensibleness; at the same time, had the deepest sense of his brutish
ignorance, and looked upon himself the most ignorant of all the saints. Prov. 30:2, 3, 4: "Surely I
am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned
wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended?
Who hath gathered the wind in his fists? Who hath bound the waters in a garment? Who hath
established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst
tell?"
For a man to be highly conceited of his spiritual and divine knowledge, is for him to be
wise in his own eyes, if anything is. And therefore it comes under those prohibitions: Prov. 3:7,
"Be not wise in thine own eyes." Rom. 12:16, "Be not wise in your own conceits;" and brings
men under that woe, Isa. 5:21: "Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in
their own sight." Those that are thus wise in their own eyes, are some of the least likely to get
good of any in the world. Experience shows the truth of that, Prov. 26:12: "Seest thou a man wise
in his own conceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him."
To this some may object, that the Psalmist, when we must suppose that he was in a holy
frame, speaks of his knowledge as eminently great, and far greater than that of other saints: Psal.
119:99, 100, "I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my
meditation. I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts."
To this I answer two things:
(1.) There is no restraint to be laid upon the Spirit of God, as to what he shall reveal to a
prophet, for the benefit of his church, who is speaking or writing under immediate inspiration. The
Spirit of God may reveal to such a one, and dictate to him, to declare to others secret things, that
otherwise would be hard, yea impossible for him to find out. As he may reveal to him mysteries,
that otherwise would be above the reach of his reason; or things in a distant place, that he cannot
see; or future events, that it would be impossible for him to know and declare, if they were not
extraordinarily revealed to him; so the Spirit of God might reveal to David this distinguishing
benefit he had received by conversing much with God's testimonies; and use him as his instrument
to record it for the benefit of others, to excite them to the like duty, and to use the same means to
gain knowledge. Nothing can be gathered concerning the natural tendency of the ordinary gracious
influences of the Spirit of God, from that that David declares of his distinguishing knowledge
under the extraordinary influences of God's Spirit, immediately dictating to him the divine mind by
inspiration, and using David as his instrument to write what he pleased for the benefit of his
church; any more than we can reasonably argue, that it is the natural tendency of grace to incline
men to curse others, and wish the most dreadful misery to them that can be thought of, because
David, under inspiration, often curses others, and prays that such misery may come upon them.
(2.) It is not certain that the knowledge David here speaks of, is spiritual knowledge,
wherein holiness does fundamentally consist. But it may be that greater revelation which God
made to him of the Messiah, and the things of his future kingdom, and the far more clear and
extensive knowledge that he had of the mysteries and doctrines of the gospel, than others; as a
reward for his keeping God's testimonies. In this, it is apparent by the book of Psalms, that David
far exceeded all that had gone before him.
Secondly, Another thing that is an infallible sign of spiritual pride, is persons being apt to
think highly of their humility. False experiences are commonly attended with a counterfeit
humility. And it is the very nature of a counterfeit humility, to be highly conceited of itself. False

122
religious affections have generally that tendency, especially when raised to a great height to make
persons think that their humility is great, and accordingly to take much notice of their great
attainments in this respect, and admire them. But eminently gracious affections (I scruple not to say
it) are evermore of a contrary tendency, and have universally a contrary effect in those that have
them. They indeed make them very sensible what reason there is that they should be deeply
humbled, and cause them earnestly to thirst and long after it; but they make their present humility,
or that which they have already attained to, to appear small; and their remaining pride great, and
exceedingly abominable.
The reason why a proud person should be apt to think his humility great, and why a very
humble person should think his humility small, may be easily seen, if it be considered, that it is
natural for persons, in judging of the degree of their own humiliation, to take their measure from
that which they esteem their proper height, or the dignity wherein they properly stand. That may be
great humiliation in one, that is no humiliation at all in another; because the degree of
honorableness, or considerableness wherein each does properly stand, is very different. For some
great man, to stoop to loose the latchet of the shoes of another great man, his equal, or to wash his
feet, would be taken notice of as an act of abasement in him; and he, being sensible of his own
dignity, would look upon it so himself. But if a poor slave is seen stooping to unloose the shoes of
a great prince, nobody will take any notice of this, as any act of humiliation in him, or token of any
great degree of humility: nor would the slave himself, unless he be horribly proud and ridiculously
conceited of himself: and if after he had done it, he should, in his talk and behavior, show that he
thought his abasement great in it, and had his mind much upon it, as an evidence of his being very
humble; would not every body cry out upon him, "Whom do you think yourself to be, that you
should think this that you have done such a deep humiliation?" This would make it plain to a
demonstration, that this slave was swollen with a high degree of pride and vanity of mind, as much
as if he declared in plain terms, "I think myself to be some great one." And the matter is no less
plain and certain, when worthless, vile, and loathsome worms of the dust, are apt to put such a
construction on their acts of abasement before God; and to think it a token of great humility in them
that obey, under their affections, can find themselves so willing to acknowledge themselves to be
so mean and unworthy, and to behave themselves as those that are so inferior. The very reason
why such outward acts, and such inward exercises, look like great abasement in such a one, is
because he has a high conceit of himself. Whereas if he thought of himself more justly, these
things would appear nothing to him, and his humility in them worthy of no regard; but would
rather be astonished at his pride, that one so infinitely despicable and vile is brought no lower
before God.—When he says in his heart, "This is a great act of humiliation; it is certainly a sign of
great humility in me, that I should feel thus and do so;" his meaning is, "This is great humility for
me, for such a one as I, that am so considerable and worthy." He considers how low he is now
brought, and compares this with the height of dignity on which he in his heart thinks he properly
stands, and the distance appears very great, and he calls it all mere humility, and as such admires
it. Whereas, in him that is truly humble, and really sees his own vileness, and loathsomeness
before God, the distance appears the other way. When he is brought lowest of all, it does not
appear to him, that he is brought below his proper station, but that he is not come to it; he appears
to himself yet vastly above it, he longs to get lower, that he may come to it, but appears at a great
distance from it. And this distance he calls pride. And therefore his pride appears great to him, and
not his humility. For although he is brought much lower than he used to be, yet it does not appear
to him worthy of the name of humiliation, for him that is so infinitely mean and detestable, to come
down to a place, which, though it be lower than what he used to assume, is yet vastly higher than
what is proper for him. As men would hardly count it worthy of the name of humility, in a
contemptible slave, that formerly affected to be a prince, to have his spirit so far brought down, as
to take the place of a nobleman; when this is still so far above his proper station.
All men in the world, in judging of the degree of their own and others' humility, as
appearing in any act of theirs, consider two things, viz., the real degree of dignity they stand in;
and the degree of abasement, and the relation it bears to that real dignity. Thus the complying with
the same low place, or low act, may be an evidence of great humility in one, that evidences but
little or no humility in another. But truly humble Christians have so mean an opinion of their own
real dignity, that all their self-abasement, when considered with relation to that, and compared to
that, appears very small to them. It does not seem to them to be any great humility, or any

123
abasement to be made much of, for such poor, vile, abject creatures as they, to lie at the foot of
God.
The degree of humility is to be judged of by the degree of abasement, and the degree of the
cause for abasement: but he that is truly and eminently humble, never thinks his humility great,
considering the cause. The cause why he should be abased appears so great, and the abasement of
the frame of his heart so greatly short of it, that he takes much more notice of his pride than his
humility.
Everyone that has been conversant with souls under convictions of sin, knows that those
who are greatly convinced of sin, are not apt to think themselves greatly convinced. And the reason
is this: men judge of the degree of their own convictions of sin by two things jointly considered,
viz., the degree of sense which they have of guilt and pollution, and the degree of cause they have
for such a sense, in the degree of their real sinfulness. It is really no argument of any great
conviction of sin, for some men to think themselves to be very sinful, beyond most others in the
world; because they are so indeed, very plainly and notoriously. And therefore a far less conviction
of sin may incline such a one to think so than another; he must be very blind indeed not to be
sensible of it. But he that is truly under great convictions of sin, naturally thinks this to be his case.
It appears to him, that the cause he has to be sensible of guilt and pollution, is greater than others
have; and therefore he ascribes his sensibleness of this to the greatness of his sin, and not to the
greatness of his sensibility. It is natural for one under great convictions, to think himself one of the
greatest of sinners in reality, and also that it is so very plainly and evidently; for the greater his
convictions are, the more plain and evident it seems to be to him. And therefore it necessarily
seems to him so plain and so easy to him to see it, that it may be seen without much conviction.
That man is under great convictions, whose conviction is great in proportion to his sin. But no man
that is truly under great convictions, thinks his conviction great in proportion to his sin. For if he
does, it is a certain sign that he inwardly thinks his sins small. And if that be the case, that is a
certain evidence that his conviction is small. And this, by the way, is the main reason that persons,
when under a work of humiliation, are not sensible of it in the time of it.
And as it is with conviction of sin, just so it is, by parity of reason, with respect to
persons' conviction or sensibleness of their own meanness and vileness, their own blindness, their
own impotence, and all that low sense that a Christian has of himself, in the exercise of evangelical
humiliation. So that in a high degree of this, the saints are never disposed to think their
sensibleness of their own meanness, filthiness, impotence, &c., to be great; because it never
appears great to them considering the cause.
An eminent saint is not apt to think himself eminent in any thing; all his graces and
experiences are ready to appear to him to be comparatively small; but especially his humility. There
is nothing that appertains to Christian experience, and true piety, that is so much out of his sight as
his humility. He is a thousand times more quicksighted to discern his pride than his humility: that
he easily discerns, and is apt to take much notice of, but hardly discerns his humility. On the
contrary, the deluded hypocrite, that is under the power of spiritual pride, is so blind to nothing as
his pride; and so quicksighted to nothing, as the shows of humility that are in him.
The humble Christian is more apt to find fault with his own pride than with other men's.
He is apt to put the best construction on others' words and behavior, and to think that none are so
proud as himself. But the proud hypocrite is quick to discern the mote in his brother's eye, in this
respect; while he sees nothing of the beam in his own. He is very often much in crying out of
others' pride, finding fault with others' apparel, and way of living; and is affected ten times as
much with his neighbor's ring or ribband, as with all the filthiness of his own heart.
From the disposition there is in hypocrites to think highly of their humility, it comes to pass
that counterfeit humility is forward to put itself forth to view. Those that have it, are apt to be much
in speaking of their humiliations, and to set them forth in high terms, and to make a great outward
show of humility, in affected looks, gestures, or manner of speech, or meanness of apparel, or
some affected singularity. So it was of old with the false prophets, Zech. 13:4; so it was with the
hypocritical Jews, Isa. 57:5, and so Christ tells us it was with the Pharisees, Matt. 6:16. But it is
contrariwise with true humility; they that have it, are not apt to display their eloquence in setting it

124
forth, or to speak of the degree of their abasement in strong terms.61 It does not affect to show
itself in any singular outward meanness of apparel, or way of living; agreeable to what is implied
in Matt. 6:17, "But thou, when thou fastest, anoint thine head and wash thy face. Col. 2:23.
Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship and humility, and neglecting of the
body." Nor is true humility a noisy thing; it is not loud and boisterous. The Scripture represents it
as of a contrary nature. Ahab, when he had a visible humility, a resemblance of true humility, went
softly, 1 Kings 21:27. A penitent, in the exercise of true humiliation, is represented as still and
silent, Lam. 3:28: "He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him." And
silence is mentioned as what attends humility, Prov. 30:32: "If thou hast done foolishly in lifting
up thyself, or if thou hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth."
Thus I have particularly and largely shown the nature of that true humility that attends holy
affections, as it appears in its tendency to cause persons to think meanly of their attainments in
religion, as compared with the attainments of others, and particularly of their attainments in
humility: and have shown the contrary tendency of spiritual pride, to dispose persons to think their
attainments in these respects to be great. I have insisted the longer on this, because I look upon it
as a matter of great importance, as it affords a certain distinction between true and counterfeit
humility; and also as this disposition of hypocrites to look on themselves better than others, is what
God has declared to be very hateful to him, "a smoke in his nose, and a fire that burneth all the
day," Isa. 65:5. It is mentioned as an instance of the pride of the inhabitants of that holy city (as it
was called) Jerusalem, that they esteemed themselves far better than the people of Sodom, and so
looked upon them worthy to be overlooked and disregarded by them: Ezek. 16:56, "For thy sister
Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride."
Let not the reader lightly pass over these things in application to himself. If you once have
taken it in, that it is a bad sign for a person to be apt to think himself a better saint than others, there
will arise a blinding prejudice in your own favor; and there will probably be need of a great
strictness of self-examination, in order to determine whether it be so with you. If on the proposal
of the question, you answer, "No, it seems to me, none are so bad as I," do not let the matter pass
off so; but examine again, whether or no you do not think yourself better than others on this very
account, because you imagine you think so meanly of yourself. Have not you a high opinion of
this humility? And if you answer again, "No; I have not a high opinion of my humility; it seems to
one I am as proud as the devil;" yet examine again, whether self-conceit do not rise up under this
cover; whether on this very account, that you think yourself as proud as the devil, you do not think
yourself to be very humble.
From this opposition that there is between the nature of a true, and of a counterfeit
humility, as to the esteem that the subjects of them have of them selves, arises a manifold
contrariety of temper and behavior.
A truly humble person, having such a mean opinion of his righteousness and holiness, is
poor in spirit. For a person to be poor in spirit, is to be in his own sense and apprehension poor,
as to what is in him, and to be of an answerable disposition. Therefore a truly humble person,
especially one eminently humble, naturally behaves himself in many respects as a poor man. "The
poor useth entreaties, but the rich answereth roughly." A poor man is not disposed to quick and
high resentment when he is among the rich: he is apt to yield to others, for he knows others are
above him; he is not stiff and self-willed; he is patient with hard fare; he expects no other than to be
despised, and takes it patently; he does not take it heinously that he is overlooked and but little
regarded; he is prepared to be in a low place; he readily honors his superiors; he takes reproofs
quietly; he readily honors others as above him; he easily yields to be taught, and does not claim
much to his understanding and judgment; he is not over nice or humorsome, and has his spirit
subdued to hard things, he is not assuming, nor apt to take much upon him, but it is natural for
61It is an observation of Mr. Jones, in his excellent treatise of the canon of the New

Testament, that the evangelist Mark, who was the companion of St. Peter, and is
supposed to have written his gospel under the direction of that apostle, when he
mentions Peter's repentance after his denying his Master, does not use such strong
terms to set it forth as the other evangelists; he only uses these words, "When he
thought thereon, he wept," Mark 14:72; whereas the other evangelists say thus, "he
went out and wept bitterly," Matt. 26:75, Luke 22:62.

125
him to be subject to others. Thus it is with the humble Christian. Humility is (as the great Mastricht
expresses it) a kind of holy pusillanimity.
A man that is very poor is a beggar; so is he that is poor in spirit. There is a great difference
between those affections that are gracious, and those that are false: under the former, the person
continues still a poor beggar at God's gates, exceeding empty and needy; but the latter make men
appear to themselves rich, and increased with goods, and not very necessitous; they have a great
stock in their own imagination for their subsistence.62
A poor man is modest in his speech and behavior; so, and much more, and more certainly
and universally, is one that is poor in spirit; he is humble and modest in his behavior amongst men.
It is in vain for any to pretend that they are humble, and as little children before God, when they
are haughty, assuming, and impudent in their behavior amongst men. The apostle informs us, that
the design of the gospel is to cut off all glorying, not only before God, but also before men, Rom
4:1, 2. Some pretend to great humiliation, that are very haughty, audacious, and assuming in their
external appearance and behavior: but they ought to consider those Scriptures, Psal. 131:1, "Lord,
my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty; neither do I exercise myself in great matters or in
things too high for me." Prov. 6:16, 17, "These six things doth the Lord hate; yea seven are an
abomination unto him: a proud look, &c."—Chap. 21:4, "A high look, and a proud heart are sin."
Psal. 18:27, "Thou wilt bring down high looks." And Psal. 101:5, "Him that hath a high look, and
a proud heart, I will not suffer." 1 Cor. 13:4. "Charity vaunteth not itself, doth not behave itself
unseemly." There is a certain amiable modesty and fear that belongs to a Christian behavior among
men, arising from humility, that the Scripture often speaks of, 1 Pet. 3:15, "Be ready to give an
answer to every man that asketh you—with meekness and fear." Romans 13:7, "Fear to whom
fear." 2 Cor. 7:15, "Whilst he remembereth the obedience of you all, how with fear and trembling
you received him." Eph. 6:5, "Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the
flesh, with fear and trembling." 1 Pet. 2:18, "Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear." 1
Pet. 3:2, "While they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear." 1 Tim. 2:9, "That
women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety." In this respect a
Christian is like a little child; a little child is modest before men, and his heart is apt to be possessed
with fear and awe amongst them.
The same spirit will dispose a Christian to honor all men: 1 Pet. 2:17, "Honor all men." A
humble Christian is not only disposed to honor the saints in his behavior; but others also, in all
those ways that do not imply a visible approbation of their sins. Thus Abraham, the great pattern of
believers, honored the children of Heth: Gen. 23:7, "Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the
people of the land." This was a remarkable instance of a humble behavior towards them that were
out of Christ, and that Abraham knew to be accursed: and therefore would by no means suffer his
servant to take a wife to his son, from among them; and Esau's wives, being of these children of
Heth, were a grief of mind to Isaac and Rebekah. So Paul honored Festus: Acts 26:25, "I am not
62"This spirit ever keeps a man poor and vile in his own eyes, and empty.—When the

man hath got some knowledge, and can discourse pretty well, and hath some taste of
the heavenly gift, some sweet illapses of grace, and so his conscience is pretty well
quieted: and if he hath got some answers to his prayers, and hath sweet affections, he
grows full: and having ease to his conscience, casts off sense, and daily groaning
under sin. And hence the spirit of prayer dies: he loses his esteem of God's
ordinances, feels not such need of them; or gets no good, feels no life or power by
them.—This is the woeful condition of some; but yet they know it not. But now he that
is filled with the Spirit the Lord empties him; and the more, the longer he lives. So
that others think he needs not much grace, yet he accounts himself the poorest."
Shepard's Parable of the Ten Virgins, Part II. p. 132.
"After all fillings, be ever empty, hungry, and feeling need, and praying for
more." Ibid., p. 151.
"Truly, brethren, when I see the curse of God upon many Christians, who are
now grown full of their parts, gifts, peace, comforts, abilities, duties, I stand adoring
the riches of the Lord's mercy, to a little handful of poor believers, not only in
making them empty, but in keeping them so all their days." Shepard's Sound
Believer, the late edition in Boston, p. 158, 159.

126
mad, most noble Festus." Not only will Christian humility dispose persons to honor those wicked
men that are out of the visible church, but also false brethren and persecutors. As Jacob, when he
was in an excellent frame, having just been wrestling all night with God, and received the blessing,
honored Esau, his false and persecuting brother: Gen. 33:3, "Jacob bowed himself to the ground
seven times, until he came near to his brother Esau." So he called him lord; and commanded all his
family to honor him in like manner.
Thus I have endeavored to describe the heart and behavior of one that is governed by a
truly gracious humility, as exactly agreeable to the Scriptures as I am able.
Now, it is out of such a heart as this, that all truly holy affections do flow. Christian
affections are like Mary's precious ointment that she poured on Christ's head, that filled the whole
house with a sweet odor. That was poured out of an alabaster box; so gracious affections flow out
to Christ out of a pure heart. That was poured out of a broken box; until the box was broken, the
ointment could not flow, nor diffuse its odor; so gracious affections flow out of a broken heart.
Gracious affections are also like those of Mary Magdalene (Luke 7 at the latter end), who also
pours precious ointment on Christ, out of an alabaster broken box, anointing therewith the feet of
Jesus, when she had washed them with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. All
gracious affections that are a sweet odor to Christ, and that fill the soul of a Christian with a
heavenly sweetness and fragrancy, are broken hearted affections. A truly Christian love, either to
God or men, is a humble broken hearted love. The desires of the saints, however earnest, are
humble desires. Their hope is a humble hope; and their joy, even when it is unspeakable, and full
of glory, is a humble broken hearted joy, and leaves the Christian more poor in spirit; and more
like a little child, and more disposed to a universal lowliness of behavior.
