PURITAN GOLD -- Human Nature in Its Fourfold State by Thomas Boston: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 13
The State of Grace: Regeneration

---

1. REGENERATION
"Being born again, not of corruptible seed—but of incorruptible, by the
word of God, which lives and abides forever." 1 Peter 1:23
We proceed now to the state of grace, the state of begun recovery of
human nature, into which all who shall partake of eternal happiness are
translated, sooner or later, while in this world. It is the result of a
gracious change made upon those who shall inherit eternal life: which
change may be taken up in these two particulars:
1. In opposition to their natural real state, the state of corruption, there
is a change made upon them in regeneration; whereby their nature is
changed.
2. In opposition to their natural relative state, the state of wrath, there is
a change made upon them in their union with the Lord Jesus Christ; by
which they are placed beyond the reach of condemnation.
These, therefore, regeneration and union with Christ, I desire to treat on
as the great and comprehensive changes on a sinner, bringing him into
the state of grace.
The first of these we have in the text; together with the outward and
ordinary means by which it is brought about. The apostle here, to excite
the saints to the study of holiness, and particularly of brotherly love, puts
them in mind of their spiritual original. He tells them that they were born
again; and that of incorruptible seed, the word of God. This shows them
to be brethren, partakers of the same new nature: which is the root from
which holiness, and particularly brotherly love, springs. We have been
once born sinners: we must be born again, that we may be
saints.
The simple word signifies "to be begotten;" and so it may be read, Matt.

11:11; "to be conceived," Matt. 1:20; and "to be born," Matt. 2:1.
Accordingly, the compound word, used in the text, may be taken in its full
latitude, the last idea presupposing the two former: so regeneration is
a supernatural real change on the whole man, fitly compared to
the natural birth, as will afterwards appear. The ordinary means of
regeneration, called the "seed," whereof the new creature is formed, is not
corruptible seed. Of such, indeed, our bodies are generated: but the
spiritual seed of which the new creature is generated, is incorruptible;
namely, "the word of God, which lives and abides forever." The sound of
the word of God passes, even as other sounds do; but the word lasts,
lives, and abides, in respect of its everlasting effects, on all
upon whom it operates. This "word, which by the gospel is preached
unto you," ver. 25, impregnated by the Spirit of God, is the means of
regeneration: and by it dead sinners are raised to life.
Doctrine. All men in the state of grace, are born again. All
gracious people, namely, such as are in a state of favor with God, and
endowed with gracious qualities and dispositions, are regenerate people.
In discoursing on this subject, I shall show,
1. What regeneration is.
2. Why it is so called.
3. Apply the doctrine.
I. Of the Nature of regeneration.
For the better understanding of the nature of regeneration, take this
along with you, that as there are false conceptions in nature, so there
are also in grace: by these many are deluded, mistaking some partial
changes made upon them, for this great and thorough change. To remove
such mistakes, let these few things be considered:
(1.) Many call the church their mother, whom God will not own
to be his children, Cant. 1:6, "My mother's children," that is, false
brethren, "were angry with me." All that are baptized, are not born again.
Simon was baptized—yet still "in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of

iniquity," Acts 8:13, 23. Where Christianity is the religion of the country,
many are called by the name of Christ, who have no more of him than the
name: and no wonder, for the devil had his goats among Christ's
sheep, in those places where but few professed the Christian religion, 1
John 2:19, "They went out from us—but they were not of us."
(2.) Good education is not regeneration. Education may chain up
men's lusts—but cannot change their hearts. A wolf is still a ravenous
beast, though it be in chains. Joash was very devout during the life of his
good tutor Jehoiada; but afterwards he quickly showed what spirit he was
of, by his sudden apostasy, 2 Chron. 24:2-18. Good example is of mighty
influence to change the outward man: but that change often goes off,
when a man changes his company; of which the world affords many sad
instances.
(3.) A turning from open profanity, to civility and sobriety, falls
short of this saving change. Some are, for a while, very loose,
especially in their younger years; but at length they reform, and leave
their profane courses. Here is a change—yet only such as may be found in
men utterly void of the grace of God, and whose righteousness is so far
from exceeding, that it does not come up to the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees.
(4.) One may engage in all the outward duties of religion, and
yet not be born again. Though lead be cast into various shapes, it
remains still but a base metal. Men may escape the pollutions of the
world, and yet be but dogs and swine, 2 Pet. 2:20-22. All the external acts
of religion are within the compass of natural abilities. Yes, hypocrites may
have the counterfeit of all the graces of the Spirit: for we read of "true
holiness," Eph. 4:24, and "sincere faith," 1 Tim. 1:5; which shows us that
there is counterfeit holiness, and a feigned faith.
(5.) Men may advance to a great deal of strictness in their own
way of religion, and yet be strangers to the new birth, Acts 26:5,
"After the most straitest sect of our religion, I lived a Pharisee." Nature
has its own unsanctified strictness in religion. The Pharisees had so much
of it, that they looked on Christ as little better than a mere libertine. A
man whose conscience has been awakened, and who lives under the felt

influence of the covenant of works, what will he not do that is within the
compass of natural abilities? It is a truth, though it came out of a hellish
mouth, that "skin for skin, yes all that a man has will he give for his life,"
Job 2:4.
(6.) A person may have sharp soul-exercises and pangs, and yet
die in the birth. Many "have been in pain," that have but, "as it were,
brought forth wind." There may be sore pangs of conscience, which turn
to nothing at last. Pharaoh and Simon Magus had such convictions, as
made them to desire the prayers of others for them. Judas repented: and,
under terrors of conscience, gave back his ill-gotten pieces of silver. All is
not gold that glitters. Trees may blossom fairly in the spring, on which no
fruit is to be found in the harvest: and some have sharp soul-exercises,
which are nothing but foretastes of hell.
The new birth, however in appearance hopefully begun, may be
MARRED two ways.
(1.) Some have sharp convictions for a while: but these go off,
and they become as careless about their salvation, and as
profane as ever, and usually worse than ever; "their last state is
worse than their first," Matt. 12:45. They get awakening grace—but not
converting grace; and that goes off by degrees, as the light of the
declining day, until it issues in midnight darkness.
Others come forth too soon; they are born, like Ishmael, before the time
of the promise, Gen. 16:2; compare Gal. 4:22, etc. They take up with a
mere law work, and stay not until the time of the promise of the gospel.
They snatch at consolation, not waiting until it be given them; and
foolishly draw their comfort from the law which wounded them. They
apply the healing plaster to themselves, before their wound is sufficiently
searched. The law, that rigorous husband, severely beats them, and
throws in curses and vengeance upon their souls; then they fall to
reforming, praying, mourning, promising, and vowing; which done, they
fall asleep again in the arms of the law: but they are never shaken out of
themselves and their own righteousness, nor brought forward to Jesus
Christ.

(2.) There may be a wonderful moving of the affections in souls
that are not at all touched with regenerating grace. When there is
no grace, there may, notwithstanding, be a flood of tears, as in Esau, who
"found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears,"
Heb. 12:17. There may be great flashes of joy; as in the hearers of the
word, represented in the parable of the stony ground, who "with joy
receive it," Matt. 13:20. There may be also great desires after good things,
and great delight in them too; as in those hypocrites described in Isa.
58:2, "Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways – they take
delight in approaching to God." See how high they may sometimes stand
—who yet fall away, Heb. 6:4-6. They may be "enlightened, taste of the
heavenly gift," "be partakers of the Holy Spirit, taste the good word of
God, and the powers of the world to come." Common operations of
the divine Spirit, like a land-flood, make a strange turning of things
upside down: but when they are over, all runs again in the ordinary
channel. All these things may be, where the sanctifying Spirit of Christ
never rests upon the soul—but the stony heart still remains; and in that
case these affections cannot but wither, because they have no root.
But regeneration is a real, thorough change, whereby the man
is made a new creature, 2 Cor. 5:17. The Lord God makes the creature
a new creature, as the goldsmith melts down a vessel of dishonor, and
makes it a vessel of honor. Man is, in respect of his spiritual state,
altogether disjointed by the fall; every faculty of the soul is, as it were,
dislocated. In regeneration, the Lord loosens every joint, and sets it right
again. Now this change made in regeneration, is,
1. A change of qualities or DISPOSITIONS. It is not a change of the
substance—but of the qualities of the soul. Vicious qualities are removed,
and the contrary dispositions are brought in, in their place. "The old man
is put off," Eph. 4:22; "the new man is put on," ver. 24. Man lost none of
the rational faculties of his soul by sin. He had an understanding still—
but it was darkened; he had still a will—but it was contrary to the will of
God. So in regeneration, there is not a new substance created—but new
qualities or dispositions are infused; light instead of darkness,
righteousness instead of unrighteousness.
2. It is a SUPERNATURAL change. He who is born again, is born of

the Spirit, John 3:5. Great changes may be made by the power of nature,
especially when assisted by external revelation. Nature may be so
elevated by the common influences of the Spirit, that a person may
thereby be turned into another man, as Saul was, 1 Sam. 10:6, who yet
never becomes a new man. But in regeneration, nature itself is changed,
and we become partakers of the divine nature; and this must needs be a
supernatural change. How can we, who are dead in trespasses and sins,
renew ourselves, any more than a dead man can raise himself out of his
grave? Who but the sanctifying Spirit of Christ can form Christ in a soul,
changing it into his same image? Who but the Spirit of sanctification can
give the new heart? Well may we say, when we see a man thus changed,
"This is the finger of God!"
3. It is a change into the LIKENESS OF GOD. 2 Cor. 3:18, "We
beholding, as in a mirror, the glory of the Lord—are changed into the
same image." Everything generates its like: the child bears the image of
the parent; and they who are born of God, bear God's image. Man
aspiring to be as God, made himself like the devil. In his natural
state he resembles the devil, as a child does his father, John 8:44, "You
are of your father the devil." But when this happy change comes, that
image of Satan is defaced, and the image of God is restored. Christ
himself, who is the brightness of his Father's glory, is the pattern after
which the new creature is made, Rom. 8:29, "For whom he did foreknow,
he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son." Hence
Christ is said to be formed in the regenerate, Gal. 4:19.
4. It is a UNIVERSAL change. "All things become new," 2 Cor. 5:17. It
is a blessed leaven—which leavens the whole lump—the whole spirit, and
soul, and body. Original sin infects the whole man; and regenerating
grace, which is the cure, goes as far as the disease. This fruit of the Spirit
is in all goodness; goodness of the mind, goodness of the will, goodness of
the affections, goodness of the whole man. He gets not only a new head,
to know and understand true religion; or a new tongue, to talk of it; but
a new heart, to love and embrace it, in the whole of his life. When the
Lord opens the sluice of grace, on the soul's new-birth day, the waters run
through the whole man, to purify and make him fruitful. In those natural
changes spoken of before, there are, as it were, pieces of new cloth put

into an old garment; new life to an old heart: but the gracious change is a
thorough change; a change both of heart and life.
5. Yet, though every part of the man is renewed, there is no
part of him which is perfectly renewed. As an infant has all the
parts of a man—but none of them come to a perfect growth; so
regeneration brings a perfection of parts, to be brought forward in the
gradual advances of sanctification, 1 Pet. 2:2, "As newborn babes, desire
the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby." Although, in
regeneration, there is heavenly light let into the mind; yet there is still
some darkness there. Though the will is renewed, it is not perfectly
renewed; there is still some of the old inclination to sin remaining: and
thus it will be, until that which is in part is done away, and the light of
glory come. Adam was created at his full stature; but those who are born,
must have their time to grow up; so those who are born again, come forth
into the new world of grace as new-born babes: Adam being created
upright, was at the same time perfectly righteous, without the least
mixture of sinful imperfection.
6. Nevertheless, it is a LASTING change, which never entirely
dies off. The seed is incorruptible, says the text; and so is the creature
who is formed of it. The life given in regeneration, whatever decays it may
fall under, can never be utterly lost. "His seed remains in him" who "is
born of God," 1 John 3:9. Though the branches should be cut down, the
root abides in the earth; and being watered with the dew of heaven, shall
spout again: for "the root of the righteous shall not be moved," Prov. 12:3.
But to come to particulars.
1. In regeneration the MIND is savingly enlightened. There is a
light let into the understanding; so that those who were "once darkness,
are now light in the Lord," Eph. 5:8. The beams of the light of life make
their way into the dark dungeon of the heart: then the night is over, and
the morning light is come, which will shine more and more unto the
perfect day.
(1.) Now the man is illuminated, in the knowledge of GOD. He
has far other thoughts of God, than ever he had before, Hos. 2:20, "I will

even betrothe you unto me in faithfulness, and you shall know the Lord."
The Spirit of the Lord brings him back to this question, "What is God?"
and catechises him anew upon that grand point, so that he is made to say,
"I have heard of you by the hearing of the ear; but now my eye sees you,"
Job 42:5. The spotless purity of God, his exact justice, his all-sufficiency,
and other glorious perfections revealed in his word, are by this new light
discovered to the soul, with a plainness and certainty, which as far exceed
the knowledge it had of these things before, as ocular viewing exceeds
common report. For now he sees, what he only heard of before.
(2.) He is enlightened in the knowledge of SIN. He has different
thoughts of it than he used to have. Formerly his sight could not pierce
through the cover Satan laid over it: but now the Spirit of God removes it,
wipes off the paint and varnish: and so he sees it in its natural colors, as
the worst of evils, exceedingly sinful, Rom. 7:13. O, what deformed
monsters—do formerly beloved lusts appear! Were they right eyes, he
would pluck them out; were they right hands, he would consent to their
being cut off. He sees how offensive sin is to God, how destructive it is to
the soul; and calls himself a fool, for fighting so long against the Lord,
and harboring that destroyer as a bosom friend!
(3.) He is instructed in the knowledge of HIMSELF. Regenerating
grace brings the prodigal to himself, Luke 15:17, and makes men full of
eyes within, knowing the plague of his own heart. The mind being
savingly enlightened, the man sees how desperately corrupt his nature is;
what enmity against God, and his holy law, has long lodged there: so that
his soul loathes itself. No open sepulcher so vile and loathsome, in his
eyes—as himself, Ezek. 36:31, "Then shall you remember your own evil
ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loathe yourselves in
your own sight." He is no worse than he was before—but the sun is now
shining; and so those pollutions are seen, which he could not discern
before—when there was no dawning in him, as the word is, Isa. 8:20,
while as yet there was no breaking of the day of grace with him.
(4.) He is enlightened in the knowledge of JESUS CHRIST. 1
Cor. 1: 23, 24, "But we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness: but unto those who are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of

God." The truth is, unregenerate men, though capable of preaching
Christ, have not, properly speaking, the knowledge of him—but only an
opinion, a good opinion, of him; as one has of many controverted points
of doctrine, wherein he is far from certainty. As when you meet with a
stranger on the road, who behaves himself discretely, you conceive a good
opinion of him, and therefore willingly converse with him: but yet you
will not commit your money to him; because, though you have a good
opinion of the man, he is a stranger to you, you do not know him. So may
they think well of Christ; but they will never commit themselves to him,
seeing they know him not.
But saving illumination carries the soul beyond opinion, to the
certain knowledge of Christ and his excellency, 1 Thess. 1:5, "For
our Gospel came not unto you in word only—but also in power, and in the
Holy Spirit, and in much assurance." The light of grace thus discovers the
suitableness of the mystery of Christ to the divine perfections, and to the
sinner's case. Hence the regenerate admire the glorious plan of
salvation, through Christ crucified; rest their whole dependence upon it,
heartily acquiesce therein; for whatever he is to others, he is to them,
"Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God." But unrenewed men,
not seeing this, are offended in him: they will not venture their souls in
that vessel—but betake themselves to the broken boards of their own
righteousness.
The same light convincingly discovers a superlative worth, a transcendent
glory and excellence in Christ, which darkens all created excellencies—as
the rising sun makes the stars hide their heads. It engages the
"merchantman to sell all that he has, to buy the one pearl of great price,"
Matt. 12:45, 46; makes the soul heartily content to take Christ for all, and
instead of all. An unskillful merchant, to whom one offers a pearl of great
price, for all his petty wares, dares not venture on the bargain; for though
he thinks that one pearl may be worth more than all he has—yet he is not
sure of it: but when a jeweler comes to him and assures him it is worth
double all his wares, he then eagerly makes the bargain, and cheerfully
parts with all he has, for that pearl.
Finally, this illumination in the knowledge of Christ,
convincingly discovers to men a fullness in him, sufficient for

the supply of all their needs, enough to satisfy the boundless
desires of an immortal soul. And they are persuaded that such
fullness is in him, and that in order to be communicated: they depend
upon it as a certain truth; and therefore, their souls take up their eternal
rest in him.
(5.) The man is instructed in the knowledge of the vanity of the
WORLD. Psalm 119:96, "I have seen an end of all perfection."
Regenerating grace elevates the soul, translates it into the spiritual world,
from whence this earth cannot but appear a little, yes, a very little thing;
even as heaven appeared before, while the soul was groveling in the earth.
Grace brings a man into a new world: where this earthly world is reputed
but a stage of vanity, a howling wilderness, a valley of tears.
God has hung the sign of vanity at the door of all created enjoyments: yet
how do men throng into the house, calling and looking for something that
is satisfying; even after it has been a thousand times told them, that there
is no such thing in it, it is not to be found there, Isa. 57:10, "You are
wearied in the greatness of your way: yet said you not, There is no hope."
Why are men so foolish? The truth of the matter lies here—they do not
see by the light of grace, they do not spiritually discern that sign of vanity.
They have often, indeed, made a rational discovery of it: but can that truly
wean the heart from the world? Nay, no more than painted fire can burn
off the prisoner's bands. But the light of grace, is the light of life, powerful
and efficacious.
(6.) To sum up all. In regeneration, the mind is enlightened in
the knowledge of spiritual things. 1 John 2:20, "You have an
unction from the Holy One," that is, from Jesus Christ, Rev. 3:18. It is an
allusion to the sanctuary, whence the holy oil was brought to anoint the
priest, "and you know all things" necessary to salvation. Though men be
not book-learned, if they are born again, they are Spirit-learned; for all
such are taught of God, John 6:45. The Spirit of regeneration teaches
them what they did not know before. And what they knew by the ear only,
he teaches them over again as by the eye.
The light of grace is an overcoming light, determining men to assent to
divine truths on the mere testimony of God. It is no easy thing for the

mind of man to acquiesce in divine revelation. Many pretend great
respect to the Scriptures; whom, nevertheless, the clear Scripture
testimony will not divorce from their preconceived opinions. But this
illumination will make men's minds run, as willing captives, after Christ's
chariot wheels, which they are ready to allow to drive over, and "cast
down" their "imaginations, and every high thing which exalts itself
against the knowledge of God," 2 Cor. 10:5. It will bring them to "receive
the kingdom of God as a little child," Mark 10:15, who thinks he has
sufficient ground to believe anything—if his father do but say it is so.

2. The WILL is renewed. The Lord takes away the stony heart, and
gives a heart of flesh, Ezek. 36:26, and so from stones—he raises up
children to Abraham. Regenerating grace is powerful and
efficacious, and gives the will a new turn. It does not indeed
force it—but sweetly, yet powerfully draws it, so that his people
are willing in the day of his power, Psalm 110:3. There is heavenly oratory
in the Mediators lips to persuade sinners, Psalm 45:2, "Grace is poured
into your liPsalm" There are cords of a man, and bands of love in his
hands, to draw them after him, Hos. 11:4. Love makes a net for elect
souls, which will infallibly catch them, and bring them to land. The cords
of Christ's love are strong cords: and they need to be so, for every sinner
is heavier than a mountain of brass; and Satan, together with the heart
itself, draws the contrary way. But love is strong as death; and the Lord's
love to the soul he died for, is the strongest love; which acts so powerfully,
that it must come off victorious.
(1.) The will is cured of its utter inability to will what is good.
While the opening of the prison to those who are bound, is proclaimed in
the gospel, the Spirit of God comes and opens the prison door, goes to the
prisoner, and, by the power of his grace, makes his chains fall off; breaks
the bonds of iniquity, with which he was held in sin, so as he could
neither will nor do anything truly good; and brings him forth into a large
place, "working in him both to will and to do of his good pleasure," Phil.
2:13. Then it is that the soul, that was fixed to the earth, can move
heavenward; the withered hand is restored, and can be stretched out.

(2.) There is wrought in the will a fixed aversion to evil. In
regeneration, a man gets a new spirit put within him, Ezek. 36:26; and
that spirit strives against the flesh, Gal. 5:17. The sweet morsel of sin, so
greedily swallowed down—he now loathes, and would sincerely be rid of
it, even as willingly as one who had drunk a cup of poison would vomit it
up again. When the spring is stopped, the mud lies in the well unmoved;
but when once the spring is cleared, the waters, springing up, will work
the mud away by degrees. Even so, while a man continues in an
unregenerate state, sin lies at ease in the heart; but as soon as the Lord
strikes the rocky heart with the rod of his strength, in the day of
conversion, grace is "in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting
life," John 4:14, working away natural corruption, and gradually
purifying the heart, Acts 15:9. The renewed will rises up against sin,
strikes at the root thereof, and the branches too. Lusts are now grievous,
and the soul endeavors to starve them; the corrupt nature is the source of
all evil, and therefore the soul will be often laying it before the great
Physician. O, what sorrow, shame, and self-loathing fill the heart, in the
day that grace makes its triumphant entrance into it! For now the
madman has come to himself, and the remembrance of his follies cannot
but cut him to the heart.
(3.) The will is endowed with an inclination, bent, and
propensity to good. In its depraved state, it lay quite another way,
being prone and bent to evil only: but now, by the operation of the
omnipotent, all-conquering arm, it is drawn from evil to good, and gets
another turn. As the former was natural, so this is natural too, in regard
to the new nature given in regeneration, which has its holy strivings, as
well as the corrupt nature has its sinful lustings, Gal. 5:17. The will, as
renewed, points towards God and godliness.
When God made man, his will, in respect of its intention, was directed
towards God, as his chief end. In respect of its choice, it pointed towards
that which God willed.
When man unmade himself, his will was framed to the very reverse
hereof: he made himself his chief end, and his own will his law.
But when man is new made, in regeneration, grace rectifies this disorder

in some measure, though not perfectly. because we are but renewed in
part, while in this world. It brings back the sinner out of himself, to God,
as his chief end, Psalm 73:25, "Whom have I in heaven but you? and there
is none upon earth that I desire besides you." Phil. 1:21, "For me to live is
Christ." It makes him to deny himself, and whatever way he turns, to
point habitually towards God, who is the center of the gracious soul, its
home, its "dwelling place in all generations," Psalm 90:1.
By regenerating grace, the will is brought into a conformity to the will of
God. It is conformed to his preceptive will, being endowed with holy
inclinations, agreeable to every one of his commands. The whole law is
impressed on the gracious soul: every part of it is written on the renewed
heart. Although remaining corruption makes such blots in the writing,
that oft-times the man himself cannot read it—yet he who wrote it can
read it at all times; it is never quite blotted out, nor can be. What he has
written, he has written; and it shall stand: "For this is the covenant – I
will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts," Heb.
8:10. It is a covenant of salt, a perpetual covenant.
By regenerating grace, the will is also conformed to his providential
will; so that the man would no more be master of his own direction, nor
carve out his lot for himself. He learns to say, from his heart, "The will of
the Lord be done." "He shall choose our inheritance for us," Psalm 47:4.
Thus the will is disposed to fall in with those things which, in its depraved
state, it could never be reconciled to. Particularly,
[1.] The soul is reconciled to the covenant of peace. The Lord God
proposes a covenant of peace to sinners, a covenant which he himself has
framed, and registered in the Bible: but they are not pleased with it. Nay,
unregenerate hearts cannot be pleased with it. Were it put into their
hands to frame it according to their minds, they would blot many things
out of it which God has put in, and put in many things which God has
kept out. But the renewed heart is entirely satisfied with the covenant, 2
Sam. 23:5, "He has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things and sure; this is all my salvation, and all my desire." Though the
covenant could not be brought down to their depraved will, their will is,
by grace, brought up to the covenant: they are well pleased with it; there
is nothing in it which they would have out, nor is anything left out of it

which they would have in.
[2.] The will is disposed to receive Christ Jesus the Lord. The
soul is content to submit to him. Regenerating grace undermines, and
brings down the towering imaginations of the heart, raised up against its
rightful Lord; it breaks the iron sinew, which kept the sinner from bowing
to him; and disposes him to be no more stiff-necked—but to yield. He is
willing to have on the yoke of Christ's commands, to take up the cross,
and to follow him. He is content to take Christ on any terms, Psalm
110:3, "Your people shall be willing in the day of your power."
The mind being savingly enlightened, and the will renewed, the sinner is
thereby determined and enabled to answer the gospel call. So the chief
work in regeneration is done; the fort of the heart is taken; there is room
made for the Lord Jesus Christ in the inmost parts of the soul; the inner
door of the will being now opened to him, as well as the outer door of the
understanding.
In one word, Christ is passively received into the heart; he is come into
the soul, by his quickening Spirit, whereby spiritual life is given to the
man, who in himself was dead in sin. His first vital act we may conceive to
be an active receiving of Jesus Christ, discerned in his glorious
excellencies; that is a believing on him, a closing with him, as discerned,
offered and exhibited in the word of his grace, the glorious Gospel: the
immediate effect of which is union with him, John 1:12, 13, "To as many
as received him to them gave he power," or privilege, "to become the sons
of God, even to those who believe on his name: which were born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man—but of God."
Eph. 3:17, "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith."
Christ having taken the heart by storm, and triumphantly entered into it,
in regeneration, the soul by faith yields itself to him, as it is expressed, 2
Chron. 30:8. Thus, this glorious King who came into the heart, by his
Spirit, dwells in it by faith. The soul, being drawn, runs; and being
effectually called, comes.

3. In regeneration there is a happy change made on the
AFFECTIONS; they are both rectified and regulated.
(1.) Regeneration rectifies the affections, placing them on
suitable objects. 2 Thess. 3:5, "The Lord direct your hearts into the
love of God." The regenerate man's desires are rectified; they are set on
God himself, and the things above. He, who before cried with the world,
"Who will show us any good?" has changed his note, and says, "Lord, lift
up the light of your countenance upon us," Psalm 4:6. Before, he saw no
beauty in Christ, for which he was to be desired; but now Christ is all he
desires, he is altogether lovely, Cant. 5:16. The main stream of his desires
is turned to run towards God; for there is the one thing he desires, Psalm
27:4.
He desires to be holy as well as happy; and rather to be gracious than
great.
His hopes, which before were low, and fastened down to things on earth
—are now raised, and set on the glory which is to be revealed. He
entertains the hope of eternal life, grounded on the word of promise, Tit.
1:2. Which hope he has, as an anchor of the soul, fixing the heart under
trials, Heb 6:19. It puts him upon purifying himself, even as God is pure, 1
John 3:3. For he is begotten again unto a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1:3.
His love is raised, and set on God himself, Psalm 18:1; on his holy law,
Psalm 119:97. Though it strikes against his most beloved lust, he says,
"The law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good," Rom.
7:12. He loves the ordinances of God," Psalm 84:1, "How amiable are your
tabernacles, O Lord Almighty!" Being passed from death unto life, he
loves the brethren, 1 John 3:14, the people of God, as they are called, 1
Pet. 2:10. He loves God for himself; and what is God's, for his sake. Yes,
as being a child of God, he loves his own enemies. His heavenly Father is
compassionate and benevolent; "He makes his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good; and sends rain on the justand on the unjust:" therefore, he is
in like manner disposed, Matt. 5:44, 45.
His hatred is turned against sin—both in himself and others, Psalm
101:3, "I hate the work of those who turn aside, it shall not cleave to me."

He groans under the body of it, and longs for deliverance, Rom. 7:24, "O
wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this