PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 10
The Epistle Dedicatory and Introduction


Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 1. The Epistle Dedicatory and Introduction.

Dartmouth, over whom the Holy Ghost hath made me an Overseer:
Sound Judgment, true Zeal, and unstained Purity, are heartily
wished.
My dear Friends,
THERE are three sad sights with which our eyes should continually
affect our hearts: The first, is to behold in every place so many
profane and dissolute ones, who bear the very image of Satan: the
face of whose conversation plainly discovers what they are, and
whither they are going, Philip. 3:18, 19. These look like themselves,
the children of wrath. The second is to see so many cursed hypocrites
artificially disguising themselves, and with marvellous dexterity
acting the parts of saints, so that even a judicious eye may sometimes
mistake the similar workings of the Spirit on them, for his saving
workings on others: To hear such a person conferring, praying,
bewailing his corruptions, and talking of his experiences; would
easily persuade a man to believe that he hath the heart, as well as the
face of a sincere Christian: For,
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.
So the people of God do speak, so they pray, and even so they open
their conditions: These look like saints, but are none. The third is to
see so many real saints, in whom the spirit of truth is, who yet,
through the impetuous workings of their corruptions, and neglecting
of the watch over their hearts, do often fall into such scandalous
practices, that they look like hypocrites, though they are not so.
These are three sad sights indeed, and O that my head were waters,
and mine eyes fountains of tears, that I may weep abundantly over
them all!
For the first, I would mourn heartily, considering that they (so
continuing) must be damned eternally, 2 Thess. 1:8, 9. 1 Cor. 6:9.

For the second, I would both weep and tremble, considering that
they (so abiding) must be damned doubly, Matth. 24:51.
And for the third no less than any of the rest, because, though they
themselves may, and shall be saved, yet their examples make fast the
bonds of death upon both the former, Matth. 18:7. 2 Sam. 12:13, 14.
Alas! that ever they should shed the blood of others souls, for whom
Christ shed his own blood! That ever they should be cruel to others
who have found Christ so kind to them! I know they dare not do it
directly and intentionally, but so it proves occasionally and
eventually. Suffer me here to digress a little, and expostulate with
these prejudiced and hardened souls, I will presently return to you
again. O why do you mischieve your own souls by other men's
examples? Because they stumble and break their shins, will you fall
and break your necks? I desire all such as harden themselves by
these things, and take up a good opinion of their own deplorable
condition, would soberly consider, and answer these three queries.

Queries
Query 1. Doth religion any way countenance or patronize the sinful
practices of its professors? Or doth it not rather impartially and
severely condemn them?
It is the glory of the Christian religion, that it is pure and undefiled,
Jam. 1:27. No doctrine so holy, Psal. 19:8. Nor doth any make more
provision for an holy life, Tit. 2:11, 12. Indeed there is a case wherein
we may charge the evil practices of men upon their principles, but
that is when their practices naturally flow from, and necessarily
follow their principles: As for example, if I see a Papist sin boldly, I
may charge it upon his principles, for they set pardons to sale, and so
make way for looseness. If I see an Arminian slight the grace of God,
and proudly advance himself, I may cry shame upon his principles,
which directly lead to it: But can I do so where such practices are

condemned and provided against by their own avowed principles,
who commit them?
Query 2. Is it not a most irrational thing to let fly at religion because
of the scandalous ways of some, whilst, in the mean time, you wholly
slight and over-look the holy and heavenly conversation of many
others?
Are all that profess godliness loose and careless in their lives? No,
some are an ornament to their profession, and the glory of Christ:
And why must the innocent be condemned with the guilty? Why the
eleven for one Judas?
Query 3. If you condemn religion because of the scandalous lives of
some that profess it, must you not then cast off all religion in the
world, and turn down-right atheists? Surely this is the consequent of
it: For what religion is there, but some that profess it walk contrary
to their profession? And then, as Constantine told the Novatian, you
must set up a ladder, and go to heaven by yourself.
But alas! it is not our printed apologies for religion, but the visible
reformations of its professor, that must both salve its honour, and
remove those fatal stumbling-blocks at which the blind world strikes
and falls into eternal perdition.
Now there are two ways by which this may be effected: First, By
convincing the consciences of professors of their miscarriages, and
the evil aggravations of them. Secondly, By medicating the heart, and
cleansing the fountain whence they proceed. In the first of these, a
worthy and eminent servant of Christ hath lately laboured, holding a
clear gospel-glass before the faces of professors, which truly
represents their spots and blemishes: If he that reads it will consider,
apply, and practise, it shall doubtless turn to his salvation; but if it
turn to no good account to him that reads it, I know it shall turn to a
testimony for him that wrote it. The second is a principal design of
this small treatise, the subject whereof is exceedingly weighty, and of

daily use to the people of God, though the manner of handling it be
attended with many defects and weaknesses: every one cannot be
excellent, who yet may be useful.
I will exercise your patience no longer than whilst I tell you,
1. Why I publish it to the view of the world.
2. Why I direct it particularly to you.
First, For the publication of it, take this sincere and brief account,
That as I was led to this subject by a special providence, so to the
publication of it by a kind of necessity. The providence at first
leading me to it, was this, a dear and choice friend of my intimate
acquaintance being under much inward trouble, upon the account of
some special heart-disorder, opened the case to me, and earnestly
requested some rules and helps in that particular; whilst I was
bending my thoughts to that special case, divers other cases of like
importance (some of which were dependent upon that consideration)
occurred to my thoughts, and this scripture, which I have insisted
upon, presented itself, as a fit foundation for the whole discourse;
which being lengthened out to what you see, divers friends requested
me to transcribe for their use, divers of the cases here handled, and
some others begged me to publish the whole, to which I was in a
manner necessitated, to save the pains of subscribing, which to me is
a very tedious, and tiresome work: and just as I had almost finished
the copy, an opportunity (and that somewhat strangely) offered to
make it public. So that from first to last, I have been carried beyond
my first intentions in this thing.
Objection. If any say, The world is even cloyed with books, and
therefore though the discourse be necessary, yet the publication is
needless.
Solution. 1. I answer, There are multitudes of books indeed, and of
them many concern not themselves about root-truths, and practical
godliness, but spend their strength upon impractical notions, and

frivolous controversies; many also strike at root-truths, and
endeavour to undermine the power of godliness; and some there are
that nourish the root, and tend to clear and confirm, to prepare and
apply the great truths of the gospel, that they may be bread for souls
to live and feed on: Now, though I could wish that those who had
handled the pen of the scribe, had better employed their time and
pains, than to obtrude such useless discourses upon the world; yet
for books of the latter rank, I say, that when husbandmen complain
of too much corn, let Christians complain of too many such books.
2. And if you be so highly conceited of your own furniture and ability,
that such books are needless to you; if you let them alone, they will
do you no hurt, and other poor hungry souls will be glad of them, and
bless God for what you despise and leave.
Objection. If it be said that several of the cases here handled touch
not your condition, I answer,
Solution 1. That which is not your condition may be another's
condition. If you be placed in an easy, full and prosperous state, and
so have no need of the helps here offered to support your hearts
under pinching wants, others are forced to live by faith for every
day's provision: If you be dandled upon the knee of providence, some
of your brethren are under its feet: If you have inward peace and
tranquillity of spirit, and so need not the counsels here given, to ward
off those desperate conclusions that poor afflicted souls are ready to
draw upon themselves at such a time; yet it may be a word in season
to them, and they may say as David to Abigail, "Blessed be thou of
the Lord, and blessed be thy advice."
2. That may be your condition shortly, which is not your condition at
present: say not thy mountain stands strong, thou shalt never be
moved: there are changes in the right-hand of the Most High; and
then those truths which are little more esteemed than hedge-fruits,
will be as apples of gold in pictures of silver. In Jer. 33:10, 11 the
prophet there teaches the Jews (who then dwelt in their own houses)

how to defend their religion in Babylon, and what they should say to
the Chaldeans there, and therefore that verse is written in Chaldee.
So much for the reasons of its publication. Next, for the dedication of
it to you, I was induced thereto by the consideration,
1. Of the relation I have to you above all the people in the world: I
look upon my gifts as yours, my time as yours, and all the talents I
am entrusted with, as yours: it is not with you as with a woman
whose husband is dead, and so is freed from the law of her husband,
the relation still continues, and so do all the mutual duties of it.
2. By the consideration of my necessitated absence from you, I would
not that personal absence should by insensible degrees untwist (as it
usually doth) the cord of friendship; and therefore I have
endeavoured (as absent friends use to do) to preserve and strengthen
it by this small remembrance. It was Vespasian's answer to
Apollonius, when he desired access for two philosophers, 'My doors
(said Vespasian, are always open to philosophers, but my very breast
is open to thee.' I cannot say with him, my doors are open for the free
access of friends, being by a sad providence shut against myself; but
this I can say, my very breast is still open to you; you are as dear to
me as ever.
3. Another inducement (and indeed the main) was the perpetual
usefulness and necessity of these truths for you, which you will have
continual need of: And I know few of you have such happy memories
to retain, and I cannot be always with you to inculcate these things,
but litera scripta manet. I was willing to leave this with you as a
legacy, as a testimony of sincere love for, and care over you: this may
counsel and direct you when I cannot: I may be rendered useless to
you by a civil or natural death; but this will out-live me, and O that it
may serve your souls when I am silent in the dust.
To hasten now to a conclusion, I have only these three requests to
you, which I earnestly beseech you not to deny me; yea, I charge you,

as ever you hope to appear with comfort before the great Shepherd,
do not dare to slight these requests.
1. Above all other studies in the world, study your own hearts: waste
not a minute more of your precious time about frivolous and sapless
controversies. It is reported even of Bellarmine (how truly I examine
not) *Quod a studiis scholasticœ theologiœ averteretur fere
nauscabundus, quoniam succo carebant liquidœ pietatis, i.e. he
turned with loathing from the study of school-divinity, because it
wanted the sweet juice of piety; I had rather it should be said of you,
as one said of† Swinkfeldius, "He wanted a regular head, but not an
honest heart," than that you should have regular heads, and irregular
hearts. My dear flock, I have, according to the grace given me,
laboured in the course of my ministry among you, to feed you with
the heart-strengthening bread of practical doctrine; and I do assue
you, it is far better you should have the sweet and saving impressions
of gospel-truths feelingly and powerfully conveyed to your hearts,
than only to understand them by a bare ratiocination, or dry
syllogistical inference. Leave trifling studies to such as have time
lying on their hands, and know not how to employ it: remember you
are at the door of eternity, and have other work to do; those hours
you spend upon heart-work in your closets, are the golden spots of
all your time, and will have the sweetest influence upon your last
hour. Never forget these sermons I preached to you upon that
subject, from 2 Kings 20:2, 3. Heart-work is weighty, and difficult
work; an error there may cost you your souls: I may say of it as
Augustine speaks of the doctrine of the Trinity, Nihilo facilius aut
periculosius erratur; A man can err in nothing more easily or more
dangerously. O then study your hearts.
2. My next request is, That you will carefully look to your
conversations, and be accurate in all your ways, hold forth the word
of life: be sure by the strictness and holiness of your lives, to settle
yourselves in the very consciences of your enemies. Remember that
your lives must be produced in the great day to judge the world, 1
Cor. 6:2. O then, what manner of persons ought you to be! you have

many eyes over you; the omniscient eye of God that searches heart
and reins, Rev. 2:23. the vigilant eye of Satan, Job 1:7, 8. the envious
eyes of enemies, that curiously observe you, Psal. 5:8. the quick and
observant eye of conscience, which none of your actions escape,
Rom. 9:1.
O then be precise and accurate in all manner of conversation; keep
up the power of godliness in your closets and families, and then you
will not let it fall in your more public employments and converses in
the world: I have often told you, that it is the honour of the gospel,
that it makes the best parents and children, the best masters and
servants, the best husbands and wives in the world.
My third and last request is, that you may pray for me: I hope I can
say, and I am sure some of you have acknowledged, that I came at
first among you, as the return and answer of your prayers: and
indeed so it should be, see Luke 10:2. I am persuaded also, I have
been carried on in my work by your prayers; it is sweet when it is so;
see Eph. 6:18, 19. And I hope by your prayers to receive yet a farther
benefit, even that which is mentioned, Heb. 13:18, 19. Philem. ver.
22. And truly it is but equal you should pray for me, I have often
prayed for you: let the pulpit, family, and closet witness for me; and
God forbid I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you.
Yea, friends, your own interest may persuade to it: what mercies you
obtain for me, redound to your own advantage; if God preserve me, it
is for your use and sendee: the more gifts and graces a minister hath,
the better for them that shall wait on his ministry; the more God
gives in to me, the more I shall be able to give out to you. I will detain
you no longer, but to entreat you to accept this small testification of
my great love, and have recourse to it, according as the exigencies of
your condition shall require: read it consideringly, and obediently;
judge it not by the dress and style, but by the weight and savour of
what you read. It is a good rule of Bernard, In legendis libris, non
quœramus scientiam sed saporem, i.e. In reading-books, regard not
so much the science as the savour. That it may prove the savour of

life unto life to you, and all those in whose hands it shall come, is the
hearty desire of
Your loving and faithful Pastor,
JOHN FLAVEL.
From my study at Ley, in
Slapton, Oct. 7, 1667.

Proverbs 4:23, The Text Explained
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of
life.
THE heart of man is his worst part before it be regenerate, and the
best afterwards: it is the seat of principles, and the fountain of
actions. The eye of God is, and the eye of the Christian ought to be,
principally fixed upon it.
The greatest difficulty in conversion is to win the heart to God; and
the greatest difficulty after conversion is to keep the heart with God.
Here lies the very pinch and stress of religion; here is that which
makes the way to life a narrow way, and the gate to heaven a strait
gate. Direction and help in this great work are the scope and sum of
this text: wherein we have,
1. An exhortation, "Keep thy heart with all diligence."
2. The reason, or motive enforcing it, "For out of it are the issues of
life."
In the exhortation I shall consider,
1. The matter of the duty.

2. The manner of performing it.
1. The mattter of the duty, keep thy heart. Heart is not here taken
properly for that noble part of the body which philosophers call the
primum vivens, et ultimum moriens; the first that lives, and the last
that dies; but by heart, in a metaphor, the scripture sometimes
understands some particular noble faculty of thy soul: in Rom. 1:21 it
is put for the understanding part, their foolish heart, i.e. "their
foolish understanding was darkened." And Psalm 119:11 it is put for
the memory, "Thy word have I hid in my heart;" and 1 John 3:20 it is
put for the conscience, which hath in it both the light of the
understanding and the recognitions of the memory: if our heart
condemn us, i.e. if your consciences, whose proper office it is to
condemn. But here we are to take it more generally for the whole
soul, or inner man; for look what the heart is to the body, that the
soul is to the man; and what health is to the heart, that holiness is to
the soul: Quod sanitas in corpore, id sanctitas in corde. The state of
the whole body depends upon the soundness and vigour of the heart,
and the everlasting state of the whole man upon the good or ill
condition of the soul.
And by keeping the heart, understand the diligent and constant use
and improvement of all holy means and duties, to preserve the soul
from sin, and maintain its sweet and free communion with God.
*Livater, on the place, will have the word taken from a besieged
garrison, begirt by many enemies without, and in danger of being
betrayed by treacherous citizens within, in which danger the soldiers,
upon pain of death, are commanded to watch; and whereas the
expression (keep thine heart) seems to put it upon us as our work,
yet it doth not imply a sufficiency or ability in us to do it; we are as
able to stop the sun in its course, or make the rivers run backward, as
by our own skill and power to rule and order our hearts: we may as
well be our own saviours, as our own keepers; and yet Solomon
speaks properly enough, when he saith keep thy heart; because the
duty is our's though the power be God's. A natural man hath no
power, a gracious man hath some, though not sufficient; and that

power he hath, depends upon the exciting and assisting strength of
Christ; Gratia gratiam postulat, grace within us is beholden to grace
without us, John 15:5. "Without me ye can do nothing." So much of
the matter of the duty.
2. The manner of performing it is, with all diligence; the Hebrew is
very emphatical,† Cum omni custodia, keeping with all keeping, q. d.
keep, keep; set double guards, your hearts will be gone else. And this
vehemency of expression, with which the duty is urged, plainly
implies how difficult it is to keep your hearts, and how dangerous to
let them go.
3. The reason, or motive quickening to this duty, is very forcible and
weighty: "For out of it are the issues of life." That is, it is the source
and fountain of all vital actions and operations; Hinc fons boni et
peccandi origo, saith Jerom; it is the spring and original both of good
and evil, as the spring in a watch that sets all the wheels in motion.
The heart is the treasury, the hand and tongue but the shops; what is
in these comes from thence; the hand and tongue always begin where
the heart ends. The heart contrives, and the members execute; Luke
6:45. "A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth
forth good things, and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart
bringeth forth evil things; for out of the abundance of his heart his
mouth speaketh." So then, if the heart err in its work, these must
needs miscarry in theirs; for heart-errors are like the errors of the
first concoction, which cannot be rectified afterwards: Or like the
misplacing, and inverting of the stamps and letters in the press,
which must needs cause so many errata in all the copies that are
printed off. O then, how important a duty is that which is contained
in the following proposition?
Doct. That the keeping and right managing of the heart in every
condition, is the great business of a Christian's life.
What the philosopher saith of waters, is as properly applicable to
hearts; Suis terminis difficile continentur, it is hard to keep them

within bounds: God hath set bounds and limits to them, yet how
frequently do they transgress, not only the bounds of grace and
religion, but even of reason and common honesty? Hic labor, hoc
opus est; this is that which affords the Christian matter of labour,
fear and trembling to his dying-day. It is not the cleansing of the
hand that makes the Christian, for many a hypocrite can shew as fair
a hand as he; but the purifying, watching, and right ordering of the
heart; this is the thing that provokes so many sad complaints, and
costs so many deep groans and brinish tears. It was the pride of
Hezekiah's heart that made him lie in the dust mourning before the
Lord, 2 Chron. 32:26. It was the fear of hypocrisy invading the heart,
that made David cry, "Let my heart be found in thy statutes that I be
not ashamed," Psalm 119:80. It was the sad experience he had of the
divisions and distractions of his own heart, in the service of God, that
made him pour out that prayer, Psalm 86:11. "Unite my heart to fear
thy name."
The method in which I shall improve the point, shall be this,
First, I shall enquire what the keeping of the heart supposes and
imports.
Secondly, Assign divers reasons, why Christians must make this the
great work and business of their lives.
Thirdly, Point at those special seasons which especially call for this
diligence in keeping the heart.
Fourthly, and lastly, Apply the whole in several uses.
1. What the keeping of the heart supposes and imports.
To keep the heart, necessarily supposes a previous work of
sanctification, which hath set the heart right, by giving it a new
spiritual bent and inclination; for as long as the heart is not set right
by grace, as to its habitual frame, no duties or means can keep it
right with God. Self is the poise of the unsanctified heart, which

biasses and moves it in all its designs and actions; and as long as it is
so, it is impossible that any external means should keep it with God.
Man, by creation, was of one constant, uniform frame and tenour of
spirit, held one straight and even course; not one thought or faculty
revelled or disordered; his mind had a perfect illumination to
understand and know the will of God, his will a perfect compliance
therewith; his sensitive appetite, and other inferior powers, stood in
a most obedient subordination.
Man, by degeneration, is become a most disordered and rebellious
creature, contesting with, and opposing his Maker, as the first cause,
by self-dependence; as the chiefest good, by self-love; as the highest
Lord, by self-will, and as the last end, by self-seeking; and so is quite
disordered, and all his acts irregular: His illuminated understanding
is clouded with ignorance, his complying will full of rebellion and
stubbornness; his subordinate powers, casting off the dominion and
government of the superior faculties.
But by regeneration this disordered soul is set aright again:
sanctification being the rectifying and due framing, or as the
scripture phrases it, the renovation of the soul after the image of
God, Eph. 4:24 in which self-dependence is removed by faith; selflove by the love of God; self-will by subjection and obedience to the
will of God; and self-seeking by self-denial. The darkened
understanding is again illuminated, Eph. 1:18 the refractory will
sweetly subdued, Psalm 110:3 the rebellious appetite, or
concupiscence gradually conquered, Rom. 5:7 per tot. And thus the
soul which sin had universally depraved is again by grace restored
and rectified.
This being pre-supposed, it will not be difficult to apprehend what it
is to keep the heart, which is nothing else but the constant care and
diligence of such a renewed man, to preserve his soul in that holy
frame to which grace hath reduced it, and daily strives to hold it.

For though grace hath, in a great measure, rectified the soul, and
given it an habitual and heavenly temper: yet sin often actually
discomposes it again: so that even a gracious heart is like a musical
instrument, which, though be it never so exactly tuned, a small
matter brings it out of tune again; yea, hang it aside but a little, and it
will need setting again before you can play another lesson on it; even
so stands the case with gracious hearts; if they are in frame in one
duty, yet how dull, dead, and disordered when they come to another?
And therefore every duty needs a particular preparation of the heart,
Job 11:13. "If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands
towards him." Well then, to keep the heart is carefully to preserve it
from sin, which disorders it; and maintain that spiritual and gracious
frame, which fits it for a life of communion with God. And this
includes these six acts in it:
1. Frequent observation of the frame of the heart, turning in and
examining how the case stands with it, this is one part of the work.
Carnal and formal persons take no heed to this, they cannot be
brought to confer with their own hearts; there are some men and
women that have lived forty or fifty years in the world, and have
scarce had one hour's discourse with their own hearts all that while:
It is a hard thing to bring a man and himself together upon such an
account; but saints know those soliloquies and self-conferences to be
of excellent use and advantage. The heathen could say, anima
sedendo et quiescendo fit sapiens, the soul is made wise by sitting
still in quietness: though bankrupts wish not to look into their books
of accompt, yet upright hearts will know whether they go backward
or forward, Psal. 77:6. "I commune with mine own heart." The heart
can never be kept until its case be examined and understood.
2. It includes deep humiliation for heart-evils and disorders; thus
Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, 2 Chron. 32:26.
Thus the people were ordered to spread forth their hands to God in
prayer, in a sense of the plague of their own hearts, 1 Kings 8:38.
Upon this account many an upright heart hath been laid low before
God: O what an heart have I? They have in their confessions pointed

at the heart, the pained place; Lord, here is the wound, here is the
plague-sore. It is with the heart well kept, as it is with the eye, which
is a fit emblem of it, if a small dust get into the eye, it will never leave
twinkling and watering till it have wept it out: So the upright heart
cannot be at rest till it have wept out its troubles, and poured out its
complaints before the Lord.
3. It includes earnest supplications and instant prayer for heart
purifying and rectifying grace, when sin hath defiled and disordered
it; so Psalm 19:12. "Cleanse thou me from secret faults;" and Psalm
86:11. "Unite my heart to fear thy name." Saints have always many
such petitions depending before the throne of God's grace; this is the
thing which is most pleaded by them with God: When they are
praying for outward mercies, haply their spirits may be more remiss,
but when it comes to the heart-case, then they extend their spirits to
the utmost, fill their mouths with arguments, weep and make
supplication: Oh, for a better heart! Oh for a heart to love God more.
To hate sin more, to walk more evenly with God: Lord, deny not to
me such a heart, whatever thou deny me; give me an heart to fear
thee, love and delight in thee, if I beg my bread in desolate places. It
is observed of holy Mr. Bradford, that when he was confessing sin, he
would never give over confessing until he had felt some brokenness
of heart for that sin; and when praying for any spiritual mercy, would
never give over that suit, until he had got some relish of that mercy.
That is the third thing included in keeping the heart.
4. It includes the imposing of strong engagements and bonds upon
ourselves to walk more accurately with God, and avoid the occasions
whereby the heart may be induced to sin: Well-composed, advised,
and deliberate vows, are, in some cases, of excellent use to guard the
heart against some special sin; so Job 31:1. "I made a covenant with
mine eyes;" by this means, holy ones have over-awed their souls, and
preserved themselves from defilement by some special heartcorruptions.
