PURITAN GOLD -- The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment by Jeremiah Burroughs: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 8
Aggravations of the Sin of Murmuring


The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. By Jeremiah Burroughs.

Chapter 6. Aggravations of the Sin of Murmuring.

profession. You have no promise for this, that you should not have such
an affliction upon you.
And a Christian should live by his faith. It is said that the just live by
faith; now you should not look after any other life but the life that you
have by faith. You have no ground for your faith to believe that you
should be delivered out of such an affliction, and then why should you
account it such a great evil to be under this affliction? Certainly the good
that we have in the ground for our faith is enough to content our hearts
here, and to all eternity.
A Christian should be satisfied with what God has made the object of his
faith. The object of his faith is high enough to satisfy his soul, were it
capable of a thousand times more than it is. Now if you may have the
object of your faith you have enough to content your soul. And know that
when you are discontented for want of certain comforts, you should think
thus: God never promised me that I should have these comforts, at this
time, and in such a way as I would have. I am discontented because I
have not these things which God never yet promised me, and therefore I
sin much against the Gospel, and against the grace of faith.
6. It is below a Christian because it is below those helps that a Christian
has more than others have. They have the promises to help them, which
others have not. It is not so much for the heart of a Nabal to sink, because
he has nothing but the creature to uphold him. But it is much for a
Christian, who has the promises and ordinances to uphold his spirit,
which others have not.
7. It is below the expectation that God has of Christians, for God expects
not only that they should be patient in afflictions, but that they should
rejoice and triumph in them. Now, Christians, when God expects this
from you, and you have not even attained to contentedness under
afflictions! Oh, this is beneath what God expects from you.
8. It is below what God has had from other Christians. Others have not
only been contented with little trials, but they have triumphed over great
afflictions, they have suffered the spoiling of their goods with joy. Read
the latter part of the eleventh of the Hebrews, and you will find what

great things God has had from his people. Therefore not to be content
with smaller crosses must needs be a great evil.
6. THE SIXTH EVIL IN A MURMURING SPIRIT IS, By
murmuring you undo your prayers, for it is exceedingly contrary to the
prayer that you make to God. When you come to pray to God, you
acknowledge his sovereignty over you, you come there to profess
yourselves to be at God's disposal. What do you pay for, unless you
acknowledge that you are at his disposal? Unless you will stand, as it
were, at his disposal never come to petition him. If you will come to
petition him and yet will be your own carver you go contrary to your
prayers, to come as if you would beg your bread at your Father's gates
every day, and yet you must do what you list: this is the undoing of the
prayers of a Christian. I remember reading that Latimer, speaking
concerning Peter who denied his master, said: 'Peter forgot his
Paternoster,* for that was, Hallowed be thy name, and thy kingdom
come.' [*Paternoster &emdash; The Lord's Prayer, so called because the
Latin version begins: 'Pater noster' (Our Father).] So we may say, when
you have murmuring and discontented hearts, you forget your prayers,
you forget what you have prayed for. What do you pray, but, Give us this
day our daily bread? (For you must make the Lord's prayer a pattern for
your prayers; that is Christ's intention, that we should have it as a pattern
and a directory, as it were, how to make our prayers.) Now God does not
teach any of you to pray, Lord, give me so much a year, or let me have this
kind of cloth, and so many dishes at my table. Christ does not teach you
to pray so, but he teaches us to pray, 'Lord, give us our bread,' showing
that you should be content with a little. What, have you not bread to eat?
I hope there are none of you here but have that.
Objection. But I do not know what would become of my children if I were
to die. Or if I have bread now, I do not know where I shall get it from next
week, or where I shall get provision for the winter.
Answer. Where did Christ teach us to pray, Lord, give us provision for so
long a time? No, but if we have bread for this day, Christ would have us
content. Therefore when we murmur because we have not so much
variety as others have, we do, as it were, forget our Paternoster. It is
against our prayers; we do not in our lives hold forth the

acknowledgment of the sovereignty of God over us as we seem to
acknowledge in our prayers.
Therefore when at any time you find your murmuring, then do but reflect
yourselves and think thus: Is this according to my prayers, in which I held
forth the sovereign power and authority that God has over me?
7. THE SEVENTH THING WHICH I ADD FOR THE EVIL OF
DISCONTENT IS the woeful effects that come to a discontented heart
from murmuring. I will name you five; there are five evil effects that come
from a murmuring spirit: 1. By murmuring and discontent in your hearts,
you come to lose a great deal of time. How many times do men and
women, when they are discontented, let their thoughts run, and are
musing and contriving, through their present discontentedness and let
their discontented thoughts work I in them for some hours together, and
they spend their time in vain! When you are alone you should spend your
time in holy meditation, but you are spending your time in discontented
thoughts. You complain that you cannot meditate, you cannot think on
good things, but if you begin to think of them a little, soon your thoughts
are off from them. But if you are discontented with anything, then you
can go alone, and muse, and roll things up and down in your thoughts to
feed a discontented humor. Oh, labor to see this evil effect of murmuring,
the losing of your time.
2. It unfits you for duty. If a man or woman is in a contented frame, you
may turn such a one to anything at any time, and he is fit to go to God at
any time; but when one is in a discontented condition, then a man or
woman is exceedingly unfit for the service of God. And it causes many
distractions in duty, it unfits for duty, and when you come to perform
duties, oh, the distractions that are in your duties, when your spirits are
discontented! When you hear any ill news from sea and cannot bear it, or
of any ill from a friend, or any loss or cross, oh, what distractions do they
cause in the performance of holy duties! When you should be enjoying
communion with God, you are distracted in your thoughts about the trial
that has befallen you, whereas had you but a quiet spirit, though great
trials befell you, yet they would never hinder you in the performance of
any duty.

3. Consider what wicked risings of heart and resolutions of spirit there
are many times in a discontented fit. In some discontented fits the heart
rises against God, and against others and sometimes it even has
desperate resolutions what to do to help itself. If the Lord had suffered
you to have done what you had sometimes thought to do, in a
discontented fit, what wretched misery you would have brought upon
yourselves! Oh, it was a mercy of God that stopped you; had not God
stopped you, but let you go on when you thought to help yourselves this
way and the other way, oh, it would have been ill with you. Do but
remember those risings of heart and wicked resolutions that sometimes
you have had in a discontented mood, and learn to be humbled for that.
4. Unthankfulness is an evil and a wicked effect which comes from
discontent. The Scripture ranks unthankfulness among very great sins.
men and women, who are discontented, though they enjoy many mercies
from God, yet they are thankful for none of them, for this is the vile
nature of discontent, to lessen every mercy of God. It makes those
mercies they have from God as nothing to them, because they cannot
have what they want.
Sometimes it is so even in spiritual things: if they do not have all they
desire, the comforts that they would have, then what they do have is
nothing to them. Do you think that God will take this well? Suppose you
were to give a friend or a relation some money to trade with and he came
and said: 'What is this you have given me? There are only a few coins
here.
This is no good to me.' This would be intolerable to you, that he should
react to your gift like this, just because you have not given him as much
money as he would like. It is just the same when you are ready to say: 'All
that God has given me is worthless. It is no good to me. It is only a few
coins.' For you to say that what God gives you is nothing and only
common gifts, all given in hypocrisy, and counterfeit, when they are the
precious graces of God's Spirit and worth more than thousands of worlds
&emdash; how ungrateful it is! The graces of God's Spirit are nothing to a
discontented heart who cannot have all that he would have. And so for
outward blessings: God has given you health of body, and strength, and
has given you some competence for your family, some way of livelihood,

yet because you are disappointed in something that you would have,
therefore all is nothing to you. Oh, what unthankfulness in this! God
expects that every day you should spend some time in blessing his name
for what mercy he has granted to you. There is not one of you in the
lowest condition but you have an abundance of mercies to bless God for,
but discontentedness makes them nothing. I remember an excellent
saying that Luther has: 'This is the rhetoric of the Spirit of God' he said,
'to extenuate evil things, and to amplify good things: if a cross comes to
make the cross but little, but if there is a mercy to make the mercy great.'
Thus, if there is a cross, where the Spirit of God prevails in the heart, the
man or woman will wonder that it is no greater, and will bless God that
though there is such a cross, yet that it is no greater, and will bless God
that though there is such a cross, yet that it is no more: that is the work of
the Spirit of God; and if there is a mercy, he wonders at God's goodness,
that God granted so great a mercy.
The Spirit of God extenuates evils and crosses, and magnifies and
amplifies all mercies; and makes al mercies seem to be great, and all
afflictions seem to be little. But the Devil goes quite contrary, says Luther,
his rhetoric is quite otherwise: he lessens God's mercies, and amplifies
evil things. Thus, a godly man wonders at his cross that it is not more, a
wicked man wonders his cross is so much: 'Oh', he says, 'none was ever so
afflicted as I am.' If there is a cross, the Devil puts the soul to musing on
it, and making it greater than it is, and so it brings discontent.
And on the other side, if there is a mercy, then it is the rhetoric of the
Devil to lessen the mercy. 'Aye, indeed', he says, 'the thing is a good thing,
but what is it? It is not a great matter, and for all this, I may be
miserable.' Thus the rhetoric of Satan lessens God's mercies, and
increases afflictions.
I will give you a striking example of this which we find in Scripture: it is
the example of Korah, Dathan and Abiram in
Numbers 16:12, 13: 'And Moses sent to call Dathan, and Abiram, the sons
of Eliab: which said, We will not come up: Is it a small thing that thou
hast brought us up out of a land that floweth with milk and honey, to kill
us in the wilderness, except thou make thyself altogether a prince over

us?' Mark, the slighted the land that they were going to, the land of
Canaan; that was the land that God promised them should flow with milk
and honey.
But mark here their discontentedness, because they met with some
troubles in the wilderness: oh, it was to slay them, they make their
affliction in the wilderness greater than it was, oh, it was to kill them,
though indeed it was to carry them to the land of Canaan. But though
their deliverance from Egypt was a great mercy, they made it to be
nothing, for they say 'You have brought us out of a land that floweth with
milk and honey' &emdash; what land was that? It was the land of Egypt,
the land of their bondage, but they call it a land that flowed with milk and
honey, though it was the land of their most cruel and unbearable
bondage; whereas they should have blessed God as long as they lived for
delivering them out of the land of Egypt. Yet, meeting with some cross
they make their deliverance from Egypt no mercy, no, it was rather a
misery to them. 'Oh', they say, 'Egypt was a land that flowed with milk
and honey.' Oh, what baseness there is in a discontented spirit! A
discontented spirit, out of envy to God's grace, will make mercies that are
great little, yea to be none at all. Would one ever have thought that such a
word could have come from the mouth of an Israelite, who had been
under bondage and cried under it? and yet when they meet with a little
cross in their way they say, 'You have brought us out of the land that
floweth with milk and honey.' To say they were better before than now,
and yet before, they could not be contented either: this is the usual,
unthankful expression of a discontented heart.
It is so with us now when we meet with any cross in our estates, any
taxation and trouble, especially if any among you have been where the
enemy have prevailed, you are ready to say: 'We had plenty before, and
we are now brought to a condition of hardship, we were better before
when we had the Prelates and others to domineer,' and so we are in
danger of being brought into that bondage again. Oh, let us take heed of
this, of a discontented heart; there is this woeful cursed fruit of
discontent, to make men and women unthankful for all the mercies God
has granted to them, and this is a sore and grievous evil.
5. Finally, there is this evil effect in murmuring, it causes shiftings of

spirit. Those who murmur and are discontented are liable to temptations
to shift for themselves in sinful and ungodly ways; discontent is the
ground of shifting courses and unlawful ways. How many of you are
condemned by your consciences of this, that in the time of your afflictions
you have sought to shift for yourselves by ways that were sinful against
God, and your discontent was the bottom and ground of it? If you would
avoid shifting for yourselves by wicked ways, labor to mortify this sin of
discontent, to mortify it at the root.
8. THERE IS A GREAT DEAL OF FOLLY, EXTREME FOLLY, IN
A DISCONTENTED HEART; IT IS A FOOLISH SIN.
I shall open the folly of it in many respects.
1. It takes away the present comfort of what you have, because you have
not something that you would have. What a foolish thing is this, that
because I have not got what I want, I will not enjoy the comfort of what I
have! Do you not account this folly in your children?: you give them some
food and they are not contented, perhaps they say it is not enough, they
cry for more, and if you do not immediately give them more they will
throw away what they have. Though you account it folly in your children,
yet you deal thus with God: God gives you many mercies, but your see
others have more mercies than you and therefore you cry for more; but
God does not give you what you want and because of that you throw away
what you have &emdash; is not this folly in your hearts? It is
unthankfulness.
2. By all your discontent you cannot help yourselves, you cannot get
anything by it. Who by taking care can add one cubit to his stature, or
make one hair that is white to be black? You may vex and trouble
yourselves but you can get nothing by it. Do you think that the Lord will
come in mercy a whit the sooner because of the murmuring of your
spirits? Oh, no, but mercy will be rather deferred the longer for it; though
the Lord was about to send mercy before, yet this disorder of your hearts
is enough to put him out of his course of mercy, and though he had
thoughts that you should have the thing before, yet now you shall not
have it. If you had a mind to give something to your child, yet if you see
him in a discontented, fretting mood you will not give it him. And this is

the very reason why many mercies are denied to you, because of your
discontent. You are discontented for want of them, and therefore you do
not get them, you deprive yourselves of the enjoyment of your own
desires, because of the discontent of your hearts, because you do not get
your desires, and is not this a foolish thing? 3. There are commonly many
foolish attitudes that a discontented heart is guilty of. They carry
themselves foolishly towards God and towards men.
Such expressions, and such kinds of behavior come from them, as to
make their friends ashamed of them many times. Their carriages are so
unseemly, they are a shame to themselves and their friends.
4. Discontent and murmuring eats out the good and sweetness of a mercy
before it comes. It God should give a mercy for the want of which we are
discontented, yet the blessing of the mercy is, as it were, eaten out before
we come to have it. Discontent is like a worm that eats the meat out of the
nut, and then when the meat is eaten out of it, you have the shell. If a
child were to cry for a nut of which the meat has been eaten out, and is all
worm-eaten, what good would the nut be to the child? So you would fain
have a certain outward comfort and you are troubled for the want of it,
but the very trouble of your spirits is the worm that eats the blessing out
of the mercy.
Then perhaps God gives it to you, but with a curse mixed with it, so that
you were better not to have it than have it. If God gives the man or
woman who is discontented for want of some good thing, that good thing
before they are humbled for their discontent, such a man or woman can
have no comfort from the mercy, but it will be rather an evil than a good
to them.
Therefore for my part, if I should have a friend or brother or one who was
as dear to me as my own soul, whom I saw discontented for the want of
such a comfort, I would rather pray, 'Lord, keep this thing from them, till
you shall be pleased to humble their hearts for their discontent; let not
them have the mercy till they come to be humbled for their discontent
over the want of it, for if they have it before that time they will have it
without any blessing.' Therefore it should be your care, when you find
your hearts discontented for the want of anything, to be humbled for it,

thinking thus with yourselves: Lord, if what I so immoderately desire
were to come to me before I am humbled for my discontent for want of it,
I am certain I could have no comfort from it, but I should rather have it as
an affliction to me.
There are many things which you desire as your lives, and think that you
would be happy if you had them, yet when they come you do not find
such happiness in them, but they prove to be the greatest crosses and
afflictions that you ever had, and on this ground, because your hearts
were immoderately set upon them before you had them. As it was with
Rachael: she must have children or else she died &emdash; 'Well', said
God, 'seeing you must, you shall have them,' but though she had a child
she died according to what she said, 'Give me children or else I die.' So in
regard of any other outward comforts, people may have the thing, but
oftentimes they have it so as it proves the heaviest cross to them that they
ever had in all their lives.
The child whom you were discontented for the want of, may have been
sick, and your hearts were out of temper for fear that you should lose it;
God restores it, but he restores it so as he makes it a cross to your hearts
all the days of your lives. Someone observes concerning manna, 'When
the people were contented with the allowance that God allowed them,
then it was very good, but when they would not be content with God's
allowance, but would gather more than God would have them, then, says
the text, there were worms in it.' So when we are content with our
conditions, and what God disposes of us to be in, there is a blessing in it,
then it is sweet to us, but if we must needs have more, and keep it longer
than God would have us to have it, then there will be worms in it and it
will be no good at all.
5. It makes our affliction a great deal worse than otherwise it would be. it
in no way removes our afflictions, indeed, while they continue, they are a
great deal the worse and heavier, for a discontented heart is a proud
heart, and a proud heart will not pull down his sails when there comes a
tempest and storm. If a sailor, when a tempest and storm comes, is
perverse and refuses to pull down his sails, but is discontented with the
storm, is his condition any better because he is discontented and will not
pull down his sails? Will this help him? Just so is it, for all the world, with

a discontented heart: a discontented heart is a proud heart, and he out of
his pride is troubled with his affliction, and is not contented with God's
disposal, and so he will not pull down his spirit at all, and make it bow to
God in this condition into which God has brought him. now is his
condition any better because he will not pull down his spirit? No,
certainly, abundantly worse, it is a thousand to one but that the tempest
and storm will overwhelm his soul.
Thus you see what a great deal of folly there is in the sin of
discontentment.
9. THERE IS A GREAT DEAL OF DANGER IN THE SIN OF
DISCONTENT, FOR IT HIGHLY PROVOKES THE WRATH OF
GOD.
It is a sin that much provokes God against his creature. We find most sad
expressions in Scripture, and examples too, how God has been provoked
against many for their discontent. In Numbers 14 you have a noteworthy
text, and one would think that it was enough for ever to make you fear
murmuring: in the
26th verse, it is said, 'The Lord spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying'
&emdash; what did he say? &emdash; 'How long shall I bear with this evil
congregation, which murmur against me?' How long shall I bear with
them? says God, this evil congregation, oh it is an evil congregation that
murmur against me, and how long shall I bear with them? They murmur,
and they have murmured; as those who have murmuring spirits, and
murmuring dispositions, they will murmur again, and again. How long
shall I bear with this evil congregation that murmur against me? How
justly may God speak this of many of you who are this morning before the
Lord: how long shall I bear with this wicked man or woman who
murmurs against me, and has usually in the course of their lives
murmured against me when anything falls out otherwise than they would
have it? And mark what follows after, 'I have heard the murmurings of
the children of Israel.' You murmur, and maybe others do not hear you, it
may be that you do not speak at all, or but half-words; yet God hears the
language of your murmuring hearts, and those muttering speeches, and
those half-words that come from you. And observe further in this verse

how the Lord repeats this sin of murmuring,' 'How long shall I bear with
this evil congregation, which murmur against me?'
Secondly, 'I have heard their murmuring.' Thirdly, 'which they murmur
against me'. Murmur, murmur, murmur &emdash; three times in one
verse he repeats it, and this is to show his indignation against the thing.
When you express indignation against a thing, you repeat it over again,
and again; now the Lord, because he would express his indignation
against this sin, repeats it over again, and again, and it follows in the 28th
verse, 'Say unto them, As truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken
in mine ears, so I will do to you.' Mark, God swears against a murmurer.
Sometimes in your discontent perhaps you will be ready to swear. Do you
swear in your discontent? &emdash; So does God swear against you for
your discontent. And what would God do to them? 'Doubtless your
carcasses shall fall in the wilderness; and you shall not come into the land
concerning which I sware, to make you dwell therein.' It is as if God
should say, 'If I have any life in me your lives shall go for it, as I live it
shall cost you your lives.' A discontented, murmuring fit of yours may
cost you your lives. You see how it provokes God; there is more evil in it
than you were aware of. If may cost you your lives, and therefore look to
yourselves, and learn to be humbled at the very beginnings of such
disorders in the heart. So in Psalm 106:24, 25: 'Yea, they despised the
pleasant land, they believed not his word; but murmured in their tents,
and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord. Therefore he lifted up his
hand against them to overthrow them in the wilderness.' There are
several things to be observed in this Scripture.
We spoke before of how a murmuring heart slights God's mercies, and so
it is here: 'They despised the pleasant land.' And a murmuring heart is
contrary to faith: 'they believed not his word, but (says the text) they
murmured in their tents, and hearkened not to the voice of the Lord.'
Many men and women will hearken to the voice of their own base
murmuring hearts, who will not hearken to the voice of the Lord. If you
would hearken to the voice of the Lord, there would not be such
murmuring as there is.
But mark what follows after it; you must not think to please yourselves in
your murmuring discontentedness, and think that no evil shall come of it:

'Therefore he lifted up his hand against them to overthrow them.' You
who are discontented lift up your hearts against God, and you cause God
to lift up his hand against you. Perhaps God lays his finger on you softly
in some afflictions, in your families or elsewhere, and you cannot bear the
hand of God, which lies upon you as tenderly as a tender-hearted nurse
lays her hand on a child. You cannot bear the tender hand of God which is
upon you in a lesser affliction; it would be just for God to lift up his hand
against you in another kind of affliction. Oh, a murmuring spirit provokes
God exceedingly.
There is another place in 16th of Numbers: compare the 41st verse, and
the 46th verse together: 'But on the morrow all the congregation of the
children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, Ye have
killed the people of the Lord,' and mark in the 46th verse: 'And Moses
said unto Aaron, Take a censer and put fire therein from off the altar, and
put on incense, and go quickly unto the congregation and make
atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague
is begun.' Mark how God's wrath is kindled: in the 41st verse, the
congregation had murmured, and they murmured only against Moses
and Aaron (perhaps you murmur more directly against God) and that was
against God, in murmuring against God's ministers. it was against God
but not so directly; if you murmur against those whom God makes
instruments, because you have not got everything that you would have,
against the Parliament, or such and such who are public instruments, it is
against God. It was only against Moses and Aaron that the Israelites
murmured, and they said that Moses and Aaron had killed the people of
the Lord, though it was the hand of God that was upon them for their
former wickedness in murmuring. It is usual for wicked, vile hearts to
deal thus with God, when God's hand is a little upon them, to murmur
again and again, and so to bring upon themselves infinite kinds of evils.
But now the anger of God was quickly kindled: 'Oh', said Moses, 'go, take
the censer quickly, for wrath is gone out from Jehovah, the plague is
begun.' So while you are murmuring in your families, the wrath of God
may quickly go out against you. In a morning or evening, when you are
murmuring, the wrath of God may come quickly upon your families or
persons. You are never so prepared for present wrath as when you are in
a murmuring, discontented fit. Those who stand by and see you in a

murmuring, discontented fit, have cause to say: 'Oh, let us go and take
the censer, let us go to prayer, for we are afraid that wrath is gone out
against this family, against this person.' And it would be a very good thing
for you, who are a godly wife, when you see your husband come home
and start murmuring because things are not going according to his desire,
to go to prayer, and say: 'Lord, pardon the sin of my husband.' And
similarly for a husband to go to God in prayer, falling down and
beseeching him that wrath may not come out against his family for the
murmuring of his wife.
The truth is that at this day there has been, at least lately, as much
murmuring in England as there ever was, and eve in this very respect the
plague has begun. This very judgment comes many times on those who
are discontented in their families, and are always grumbling and
murmuring at any thing that falls out amiss.
I say this text of Scripture in Numbers clearly holds forth that the Lord
brings the plague upon men for this sin of murmuring; he does it in
kingdoms and families, and on particular persons. Though we cannot
always point out the particular sin that God brings it for, yet we should
examine how far we are guilty of the sin of murmuring, because the
Scripture holds forth this so clearly, that when Moses but heard that they
murmured: 'Do they murmur?' he said, 'go forth quickly and seek to
pacify the anger of God, for wrath is gone out, and the plague is begun.'
And you have a notable example of God's heavy displeasure against
murmuring in 1 Corinthians 10:10: 'Neither murmur ye as some of them
also murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.' Take heed of
murmuring as some of them did &emdash; he speaks of the people of
Israel in the wilderness &emdash; for, he says, what came of it? They
were destroyed of the destroyer. Now the destroyer is thought to be the
fiery serpents that were sent among them. They murmured and God sent
fiery serpents to sting them. What! do you think that a certain cross and
affliction stings you? Perhaps such an affliction is upon you, and it seems
to be grievous for the present; what! do your murmur and repine? God
has greater crosses to bring upon you. Those people who murmur for
want of outward comforts, for want of water, and for the want of bread,
murmur, but the Lord sends fiery serpents among them. I would say to a

murmuring heart, 'Woe to you that strive with your maker! Woe to that
man, that woman who strives against their maker! What else are you
doing but striving against your maker? Your maker has the absolute
disposal of you, and will you strive against him? What is the murmuring,
discontented heart of yours doing but wrangling and contending and
striving even with God himself? Oh, woe to him who strives against his
maker! I may further say to you, as God spoke to Job, when he was
impatient (
Job 38:1, 2): 'Now God spake', says the text, 'out of the whirlwind, and
said, Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?'
So, do you speak against God's way, and his providences which have
taken place concerning your condition and outward comforts? Who is
this? Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words without knowledge?
Where is the man or woman whose heart is so bold and impudent that
they dare to speak against the administration of God's providence?
10. THERE IS A GREAT CURSE OF GOD UPON MURMURING
AND DISCONTENT; SO FAR AS IT PREVAILS IN ONE WHO IS
WICKED, IT HAS THE CURSE OF GOD UPON IT.
In Psalm 59:15, see what the curse of God is upon wicked and ungodly
men: 'Let them wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not
satisfied.' That is the imprecation and curse upon wicked and ungodly
men, that if they are not satisfied they shall grudge. When you are not
satisfied in your desires and find your heart grudging against God, apply
this Scripture &emdash; what! is the curse of the wicked upon me? This is
the curse that is threatened upon wicked and ungodly ones, that they
shall grudge if they be not satisfied.
And in Deuteronomy 28:67, it is threatened as a curse of God upon men
that they cannot be content with their present condition: 'But they shall
say in the morning, Would God it were even! and at even, Would God it
were morning!' So they lie tossing up and down and cannot be content
with any condition that they are in, because of the sore afflictions that are
upon them.
Therefore it is further threatened as a curse upon them, in the 34th verse,

that they should be mad for the sight of their eyes which they should see:
this is but the extremity of their discontentedness, that is, they shall be so
discontented, that they shall even be mad. Many men and women in
discontented moods are a mad sort of people, and though you may please
yourselves with such a mad kind of behavior, you should know that it is a
curse of God upon men to be given up to a kind of madness for evils
which they imagine have come upon them, and which they fear. In the
47th verse, there is a striking expression to show the curse of God on
murmuring hearts: The Lord threatens the curses which shall be upon
them, and says (verses 45-47): 'The curses shall pursue thee, and they
shall be upon thee for a sign, and for a wonder, and upon thy seed for
ever: Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and
with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things.' God here
threatens to bring this curse upon them, so as to make them a wonder
and a sign to others. Why? Because they served not the Lord with
joyfulness of heart, therefore God would bring such a curse upon them as
would make them a wonder to all that were about them. Oh, how far are
you, then, who have a murmuring heart, from serving the Lord with
joyfulness!
11. THERE IS MUCH OF THE SPIRIT OF SATAN IN A
MURMURING SPIRIT.
The Devil is the most discontented creature in the world, he is the
proudest creature that is, and the most discontented creature, and the
most dejected creature. Now, therefore, so much discontent as you have,
so much of the spirit of Satan you have. It was the unclean spirit that
went up and down and found no rest; so when a man or woman's spirit
has no reset, it is a sign that it has much of the unclean spirit, of the spirit
of Satan, and you should think with yourself, Oh, Lord, have I the spirit of
Satan upon me? Satan is the most discontented spirit that is, and oh! how
much of his spirit have I upon me who can find no rest at all?
12. IF YOU HAVE A MURMURING SPIRIT, YOU MUST THEN
HAVE DISQUIET ALL THE DAYS OF YOUR LIFE.
It is as if a man in a great crowd were to complain that other folks touch
him. While we are in this world God has so ordered things that afflictions

must befall us; and if we will complain and be discontented at every cross
and affliction, why, we must complain and be discontented all the days of
our lives! Indeed, God in just judgment will let things fall out on purpose
to vex those who have vexing spirits and discontented hearts; and
therefore it is necessary that they should live disquieted all their days.
People will not be troubled much if they upset those who are continually
murmuring. Oh, they will have disquiet all their days!
13. FINALLY, THERE IS THIS FURTHER DREADFUL EVIL IN
DISCONTENT AND MURMURING: God may justly withdraw his
care of you, and his protection over you, seeing God cannot please you in
his administration.
We would say so to discontented servants: If you are not pleased, better
yourselves when you will. If you have a servant not content with his diet
and wages, and work, you say, Better yourselves; so may God justly say to
us &emdash; we who profess ourselves servants to him, to be in his work,
and yet are discontented with this thing or that in God's household, God
might justly say &emdash; Better yourselves. What is God should say to
any of you, If my care over you does not please you, then take care of
yourselves, if my protection over you will not please you, then protect
yourselves? Now all things that befall you, befall you through a
providence of God, and if you are those who belong to God, there is a
protection of God over you, and a care of God. If God were to say, 'Well,
you shall not have the benefit of my protection any longer, and I will take
no further care of you', would not this be a most dreadful judgment of
God from Heaven upon you? Take heed what you do then in being
discontented with God's will towards you, for, indeed, on account of
discontent this may befall you. That is the reason why many people, over
whom God's protection has been ver gracious for a time, when they have
thriven abundantly, yet afterwards almost all who behold them may say
of them that they live as if God had cast off his care over them, and as if
God did not care what befell them.
Now then, my brethren, put all these points together, those we spoke of in
the last chapter, and these points that have been added now in this
chapter, for setting out a murmuring and discontented spirit. Oh, what an
ugly face has this sin of murmuring and discontentedness! Oh, what

cause is there that we should lay our hands upon our hearts, and go away
and be humbled before the Lord because of this! Whereas your thoughts
were wont to be exercised about providing for yourselves, and getting
more comforts for yourselves, let the stream of your thoughts now be
turned to humble yourselves for your discontentedness. Oh, that your
hearts may break before God, for otherwise you will fall to it again! Oh,
the wretchedness of man's heart! You find in Scripture, concerning the
people of Israel, how strangely they fell to their murmuring, again and
again. Do but observe three texts of Scripture for that, the first in the 15th
of Exodus at the beginning. There you have Moses and the congregation
singing to God and blessing God for his mercy: 'Then sang Moses and the
children of Israel this song unto the Lord, and spake, saying, I will sing
unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider
hath he thrown into the sea.' And then: 'The Lord is my strength and
song, and he is become my salvation, he is my God and I will prepare him
an habitation, my father's God and I will exalt him.' So he goes on: 'and
who is like unto thee, O Lord, amongst the gods? who is like thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?' Thus their hearts
triumphed in God, but mark, before the chapter is ended, in the 23rd
verse: 'When they came to Marah (in the same chapter) they could not
drink of the waters of Marah for they were bitter, therefore the name of it
was called Marah; and the people murmured against Moses.' After so
great a mercy as this, what unthankfulness was there in their murmuring!
Then God gave them water, but in the very next chapter they fell to their
murmuring. You do not read that they were humbled for their former
murmuring, and therefore they murmur again (Exodus 16:1 ff.): 'All the
congregation of the children of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, etc.
And the whole congregation' (in the second verse) 'of the children of
Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness, and
the chlordane of Israel said unto them, Would to God we had died by the
hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, and
when we did eat bread to the full.' now they want flesh; they wanted
water before, but now they want meat. They fell to murmuring again, they
were not humbled for this murmuring against God, not even when God
gave them flesh according to their desires, but they fell to murmuring
again: they wanted somewhat else. In the very next chapter (they did not

go far), in the
17th of Exodus at the beginning: 'And all the congregation of the children
of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin and pitched in Rephidim;
and there was no water for the people to drink.' Then in the second verse:
'Wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and said, Give us water that
we may drink. And Moses said unto them, Why chide ye with me?
Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?' And in the third verse: 'And the people
thirsted for water, and the people murmured against Moses and said,
Wherefore is this, that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us,
and our children, and our cattle with thirst?' So one time after another, as
soon as ever they had received the mercy, then they were a little quieted,
but they were not humbled. I bring these Scriptures to show this, that if
we have not been humbled for murmuring, when we meet with the next
cross we will fall to murmuring again.

Aggravations of the Sin of Murmuring
Now because it is very hard to work upon a murmuring spirit, there are
many aggravations which we must consider for the further setting out of
the greatness of this sin.
1. To murmur when we enjoy an abundance of mercy; the greater
and the more abundant the mercy that we enjoy, the greater and viler is
the sin of murmuring. For example, when God had newly delivered the
people out of the house of bondage, for them to murmur, because they
lack some few things that they desire, oh, to sin against God after a great
mercy, is a great aggravation, and a most abominable thing. Now, my
brethren, the Lord granted to us this summer, heaped mercies upon us,
one mercy upon another! What a condition were we in at the beginning of
this summer! And what a different condition are we in now! Oh, what a
mercy is it that the Lord has not taken advantage of us, that he has not
made those Scriptures before mentioned good upon us for all our
murmuring! The Lord has gone on with one mercy after another.
We hear of mercy in Bristol, and mercy to our brethren in Scotland. But if
after this anything should befall us that is contrary to us, and we should
be ready to murmur again at once-Oh, let us not so requite God for those
mercies of his! Oh, let us take heed of giving God any ill requital for his
mercies! Oh, give God praise according to his excellent greatness, to his
excellent goodness and grace! And now has God given to you the
contentment of your hearts? Take heed of being the cause of any grief to
your brethren. Do not think that because God has been gracious to you,
that therefore he has given you liberty to bring them into bondage. Oh, let
not there be such an ill effect of God's mercy to you, as for you for to
exclude, by petitioning, or any other way, your brethren whom the Lord
has been pleased to make instruments of your peace; let not that be the
fruit of it, nor to desire anything that yourselves do not yet understand.
God is very jealous of the glory of his mercy, and if any ill use should be
made of the mercy of God after we enjoy it, Oh, it would go to the heart of
God. Nothing is more grievous to the heart of God than the abuse of
mercy, as, for example, if any way that is hard and rigid should be taken

towards our brethren, and those especially whom God has made such
special instruments of good to us, who have been willing to venture their
lives and all for us; if now, when we have our turns served, we let God and
his people and servants who helped to save us shift for themselves as well
as they can. This is a great aggravation of your sin, to sin against the
mercies of God.
For men and women to be discontented in the midst of mercies, in
enjoyment of an abundance of mercies, aggravates the sin of discontent
and murmuring. To be discontented in any afflicted condition is sinful
and evil, but to be discontented when we are in the midst of God's
mercies, when we are not able to count the mercies of God, still to be
discontented because we have not got all we would have, this is a greater
evil. The Lord this summer has multiplied mercies one after another, the
Lord has made this summer a continued miracle of mercy. Never did a
Kingdom enjoy (in so little a space of time) such mercies one upon
another. Now the public mercies of God should quiet our hearts and keep
us from discontent. The sin of discontent for private afflictions is
exceedingly aggravated by the consideration of public mercies to the land.
When the Lord has been so merciful to the land, will you be fretting and
murmuring, because you have not in your family all the comforts that you
would have? Just as it is a great aggravation of a man's evil for him to
rejoice immediately in his own private comforts when the Church is in
affliction; when the public suffers grievous and hard troubles, if any man
shall then rejoice and give liberty to himself, at that time to satisfy his
flesh to the uttermost in all outward comforts, this greatly aggravates his
sin. So on the contrary for any man to be immoderately troubled for any
private afflictions when it goes well with the public, with the Churches, is
a great aggravation of his sin. It may be that when the Church of God was
lowest, and it went worst in other parts, yet you did abate none of the
comforts of your flesh, but gave full liberty to satisfy your flesh as
formerly: Know that this was your sin. So, on the other side, when we
have received such mercies in public, all our private afflictions should be
swallowed up in the public mercies. We should think with ourselves,
Though we be afflicted for our part, yet blessed be God, it goes well with
the Church, and with the public interest. Thus the consideration of that
should mightily quiet our hearts in all our private discontents, and if it

does not do so, know that our sin is much increased by the mercies of
God which are abroad. Now shall God's mercies aggravate our sins? This
is a sad thing, it is to turn the mercies of God to be our misery. Did you
not pray to God for these mercies which God sent of late to the public?
these great victories that God has given, did you not pray for them? Now
you have them, is not there enough in them to quiet your heart for some
private trouble you meet with in your family? Is not there goodness
enough there to cure your discontent? Certainly, such mercies were not
so worthy to be prayed for, except they have so much excellence in them
as to countervail some private afflictions.
Public mercies are the aggravation of private discontent. It is so of public
discontent too: if we receive so many public mercies, and yet if every
thing goes not in the public according as we desire, we are discontented
at that, it will greatly aggravate our sin. God may say, 'What! shall I
bestow such mercies upon people, and yet, if they have not everything
they would have, they will be discontented?' Oh, it is exceedingly evil. So
in particular, with the mercies that concern yourself, your family: if you
would consider, you have many more mercies than afflictions-I dare
boldly aver it concerning anyone in this congregation. Let your afflictions
be what they will, there is not one of you, but has more mercies than
afflictions.
Objection. You will say, Yes, but you do not know what our afflictions are;
our afflictions are such as you do not conceive of, because you do not feel
them.
Answer. Though I cannot know what your afflictions are, yet I know what
your mercies are, and I know they are so great that I am sure there can be
no afflictions in this world as great as the mercies you have. If it were only
this mercy, that you have this day of grace and salvation continued to
you: it is a greater mercy than any affliction. Set any affliction beside this
mercy and see which would weigh heaviest; this is certainly greater than
any affliction. That you have the day of grace and salvation, that you are
not now in hell, this is a greater mercy. That you have the sound of the
Gospel still in your ears, that you have the use of your reason: this is a
greater mercy than your afflictions. That you have the use of your limbs,
your senses, that you have the health of your bodies; health of body is a

greater mercy than poverty is an affliction. No man who is rich, if he is
wise, and has a sickly body, would not part with all his riches that he
might have his health. Therefore your mercies are more than your
afflictions.
We find in Scripture how the Holy Ghost aggravates the sin of discontent
from the consideration of mercies: you have a notable Scripture for this in
the
16th of Numbers, verse 8 and following. it is a speech of Moses to Korah
and his company, when they murmured: 'And Moses said unto Korah,
Hear, I pray you, ye sons of Levi' (that is something, that you are sons of
Levi), 'Seemeth it but a small thing unto you that the God of Israel hath
separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to
himself to do the service of the tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand before
the congregation to minister unto them?' Korah and his company were
murmuring, but mark how Moses aggravates this: "Seemeth it a small
thing unto you that the God of Israel hath separated you from the
congregation of Israel to bring you near to himself to do the service of the
tabernacle of the Lord? etc.' You see, it is a great honor that God puts
upon a man, a great mercy that he bestows upon any man, to separate
him in the service for himself, to come near to him, to employ him in the
service of the tabernacle, to minister to the congregation in holy things.
This is a great mercy, and indeed, it is such a mercy that one would think
there should be none upon whom God bestows such a mercy who would
have a murmuring heart for any affliction. It is true, many ministers of
God meet with hard things which might discourage them, and trouble
and grieve their spirits; but this consideration, that God is pleased to
employ them in such a service near to himself, that though they cannot
do good to themselves, yet they may do good to others, this should quiet
them. And yet in the 10th verse: 'And he hath brought thee near to him,
and all thy brethren the sons of Levi with thee, and seek ye the priesthood
also?' Have you not enough already? But still you are discontented with
what you have, and must have more; do you seek still more? 'Seek ye the
priesthood also? For which cause both thou and all thy company are
gathered together against the Lord: and what is Aaron, that ye murmur
against him?' What, has God given you such things, and yet will you be

murmuring, because you cannot have more? Methinks that this place
should keep ministers from murmuring, no matter what afflictions and
crosses, and unkind dealings they meet with from men, yet still they
should go on with hearts quiet and discomforted in the work that God has
set them about, and labor to countervail all their afflictions by being more
abundant in the work of the Lord. That is the first text of Scripture that
shows how the mercies we enjoy are aggravations of the sin of
murmuring.
Then a second Scripture is in the 2nd of Job, verse 10. It is a speech of
Job to his wife: What? said Job, when his wife would have him curse God
and die, which was a degree beyond murmuring, Why, he said, 'thou
speakest as one of the foolish women. Shall we receive good at the hand
of God and not evil?' You see, Job helped himself against all murmuring
thoughts against the ways of God, with this consideration, that he had
received so much good from the Lord. What though we receive evil, yet
do we not receive good as well as evil? Let us set one against the other:
that is the way we should go. In the
7th chapter of Ecclesiastes, the 14th verse, you find a notable Scripture
whereby you may see what course is to be taken when the heart rises in
murmuring: 'In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity
consider.' What should they consider? Mark what follows: 'God also hath
set the one over against the other, to the end that man should find
nothing after him.' 'God also hath set the one over against the other,'
thus, when you are in prosperity, then indeed every man can be joyful,
but what if afflictions befall you, what then? Then consider- consider
what? 'That God hath set one over against the other'; you have a great
deal of affliction, and you have had a great deal of prosperity, you have
many troubles, and you have had many mercies: make one column of
mercies, and one column of afflictions, and write one against the other,
and see if God has not filled one column as full as the other. You look
altogether upon your afflictions, but look upon your mercies also.
For instance, it may be God has afflicted you in one child, but he has been
merciful to you in another child: set one against the other. God afflicted
David in Absalom, but he was merciful to David in Solomon, and,
therefore, when David cried out: 'Oh Absalom, my son, my son,' it would

have quieted him. And it may be God has been merciful to you in a wife,
or in your husband: set that against your affliction. It may be, God crosses
you in your possessions, but that he employs you in his service. It may be,
you are afflicted in some of your friends, but you have other friends who
are great mercies to you, and therefore you should set one against the
other; and it concerns you to do so, for those mercies will be aggravations
of your sins, and you had better make God's mercies a means to lessen
your sins, than to be the aggravation of your sins. If you do not make the
mercies of God help you against your murmuring, you will make them
aggravations of the sin of murmuring.
Take but this one further consideration, and if you will but work it on
your hearts, I hope you may find a great deal of power in it. You find
afflictions, and your hearts are troubled and murmur; consider how God's
mercies aggravate this sin. in the midst of our sins we reckon that God
should accept our services. Do but consider thus: if in the midst of our
many sins we hope that God will accept our poor services, why, then,
should we not in the midst of our afflictions bless God for his many
mercies? Shall God be thus gracious to us that, notwithstanding our
many sins, yet he will not cast away our poor duties and services that we
perform? then why should not we in the midst of our sufferings accept
what mercies we have, and not slight them and disregard them? If you, in
the midst of God's mercies, are not willing to bear the afflictions that God
lays upon you, then it is just with God that, in the midst of your sins, he
should not regard any of your duties. Now is there not as much power in
your manifold sins to cause God to reject your duties and services, as
there is power in afflictions (in the midst of many mercies) to take off
your heart from being affected with God's mercies? And that is the first
aggravation of the sin of murmuring, to murmur in the midst of mercies.
2. A SECOND AGGRAVATION OF THE SIN OF MURMURING
IS, When we murmur for small things. Naaman's servant said to him,
Father (for so he called him), if the prophet had required you to do some
great thing, would not you have done it? How much more this little thing.
So I say, if the Lord had required you to suffer some great thing, would
not you have been willing to suffer? How much more this little thing! I
remember reading in Seneca a Heathen, that he has this comparison

which is a very fine one to set out the great evil of murmuring over small
afflictions: he says, Suppose a man has a very fine house to dwell in, and
he has beautiful orchards and gardens, set about with handsome tall trees
for ornament. If this man should now murmur because the wind blows a
few leaves off his trees, what a most unreasonable thing it would be, for
him to be weeping, and wringing his hands over the loss of a few leaves,
when he has plenty of all kinds of fruit? Thus it is with many, says Seneca,
though they have a great many comforts about them, yet some little thing,
the blowing off of a few leaves from them is enough to disquiet him. So
for us to murmur, not because we have not got such a thing as we have
need of, but because we have not got what possibly we might have: this is
a very great sin.
Suppose God gives a woman a child who has all his limbs and parts
complete, a child who is very comely, with excellent gifts, wit and
memory, but maybe there is a wart growing on the finger of the child, and
she murmurs at it, and, Oh, what an affliction this is to her! She is so
taken up with it, that she forgets to give any thanks to God for her child,
and all the goodness of God to her in the child is swallowed up in that.
Would you not say that this was folly and a very great evil in a woman to
do so? Truly, our afflictions, if we weighed them aright, are but such
things in comparison of our mercies Rebekah had a mighty desire to have
children, but because she found some trouble in her body when she was
with child, said, 'Why am I thus?' As if she should say, I had rather have
none, only because she found a little pain and trouble in her body. To be
discontented when the affliction is small and little that increases very
much the sin of murmuring. It is too much for anyone to murmur over
the heaviest cross that can befall one in this world, but to be discontented
and murmur over some small things, that is worse. I have read of
someone who, when he lay upon a heap of damask-roses, complained
that one of the rose leaves lay double under him. So we are ready thus for
very small things to make complaints, and to be discontented with our
condition, and that is a second aggravation.
3. FOR MEN OF GIFTS AND ABILITIES TO WHOM GOD HAS
GIVEN WISDOM, TO BE DISCONTENTED AND MURMUR, IS
MORE THAN IF OTHERS DO IT.
