PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 14
The Glory of Christ in Communication to Believers


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 10. The Glory of Christ in Communication to Believers.

if we have not another, and that a more excellent way of beholding him, than they have who behold him, as they suppose, in images
and crucifixes, they would seem to have the advantage of us; for their minds will really be affected with somewhat, ours with nothing
at all. And by the pretence thereof, they inveigle the carnal affections of men ignorant of the power of the gospel, to become their
proselytes. For having lived, it may be, a long time without any the least experience of a sensible impression on their minds, or a
transforming power from the representation of Christ in the gospel, upon their very first religious, devout application unto these
images, they find their thoughts exercised, their minds affected, and some present change made upon them.
But there was a difference between the person of David and an image with a bolster of goat’s hair, though the one were laid in the
room and place of the other; and there is so between Christ and an image, though the one be put into the place of the other. Neither
do these things serve unto any other end, but to divert the minds of men from faith and love to Christ; giving them some such
satisfactions in the room of them, as that their carnal affections do cleave unto their idols. And indeed it does belong unto the wisdom
of faith, or we stand in need of spiritual light, to discern and judge between the working of natural affections towards spiritual objects,
on undue motives by undue means with indirect ends, – wherein all Papal devotion consists, – and the spiritual exercise of grace in
those affections duly fixed on spiritual objects.
But, as was said, it is a real experience of the efficacy that there is in the spiritual beholding of the glory of Christ by faith, as proposed
in the Gospel, to strengthen, increase, and excite all grace unto its proper exercise, so changing and transforming the soul gradually
into his likeness, which must secure us against all those pretences; and so I return from this digression.
Hereby we may understand whether the Lord does so withdraw himself as that we do not, as that we cannot, behold his glory by faith
in a due manner; – which is the thing inquired after. For if we grow weak in our graces, unspiritual in our frames, cold in our
affections, or negligent in the exercise of them by holy meditation, it is evident that he is at a great distance from us, so as that we do
not behold his glory as we ought. If the weather grow cold, herbs and plants do wither, and the frost begins to bind up the earth, all
men grant that the sun is withdrawn, and makes not his wonted approach unto us. And if it be so with our hearts, that they grow
cold, frozen, withering, lifeless, in and unto spiritual duties, it is certain that the Lord Christ is in some sense withdrawn, and that we
do not behold his glory. We retain notions of truth concerning his person, office, and grace; but faith is not in constant exercise as to
real views of him and his glory. For there is nothing more certain in Christian experience than this is, that while we do really by faith
behold the glory of Christ, as proposed in the Gospel, the glory of his person and office, as before described, and so abide in holy
thoughts and meditations thereof, especially in our private duties and retirements, all grace will live and thrive in us in some measure,
especially love unto his person, and therein unto all that belongs unto him. Let us but put it to the trial, and we shall infallibly find the
promised event.
Do any of us find decays in grace prevailing in us; – deadness, coldness, lukewarmness, a kind of spiritual stupidity and senselessness
coming upon us? Do we find an unreadiness unto the exercise of grace in its proper season, and the vigorous acting of it in duties of
communion with God, and would we have our souls recovered from these dangerous diseases? Let us assure ourselves there is no
better way for our healing and deliverance, yea, no other way but this alone, – namely, the obtaining a fresh view of the glory of
Christ by faith, and a steady abiding therein. Constant contemplation of Christ and his glory, putting forth its transforming power
unto the revival of all grace, is the only relief in this case; as shall farther be showed afterward.
Some will say, that this must be effected by fresh supplies and renewed communications of the Holy Spirit. Unless he fall as dew and
showers on our dry and barren hearts, – unless he cause our graces to spring, thrive, and bring forth fruit, – unless he revive and
increase faith, love, and holiness in our souls, – our backsliding will not be healed, nor our spiritual state be recovered. Unto this end is
he prayed for and promised in the Scripture. See Cant. 4: 16; Isa. 44: 3, 4; Ezek. 11: 19; 36: 26; Hos. 14: 5, 6. And so it is. The
immediate efficiency of the revival of our souls is from and by the Holy Spirit. But the inquiry is, in what way, or by what means, we
may obtain the supplies and communications of him unto this end. This the apostle declares in the place insisted on: We, beholding
the glory of Christ in a glass, “are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord.” It is in the
exercise of faith on Christ, in the way before described, that the Holy Spirit puts forth his renewing, transforming power in and upon
our souls. This, therefore, is that alone which will retrieve Christians from their present decays and deadness.
Some complain greatly of their state and condition; none so dead, so dull and stupid as they; – they know not whether they have any
spark of heavenly life left in them. Some make weak and faint endeavours for a recovery, which are like the attempts of a man in a
dream, wherein he seems to use great endeavours without any success. Some put themselves unto multiplied duties. Howbeit, the
generality of professors seem to be in a pining, thriftless condition. And the reason of it is, because they will not sincerely and
constantly make use of the only remedy and relief; like a man that will rather choose to pine away in his sickness with some useless,
transient refreshments, than apply himself unto a known and approved remedy, because, it may be, the use of it is unsuited unto
some of his present occasions. Now this is, to live in the exercise of faith in Christ Jesus. This himself assures us of, John 15: 4, 5,
“Abide in me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me.
I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that abideth in me, and I in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit; for without me ye can do
nothing”.
There is a twofold coming unto Christ by believing. The first is that we may have life; – that is, a spring and principle of spiritual life
communicated unto us from him: for he is “our life,” Col. 3: 4, and “because he liveth, we live also,” John 14: 19. Y ea, it is not so
much we that live, as he liveth in us, Gal. 2: 19, 20. And unbelief is a not coming unto him, that we may have life, John 5: 40. But,
secondly, there is also a coming unto him by believers in the actual exercise of faith, that they may “have this life more abundantly,”
John 10: 10; that is, such supplies of grace as may keep their souls in a healthy, vigorous acting of all the powers of spiritual life. And
as he reproacheth some that they would not come unto him that they might have life, so he may justly reprove us all, that we do not
so come unto him in the actual exercise of faith, as that we might have this life more abundantly.
(2.) When the Lord Christ is near us, and we do behold his glory, he will frequently communicate spiritual refreshment in peace,
consolation, and joy unto our souls. We shall not only hereby have our graces excited with respect unto him as their object, but be
made sensible of his acting toward us in the communications of himself and his love unto us. When the Sun of Righteousness ariseth
on any soul, or makes any near approach thereunto, it shall find “healing under his wings;” this beams of grace shall convey by his
Spirit holy spiritual refreshment thereunto. For he is present with us by his Spirit, and these are his fruits and effects, as he is the
Comforter, suited unto his office, as he is promised unto us.

Comforter, suited unto his office, as he is promised unto us.
Many love to walk in a very careless, unwise profession. So long as they can hold out in the performance of outward duties, they are
very regardless of the greatest evangelical privileges, – of those things which are the marrow of divine promises, – all real endeavours
of a vital communion with Christ. Such are spiritual peace, refreshing consolations, ineffable joys, and the blessed composure of
assurance. Without some taste and experience of these things, profession is heartless, lifeless, useless; and religion itself a dead carcass
without an animating soul. The peace which some enjoy is a mere stupidity. They judge not these things to be real which are the
substance of Christ’s present reward; and a renunciation whereof would deprive the church of its principal supportments and
encouragements in all its sufferings. It is a great evidence of the power of unbelief, when we can satisfy ourselves without an
experience in our own hearts of the great things, in this kind of joy, peace, consolation, assurance, that are promised in the Gospels.
For how can it be supposed that we do indeed relieve the promises of things future, – namely, of heaven, immortality, and glory, the
faith whereof is the foundation of all religions, – when we do not relieve the promises of the present reward in these spiritual
privileges? And how shall we be thought to believe them, when we do not endeavour after an experience of the things themselves in
our own souls, but are even contented without them? But herein men deceive themselves. They would very desirously have
evangelical joy, peace, and assurance, to countenance them in their evil frames and careless walking. And some have attempted to
reconcile these things, unto the ruin of their souls. But it will not be. Without the diligent exercise of the grace of obedience, we shall
never enjoy the grace of consolation. But we must speak somewhat of these things afterward.
I t is peculiarly in the view of the glory of Christ, in his approaches unto us, and abiding with us, that we are made partakers of
evangelical peace, consolation, joy, and assurances. These are a part of the royal train of his graces, of the reward wherewith he is
accompanied. “His reward is with him.” Wherever he is graciously present with any, these things are never wanting in a due measure
and degree, unless it be by their own fault, or for their trial. In these things does he give the church of his loves, Cant. 7: 12. “For if any
man,” saith he, “love me, I will love him, and will manifest myself unto him,” John 14: 21; – “yea, I and the Father will come unto
him, and make our abode with him,” verse 23; and that so as to “sup with him,” Rev. 3: 20; – which, on his part, can be only by the
communication of those spiritual refreshments. The only inquiry is, by what way and means we do receive them? Now, I say this is in
and by our beholding of the glory of Christ by faith, 1 Peter 1: 8, 9. Let that glory be rightly stated, as before laid down, – the glory of
his person, his office, his condescension, exaltation, love, and grace; let faith be fixed in a view and contemplation of it, mix itself with
it, as represented in the glass of the gospel, meditate upon it, embrace it, and virtue will proceed from Christ, communicating spiritual,
supernatural refreshment and joy unto our souls. Y ea, in ordinary cases, it is impossible that believers should have a real prospect of
this glory at any time, but that it will in some measure affect their hearts with a sense of his love; which is the spring of all consolation
in them. In the exercise of faith on the discoveries of the glory of Christ made unto us in the Gospel, no man shall ever totally want
such intimations of his love, yea, such effusion of it in his heart, as shall be a living spring of those spiritual refreshments, John 4: 14;
Rom 5: 5. When, therefore, we lose these things, as unto a sense of them in our souls, it is evident that the Lord Christ is withdrawn,
and that we do not behold his glory.
But I cannot here avoid another short digression. There are those by whom all these things are derided as distempered fancies and
imaginations; yea, such things have been spoken and written of them as contain a virtual renunciation of the gospel, the powers of
the world to come, and the whole work of the Holy Ghost as the comforter of the church. And hereby all real intercourse between the
person of Christ and the souls of them that do believe is utterly overthrown; – reducing all religion to an outward show, and a
pageantry fitter for a stage than that temple of God which is in the minds of men. According unto the sentiments of these profane
scoffers, there is no such thing as the shedding abroad of the love of God in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, nor as the witnessing of the
Spirit of God with our spirits that we are the children of God, from which these spiritual joys and refreshments are inseparable as their
necessary effects; – no such thing as the lifting up of the light of God’s countenance upon us, which will put gladness into our hearts,
that gladness which compriseth all the things mentioned; – no such thing as rejoicing upon “believing, with joy unspeakable and full
of glory;” – no such thing as Christ’s showing and manifesting himself unto us, supping with us, and giving us of his loves; – that the
divine promises of a “feast of fat things, and wine well refined,” in gospel mercies, are empty and insignificant words; – that all those
ravishing joys and exultations of spirit that multitudes of faithful martyrs of old and in later ages have enjoyed, by a view of the glory
of God in Christ and a sense of his love, whereunto they gave testimony unto their last moments in the midst of their torments, were
but fancies and imaginations. But it is the height of impudence in these profane scoffers, that they proclaim their own ignorance of
those things which are the real powers of our region.
Others there are who will not deny the truth of these things. They dare not rise up in contradiction unto those express testimonies of
the Scripture wherewith they are confirmed. And they do suppose that some are partakers of them, at least there were so formerly;
but as for their parts, they have no experience of them, nor do judge it their duty to endeavour after it. They can make a shift to live
on hopes of heaven and future glory; as unto what is present, they desire no more, but to be found in the performance of some duties
in answer unto their convictions, – which gives them that sorry peace which they do enjoy. So do many countenance themselves in
their spiritual sloth and unbelief, keeping themselves at liberty to seek for refreshment and satisfaction in other things, whilst those of
the gospel are despised. And these things are inconsistent. While men look for their chief refreshment and satisfaction in temporal
things, it is impossible they should seek after those that are spiritual in a due manner. And it must be confessed, that when we have a
due regard unto spiritual, evangelical consolations and joys, it will abate and take off our affections unto, and satisfaction in, present
enjoyments, Phil. 3: 8, 9.
But there is no more sacred truth than this, that where Christ is present with believers, – where he is not withdrawn for a season from
them, where they live in the view of his glory by faith as it is proposed unto them in the gospel, – he will give unto them, at his own
seasons such intimations of his love, such supplies of his Spirit, such holy joys and rejoicings, such repose of soul in assurance, as shall
refresh their souls, fill them with joy, satisfy them with spiritual delight, and quicken them unto all acts of holy communion with
himself.
Let no such dishonour be reflected on the gospel, that whereas the faith of it, and obedience unto it, are usually accompanied with
outward troubles, afflictions, persecution, and reproaches, as we are foretold they should be, – that it does not by its inward
consolations and divine refreshments, outbalance all those evils which we may undergo upon the account of it. So to suppose, is
expressly contrary to the promise of Christ himself, who has assured us that even “nun en toi kairoi toutoi”, “even now in this life,” in
this world, distinct from eternal life in the world to come, we shall receive a hundred-fold recompense for all that we can lose or suffer
for his sake, Mark 10: 30; – as also unto the experience of them who, in all ages, have “taken joyfully the spoiling of their goods, as

knowing in themselves” (by the experience which they have of its first-fruits) that they “have in heaven a better and an enduring
substance,” Heb. 10: 34. If we come short in a participation of these things, if we are strangers unto them, the blame is to be laid on
ourselves alone, as it shall be immediately declared.
Now, the design of the Lord Christ, in thus withdrawing himself from us, and hiding his glory from our view, being the exercise of our
grace, and to stir us up unto diligence in our inquiries after him, here lieth our guidance and direction in this case. Do we find
ourselves lifeless in the spiritual duties of religion? Are we strangers unto the heavenly visits of consolation and joys, – those visitations
of God whereby he preserves our souls? Do we seldom enjoy a sense of the “shedding abroad of his love in our hearts by the holy
Ghost?” We have no way of recovery but this alone, – to this “strong tower” must we turn ourselves as “prisoners of hope,” unto
Christ must we look, that we may be saved. It is a steady view or contemplation of his glory by faith alone that will bring in all these
things in a lively experience into our hearts and souls.
Again, in the second place, it is from ourselves principally, if we lose the view of the glory of Christ, and the exercise of faith be
obstructed therein. All our spiritual disadvantages do arise from ourselves. It is the remainder of lusts and corruptions in us, either
indulged by sloth and negligence or excited and inflamed by Satan’s temptations, that do obstruct us in this duty. Whilst they are in
any disorder or disturbance, it is in vain for us to expect any clear view of this glory.
That view of the glory of Christ whereof we treat consists in two things, – namely, its especial nature, and its necessary adjunct or
effect. The first is, a ritual perception or understanding of it as revealed in the Scriptures. For the revelation of the glory of his person,
office, and grace, is the principal subject of them, and the principal object of our faith. And the other consists in multiplied thoughts
about him, with acting of faiths in love, trust, delight, and longing after the full enjoyment of him, 1 Peter 1: 8. If we satisfy ourselves
in mere notions and speculations about the glory of Christ as doctrinally revealed unto us, we shall find no transforming power or
efficacy communicated unto us thereby. But when, under the conduct of that spiritual light, our affections do cleave unto him with
full purpose of heart, our minds are filled with the thoughts of him and delight in him, and faith is kept up unto its constant exercise in
trust and affiance on him, – virtue will proceed from him to purify our hearts, increase our holiness, strengthen our graces, and to fill
us sometimes “with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” This is the just temperature of a state of spiritual health, – namely, when our
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in Christ does answer the means of it which we enjoy, and when our affections unto Christ
do hold proportion unto that light; and this according unto the various degrees of it, – for some have more, and some have less.
Where light leaves the affections behind, it ends in formality or atheism; and where affections outrun light, they sink in the bog of
superstition, doting on images and pictures, or the like. But where things go not into these excesses, it is better that our affections
exceed our light from the defect of our understandings, than that our light exceed our affections from the corruption of our wills. In
both these is the exercise of faith frequently interrupted and obstructed by the remainder of corruption in us, especially if not kept
constantly under the disciplines of mortification, but some way indulged unto. For, – First, The steam of their disorder will cloud and
darken the understanding, that it shall not be able clearly to discern any spiritual object,- least of all the greatest of them. There is
nothing more acknowledged, even in things natural and moral, than that the disorder of the passions and affections will blind, darken,
and deceive the mind in its operations. And it is much more so in things spiritual, wherein that disorder is an immediate rebellion
against its proper conducting light; that is, against the light and rule of grace.
There are three sorts of them unto whom the goes is preached, in whom there are various obstructions of this view.
1. There is in obstinate unbelievers a darkness, that is an effect of the power of Satan on their minds, in blinding them, which makes it
impossible for them to behold any thing of the glory of Christ. So the apostle declares it, “If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost: in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who
is the image of God, should shine unto them,” 2 Cor. 4: 3, 4. Of these we do not speak.
2. There is in all men a corrupt, natural darkness; or such a depravation of their minds by nature, as that they cannot discern this
glory of Christ in a due manner. Hence “the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehended it not,” John 1: 5. For “the
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned,” 1 Cor. 2: 14. Hence it is, that although Christ be preached among us continually, yet there are very few who
discern any glory or beauty in him for which he should be desired, as the prophet complaint, Isa. 53: 1, 2. But I speak not of this
natural darkness in general. But even these persons have their minds filled with prejudices against the gospel, and darkened as unto
the glory of Christ, according as corrupt lusts and affections are prevalent in them. See John 1: 46; 12: 43. Hence is the difference that
is among the common hearers of the Word. For although no man can do any thing of himself for the receiving of Christ and the
beholding of his glory, without the especial aid of the grace of God (Matt. 11: 25; John 6: 44, 45), yet some may make more
opposition unto believing, and lay more hindrances in their own way, than others; which is done by their lusts and corruptions.
3. There are those in whom both these evils are cured by faith, wherein the eyes of our understandings are enlightened to perceive and
discern spiritual things, Eph. 1: 16-18. But this cure is wrought in this life but in part, 1 Cor. 13: 12. And in this cure, by a supply of a
principle of saving light unto our minds, there are many degrees. For some have a clearer light than others, and thereby a more clear
discerning of the mystery of the wisdom of God, and of the glory of Christ therein. But whatever be our attainments herein, that
which obstructs this light, which hinders it from shining in a due manner, that obstructs and hinders faith in its view of the glory of
Christ. And this is done by the remainders of corrupted nature in us, when they act in any prevalent degree. For they darken the mind,
and weaken it in its spiritual operations. That is, where any corrupt and inordinate affections, as love of the world, cares about it,
inclinations unto sensuality, or the like spiritual disorders, do prevail, faith is weakened in its spiritual acts, especially in discerning and
beholding the glory of Chris. For the mind is rendered unsteady in its inquiries after it, being continually distracted and diverted with
vain thoughts and imaginations.
Persons under the power of such distemper may have the same doctrinal knowledge of the person of Christ, his office, and his grace,
with other men, and the same evidence of its truth fixed on their minds; but when they endeavour a real intuition into the things
themselves, all things are dark and confused unto them, from the uncertainty and instability of their own minds.
This is the sum of what I do design. We have by faith a view of the glory of Christ. This view is weak and unsteady, from the nature of
faith itself, and the way of its proposal unto us as in a glass, in comparison of what by sight we shall attain unto. But, moreover,
where corrupt lusts or inordinate affections are indulged unto, where they are not continually mortified, where any one sin has a

perplexing prevalence in the mind, faith will be so far weakened thereby, as that it can neither see nor meditate upon this glory of
Christ in a due manner. This is the reason why the most are so weak and unstable in the performance of this duty; yea, are almost
utterly unacquainted with it. The light of faith in the minds of men being impaired, clouded, darkened, by the prevalence of
unmortified lusts, it cannot make such discoveries of this glory as otherwise it would do. And this makes the preaching of Christ unto
many so unprofitable as it is.
Secondly, In the view of the glory of Christ which we have by faith, it will fill the mind with thoughts and meditations about him,
whereon the affections will cleave unto him with delight. This, as was said, is inseparable from a spiritual view of his glory in its due
exercise. Every one that has it, must and will have many thoughts concerning, and great affections to him. See the description of these
things, Phil. 3: 8-10. It is not possible, I say, that we should behold the glory of his person, office, and grace, with a due conviction of
our concernment and interest therein, but that our minds will be greatly affected with it, and be filled with contemplations about it.
Where it is not so with any, it is to be feared that they “have not heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape,” whatever they
profess. A spiritual sight of Christ will assuredly produce love unto him; and if any man love him not, he never saw him, – he knows
him not at all. And that is no love which does not beget in us many thoughts of the object beloved. He, therefore, who is partaker of
this grace, will think much of what Christ is in himself, – of what he has done for us, – of his love and condescension, – of the
manifestation of all the glorious excellencies of the divine nature in him, exerted in a way of infinite wisdom and goodness for the
salvation of the church. Thoughts and meditations of these things will abound in us, if we are not wanting unto the due exercise of
faith; and intense, inflamed affections unto him will ensue thereon; at least they will be active unto our own refreshing experience.
And where these things are not in reality (though in some they may be only in a mean and low degree), men do but deceive their own
souls in hopes of any benefit by Christ or the gospel.
This, therefore, is the present case: – Where there are prevailing sinful distemper or inordinate affections in the mind, such as those
before mentioned, as self-love, love of the world, cares and fears about it, with an excessive valuation of relations and enjoyments, –
they will so far cumber and perplex it with a multitude of thoughts about their own objects, as shall leave no place for sedate
meditations on Christ and his glory. And where the thoughts are engaged, the affections, which partly excite them and partly are led
by them, will be fixed also,” Col. 3: 1, 2.
This is that which, in the most, greatly promoteth that imperfection which is in our view of the glory of Christ by faith, in this life.
According to the proportion and degree of the prevalence of affections, corrupt, earthly, selfish, or sensual, filling the heads and hearts
of men with a multitude of thoughts about what they are fixed on or inclined unto; so is faith obstructed and weakened in this work
and duty.
Wherefore, whereas there is a remainder of these lusts, as to the seeds of them, in us all, – though more mortified in some than in
others, yet having the same effects in the minds of all, according to the degree of their remainder, – thence it is, as from an efficacious
cause of it, that our view of the glory of Christ by faith is in many so weak, imperfect and unsteady.
Thirdly, We have interruption given unto the work of faith herein by the temptations of Satan. His original great design, wherever the
gospel is preached, is to blind the eyes of men, that the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine
unto them, or irradiate their minds, 2 Cor. 4: 4. And herein he prevails unto astonishment. Let the light of the gospel in the preaching
of the Word be never so glorious, yet, by various means and artifices, he blinds the minds of the most, that they shall not behold any
thing of the glory of Christ therein. By this means he continues his rule in the children of disobedience. With respect unto the elect,
God overpowers him herein. He shines into their hearts, to give them the knowledge of his glory in the face of Christ Jesus, verse 6.
Y et will not Satan so give over. He will endeavour by all ways and means to trouble, discompose, and darken the minds even of them
that believe, so as that they shall not be able to retain clear and distinct views of this glory. And this he does in two ways.
1 . With some he employs all his engines, uses all his methods of serpentine subtlety, and casts in his fiery darts so to disquiet,
discompose, and deject them, as that they can retain no comfortable views of Christ or his glory. Hence arise fears, doubts, disputes,
uncertainties, with various disconsolations. Hereon they cannot apprehend the love of Christ, nor be sensible of any interest they have
therein, or any refreshing persuasions that they are accepted with him. If such things sometimes shine and beam into their minds, yet
they quickly vanish and appear. Fears that they are rejected and cast off by him, that he will not receive them here nor hereafter, do
come in their place; hence are they filled with anxieties and despondencies, under which it is impossible they should have any clear
view of his glory.
I know that ignorance, atheism, and obstinate security in sensual sins, do combine to despise all these things. But it is no new thing in
the world, that men outwardly professing Christian religion, when they find gain in that godliness, should speak evil of the things
which they know not, and corrupt themselves in what they know naturally, as brute beasts.
2. With others he deals after another manner. By various means he seduceth them into a careless security, wherein they promise
peace unto themselves without any diligent search into these things. Hereon they live in a general presumption that they shall be
saved by Christ, although they know not how. This makes the apostle so earnest in pressings the duty of self-examination on all
Christians, 2 Cor. 13: 5, “Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith; prove your own selves: know ye not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates?” The rule of self-judging prescribed by him is, whether Christ be in us or no; and
in us he cannot be, unless he be received by that faith wherewith we behold his glory. For by faith we receive him, and by faith he
dwelleth in our hearts, John 1: 12; Eph 3: 17.
This is the principal way of his prevailing in the world. Multitudes by his seduction live in great security under the utmost neglect of
these things. Security is granted to be an evil destructive of the souls of men; but then it is supposed to consist only in impenitence for
great and open sins: but to be neglective of endeavouring an experience of the power and grace of the gospel in our own souls, under a
profession of religion, is no less destructive and pernicious than impenitence in any course of sin.
These and the like obstructions unto faith in its operations being added unto its own imperfections, are another cause whence our view
of the glory of Christ in this world is weak and unsteady; so that, for the most part, it does but transiently affect our minds, and not so
fully transform them into his likeness as otherwise it would.

It is now time to consider that sight which we shall have of the glory of Christ in heaven, in comparison of that which we have here
below. Now this is equal, stable, always the same, – without interruption or diversion. And this is evident, both in the causes or means
of it, as also in our perfect deliverance from every thing that might be a hindrance in it, or an obstruction unto it.
1 . We may consider the state of our minds in glory. The faculties of our souls shall then be made perfect, Heb 12: 23, “The spirits of
just men made perfect.” (1.) Freed from all the clogs of the flesh, and all its influence upon them, and restraint of their powers in their
operation (2.) Perfectly purified from all principles of instability and variety, – of all inclinations unto things sensual and carnal, and
all contrivances of self-preservation or advancement, – being wholly transformed into the image of God in spirituality and holiness.
And to take in the state of our bodies after the resurrection; even they also, in all their powers and senses, shall be made entirely
subservient unto the most spiritual actings of our minds in their highest elevation by the light of glory. Hereby shall we be enabled and
fitted eternally to abide in the contemplation of the glory of Christ with joy and satisfaction. The understanding shall be always
perfected with the vision of God, and the affections cleave inseparably to him; – which is blessedness.
The very essential faculties of our souls, in that way and manner of working which, by their union with our bodies, they are confined
unto, are not able to comprehend and abide constantly in the contemplation of this glory. So that, though our sight of it here be dim
and imperfect, and the proposal of it obscure; yet, from the weakness of our minds, we are forced sometimes to turn aside from what
we do discern, as we do our bodily eyes from the beams of the sun when it shines in its brightness. But in this perfect state they are
able to behold and delight in this glory constantly with eternal satisfaction.
But “as for me,” saith David, “I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy likeness,” Ps. 17: 15.
It is Christ alone who is the likeness and image of God. When we awake in the other world, with our minds purified and rectified, the
beholding of him shall be always satisfying unto us. There will be then no satiety, no weariness, no indispositions; but the mind, being
made perfect in all its faculties, powers, and operations, with respect unto its utmost end, which is the enjoyment of God, is satisfied in
the beholding of him for evermore. And where there is perfect satisfaction without satiety, there is blessedness for ever. So the Holy
Spirit affirms of the four living creatures, in the Revelation, “They rest not day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty,” chap. 4: 8. They are continually exercised in the admiration and praises of God in Christ without weariness or interruption.
Herein shall we be made like unto angels.
2. As our minds, in their essential powers and faculties, shall be enabled to comprehend and acquiesce in this glory of Christ; so the
means or instrument of the beholding of it is much more excellent than faith, and in its kind absolutely perfect; as has impart been
before declared. This is vision or sight. Here we walk by faith; there, by sight. And this sight is not an external aid, like a glass helping
the weakness of the visive faculty to see things afar off; but it is an internal power, or an act of the internal power of our minds, where
with they are endowed in a glorified state. Hereby we shall be able to “see him face to face, – to see him as he is,” in a direct
comprehension of his glory; for this sight or visive power shall be given us for this very end, – namely, to enable us so to do. Hereunto
the whole glory of Christ is clear, perspicuous, and evident; which will give us eternal acquiescence therein. Hence shall our sight of
the glory of Christ be invariable and always the same.
3. The Lord Christ will never, in any one instance, on any occasion, so much as one moment, withdraw himself from us, or eclipse the
proposal and manifestation of himself unto our sight. This he does sometimes in this life; and it is needful for us that so he should do.
“We shall ever be with the Lord,” 1 Thess. 4: 17, – without end, without interruption. This is the centre of good and evil as to the
future different states of men. They shall be for ever. Eternity makes them absolutely good on the one hand, and absolutely evil on the
other. To be in hell under the wrath of God is in itself the greatest penal evil; but to be there for ever, without the intermission of
misery or determination of time, is that which renders it the greatest evil unto them who shall be in that condition. So is eternity the
life of future blessedness. “We shall ever be with the Lord,” without limitation of time, without interruption of enjoyment.
There are no vicissitudes in the heavenly state. The new Jerusalem has no temple in it; “for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are
the temple thereof,” Rev. 21: 22. There is no need of instituted means of worship, nor of ordinances of divine service; for we shall need
neither increase of grace nor excitations unto its exercise; the constant, immediate, uninterrupted enjoyment of God and the Lamb
supplieth all. And it has no need of the sun nor of the moon to shine in it; for the glory of God does enlighten it, and the Lamb is the
light thereof. The light of the sun is excellent; howbeit it has its seasons; – after it has shone in its brightest lustre, it gives place to the
night and darkness. So is the light of the moon of great use in the night; but it has its seasons also. Such is the light we have of the
glory of God and the Lamb in this world. Sometimes it is as the light of the sun, which, under the gospel, is sevenfold, as the light of
seven days in one in comparison of the Law, Isa. 30: 26; sometimes as the light of the moon, which giveth relief in the night of
temptations and trials. But it is not constant; we are under a vicissitude of light and darkness, – views of Christ, and a loss of him. But
in heaven the perpetual presence of Christ with his saints makes it always one noon of light and glory.
4. This vision is not in the least liable unto any weakening from internal defects, nor any assaults from temptations, as is the sight of
faith in this life. No doubts or fears, no disturbing darts or injections, shall there have any place. There shall no habit, no quality, no
inclination or disposition remain in our souls, but what shall eternally lead us unto the contemplation of the glory of Christ with
delight and complacency. Nor will there be any defect in the gracious powers of our souls, as unto a perpetual exercise of them; and as
to all other opposing enemies, we shall be in a perpetual triumph over them, 1 Cor. 15: 55-57. The mouth of iniquity shall be stopped
for ever, and the voice of the self-avenger shall be heard no more.
Wherefore, the vision which we shall have in heaven of the glory of Christ is serene, – always the same, always new and indeficient,
wherein nothing can disturb the mind in the most perfect operations of a blessed life. And when all the faculties of the soul can,
without any internal weakness or external hindrances, exercise their most perfect operations on the most perfect object, – therein lies
all the blessedness which our nature is capable of.
Wherefore, whenever in this life we attain any comfortable, refreshing view of the glory of Christ by the exercise of faith on the
revelation of it, with a sense of our interest therein, we cannot but long after, and desire to come unto, this more perfect, abiding,
invariable aspect of it.
