PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 11 God's Sovereignty and the Human Will

The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 7. God's Sovereignty and the Human Will.

89

the dog wags the tail? Or, is it the will, the tail, wags the dog? Is the will the first and chief thing in man, or is it the last thing—to be kept subordinate, and in its place beneath the other faculties? And, is the true philosophy of moral action and its process that of Genesis 3:6: “And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food [senseperception, intelligence], and a tree to be desired [affections], she took and ate thereof [the will]”? (George S. Bishop). These are questions of more than academic interest. They are of practical importance. We believe that we do not go too far when we affirm that the answer returned to these questions is a 1 fundamental test of doctrinal soundness. What is the will? We answer: the will is the faculty of choice, the immediate cause of all action. Choice necessarily implies the refusal of one thing and the acceptance of another. The positive and the negative must both be present to the mind before there can be any choice. In every act of the will there is a preference: the desiring one thing rather than another. Where there is no preference, but complete indifference, there is no volition. 2 To will is to choose, and to choose is to decide between two or more alternatives. But there is something that influences the choice; something that determines the decision. Hence the will cannot be sovereign because it is the servant of that “something.” The will cannot be both sovereign and servant. It cannot be both cause and effect. The will is not causative, because, as we have said, something causes it to choose, therefore that something must be the causative agent. Choice itself is affected by certain considerations, is determined by various influences brought to bear upon the individual himself. Hence, volition is the effect of these considerations and influences; and if the effect, it must be their servant; and if the will is their servant, then it is not sovereign; and if the will is not sovereign, we certainly cannot predicate absolute “freedom” of it. Acts of the will cannot come to pass of themselves—to say they can, is to postulate an uncaused effect. Ex nihilo nihil fit— nothing cannot produce something. 2. Freedom of will? In all ages, however, there have been those who contended for the absolute freedom or sovereignty of the human will. Men will argue that the will possesses a self-determining power. They say, for example, I can turn my eyes up or down, the mind is quite indifferent which I do, the will must decide. But this is a contradiction in terms. This case supposes that I choose one thing in preference to another while I am in a state of complete indifference. Manifestly, both cannot be true. But it may be replied, The mind was quite indifferent until it came to have a preference. Exactly; and at that time [when the mind was indifferent], the will was quiescent 3 too! But the moment indifference vanished, choice was made; and the fact that indifference gave place to preference, overthrows the argument that the will is capable of choosing between 1

Since writing the above we have read an article by the late J. N. Darby entitled, “Man’s So-called Free Will,” that opens with these words: “This re-appearance of the doctrine of free will serves to support that of the pretensions of the natural man to be not irremediably fallen, for this is what such doctrine tends to. All who have never been deeply convicted of sin, all persons in whom this conviction is based on gross external sins, believe more or less in free will.—A.W.P. 2 volition – ability to make conscious choice or decision. 3 quiescent – being at rest, quiet, still; inactive.

90

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

two equal things. As we have said, choice implies the acceptance of one alternative and the rejection of the other or others. That which determines the will is that which causes it to choose. If the will is determined then there must be a determiner. What is it that determines the will? We reply: The strongest motive power that is brought to bear upon it. What this motive power is varies in different cases. With one it may be the logic of reason, with another the voice of conscience, with another the impulse of the emotions, with another the whisper of the Tempter, with another the power of the Holy Spirit; whichever of these presents the strongest motive power and exerts the greatest influence upon the individual himself is that which impels the will to act. In other words, the action of the will is determined by that condition of mind (which in turn is influenced by the world, the flesh, and the devil, as well as by God) that has the greatest degree of tendency to excite volition. To illustrate what we have just said, let us analyze a simple example. On a certain Lord’s day afternoon a friend of ours was suffering from a severe headache. He was anxious to visit the sick, but feared that if he did so his own condition would grow worse and, as a consequence, be unable to attend the preaching of the gospel that evening. Two alternatives confronted him: to visit the sick that afternoon and risk being sick himself, or to take a rest that afternoon (and visit the sick the next day) and probably arise refreshed and fit for the evening service. Now what was it that decided our friend in choosing between these two alternatives? The will? Not at all. True, that in the end the will made a choice; but the will itself was moved to make the choice. In the above case certain considerations presented strong motives for selecting either alternative; these motives were balanced the one against the other by the individual himself, i.e., his heart and mind. The one alternative being supported by stronger motives than the other, decision was formed accordingly, and then the will acted. On the one side, our friend felt impelled by a sense of duty to visit the sick; he was moved with compassion to do so, and thus a strong motive was presented to his mind. On the other hand, his judgment reminded him that he was feeling far from well himself, that he badly needed a rest, that if he visited the sick his own condition would probably be made worse, and in such case he would be prevented from attending the preaching of the gospel that night; furthermore, he knew that on the morrow, the Lord willing, he could visit the sick—and this being so, he concluded he ought to rest that afternoon. Here then were two sets of alternatives presented to our Christian brother: on the one side was a sense of duty plus his own sympathy, on the other side was a sense of his own need plus a real concern for God’s glory, for he felt that he ought to attend the preaching of the gospel that night. The latter prevailed. Spiritual considerations outweighed his sense of duty. Having formed his decision, the will acted accordingly and he retired to rest. An analysis of the above case shows that the mind, or reasoning faculty, was directed by spiritual considerations, and the mind regulated and controlled the will. Hence we say that, if the will is controlled, it is neither sovereign nor free, but is the servant of the mind. It is only as we see the real nature of freedom, and mark that the will is subject to the motives brought to bear upon it, that we are able to discern there is no conflict between two statements of Holy Writ that concern our blessed Lord. In Matthew 4:1 we read, “Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil”; but in Mark 1:12-13 we are told, “And immediately the Spirit driveth him into the wilderness. And he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan.” It is utterly impossible to harmonize these two

7. God’s Sovereignty and the Human Will

91

statements by the Arminian conception of the will. But really there is no difficulty. That Christ was “driven” implies it was by a forcible motive or powerful impulse, such as was not to be resisted or refused; that He was “led” denotes His freedom in going. Putting the two together, we learn that He was driven with a voluntary condescension thereto. So, there is the liberty of man’s will and the victorious efficacy of God’s grace united together: a sinner may be “drawn” and yet “come” to Christ (Joh 6:44)—the “drawing” presenting to him the irresistible motive, the “coming” signifying the response of his will—as Christ was “driven” and “led” by the Spirit into the wilderness. 3. “Heart” Human philosophy insists that it is the will which governs the man, but the Word of God teaches that it is the heart which is the dominating center of our being. Many Scriptures might be quoted in substantiation of this. “Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues of life” (Pro 4:23). “For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders,” etc. (Mar 7:21). Here our Lord traces these sinful acts back to their source and declares that their fountain is the “heart” and not the will! Again, “This people draweth nigh unto me with their mouth, but their heart is far from me” (Mat 15:8). If further proof were required, we might call attention to the fact that the word “heart” is found in the Bible more than three times oftener than is the word “will,” even though nearly half of the references to the latter refer to God’s will! When we affirm that it is the heart and not the will which governs the man, we are not merely striving about words, but insisting on a distinction that is of vital importance. Here is an individual before whom two alternatives are placed; which will he choose? We answer, the one that is most agreeable to himself, i.e., his “heart”—the innermost core of his being. Before the sinner is set a life of virtue and piety, and a life of sinful indulgence; which will he follow? The latter. Why? Because that is his choice. But does that prove the will is sovereign? Not at all. Go back from effect to cause. Why does the sinner choose a life of sinful indulgence? Because he prefers it—and he does prefer it, all arguments to the contrary notwithstanding, though of course he does not enjoy the effects of such a course. And why does he prefer it? Because his heart is sinful. The same alternatives, in like manner, confront the Christian, and he chooses and strives after a life of piety and virtue. Why? Because God has given him a new heart or nature. Hence we say it is not the will that makes the sinner impervious to all appeals to “forsake his way,” but his corrupt and evil heart. He will not come to Christ because he does not want to, and he does not want to because his heart hates Him and loves sin (see Jer 17:9)! In defining the will, we have said above that “the will is the faculty of choice, the immediate cause of all action.” We say the immediate cause, for the will is not the “primary cause” of any action—not any more than the hand is. Just as the hand is controlled by the muscles and nerves of the arm, and the arm by the brain; so the will is the servant of the mind, and the mind, in turn, is affected by various influences and motives that are brought to bear upon it. But, it may be asked, Does not Scripture make its appeal to man’s will? Is it not written, “And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely” (Rev 22:17)? And did not our Lord say, “ye will not come to me that ye might have life” (Joh 5:40)? We answer; the appeal of Scripture is not always made to man’s “will”; other of his faculties are also addressed, for example: “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” “Hear and your soul shall live.” “Look unto

92

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

me and be ye saved.” “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.” “Come now and let us reason together,” “with the heart man believeth unto righteousness,” etc., etc.

C. The Bondage of the Human Will 1. The will in three aspects In any treatise that proposes to deal with the human will, its nature and functions, respect should be had to the will in three different men, namely, unfallen Adam, the sinner, and the Lord Jesus Christ. In unfallen Adam the will was free, free in both directions, free toward good and free toward evil. Adam was created in a state of innocency, but not in a state of holiness, as is so often assumed and asserted. Adam’s will was therefore in a condition of moral equipoise; 4 that is to say, in Adam there was no constraining bias in him toward good or evil, and as such Adam differed radically from all his descendants, as well as from “the man Christ Jesus” (1Ti 2:5). But with the sinner it is far otherwise. The sinner is born with a will that is not in a condition of moral equipoise, because in him there is a heart that is “deceitful above all things and desperately wicked” (Jer 17:9), and this gives him a bias toward evil. So, too, with the Lord Jesus it was far otherwise; He also differed radically from unfallen Adam. The Lord Jesus Christ could not sin, because He was the “Holy One of God.” Before He was born into this world, it was said to Mary, “The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God” (Luk 1:35). Speaking reverently then, we say that the will of the Son of Man was not in a condition of moral equipoise, that is, capable of turning toward either good or evil. The will of the Lord Jesus was biased toward that which is good because, side by side with His sinless, holy, perfect humanity, was His eternal deity. Now in contradistinction from the will of the Lord Jesus, which was biased toward good, and Adam’s will—which, before his fall, was in a condition of moral equipoise, capable of turning toward either good or evil—the sinner’s will is biased toward evil, and therefore is free in one direction only, namely, in the direction of evil. The sinner’s will is enslaved because it is in 5 bondage to and is the servant of a depraved heart. 2. The sinner’s freedom In what does the sinner’s freedom consist? This question is naturally suggested by what we have just said above. The sinner is “free” in the sense of being unforced from without. God never forces the sinner to sin. But the sinner is not free to do either good or evil, because an evil heart within is ever inclining him toward sin. Let us illustrate what we have in mind. I hold in my hand a book. I release it; what happens? It falls. In which direction? Downwards; always downwards. Why? Because, answering the law of gravity, its own weight sinks it. Suppose I desire that book to occupy a position three feet higher; then what? I must lift it; a power outside of that book must raise it. Such is the relationship that fallen man sustains toward God. Whilst divine power up-holds him, he is preserved from plunging still deeper into sin; let that power be withdrawn and he falls—his own weight (of sin) drags him down. God does not push him down anymore than I did that book. Let all divine restraint be removed and every 4 5

equipoise – even balance; equilibrium. For more on this, see The Bondage of the Will by Martin Luther (1483-1546), available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.

7. God’s Sovereignty and the Human Will

93

man is capable of becoming, would become, a Cain, a Pharaoh, a Judas. How then is the sinner to move heavenward? By an act of his own will? Not so. A power outside of himself must grasp hold of him and lift him every inch of the way. The sinner is free, but free in one direction only—free to fall, free to sin. As the Word expresses it: “For when ye were the servants of sin, ye were free from righteousness” (Rom 6:20). The sinner is free to do as he pleases, always as he pleases (except as he is restrained by God)—but his pleasure is to sin.

D. The Impotency of the Human Will 1. Human depravity In the opening paragraph of this chapter, we insisted that a proper conception of the nature and function of the will is of practical importance; nay, that it constitutes a fundamental test of theological orthodoxy or doctrinal soundness. We wish to amplify this statement and attempt to demonstrate its accuracy. The freedom or bondage of the will was the dividing line between Augustinianism6 and Pelagianism, 7 and in more recent times between Calvinism and 8 Arminianism. Reduced to simple terms this means that the difference involved was the affirmation or denial of the total depravity of man. In taking the affirmative, we shall now consider the impotency of the human will. Does it lie within the province of man’s will to accept or reject the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour? Granted that the gospel is preached to the sinner [and] that the Holy Spirit convicts him of his lost condition, does it, in the final analysis, lie within the power of his own will to resist or to yield himself up to God? The answer to this question defines our conception of human depravity. 9 That man is a fallen creature, all professing Christians will allow; but what many of them mean by “fallen” is often difficult to determine. The general impression seems to be that man is now mortal, that he is no longer in the condition in which he left the hands of his Creator, that he is liable to disease, that he inherits evil tendencies—but that, if he employs his powers to the best of his ability, somehow he will be happy at last. O, how far short of the sad truth! 10 Infirmities, sickness, even corporeal death, are but trifles in comparison with the moral and spiritual effects of the Fall! It is only by consulting the Holy Scriptures that we are able to obtain some conception of the extent of that terrible calamity. When we say that man is totally depraved, we mean that the entrance of sin into the human constitution has affected every part and faculty of man’s being. Total depravity means that man is, in spirit and soul and body, the slave of sin and the captive of the devil—walking “according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience” (Eph 2:2). This statement ought not to need arguing: it is a common fact of 6

Augustinianism – doctrine of Augustine of Hippo (354-430), early church theologian in North Africa, teaching the total depravity of man and his absolute dependence upon the grace of God in salvation. 7 Pelagianism – doctrine of Pelagius (c. 354-c. 420), a British monk who argued for a totally free human will to do good. He held that divine grace was bestowed in relation to human merit. His views were condemned as heresy by the Council of Ephesus (431). 8 Arminianism – system of doctrine espoused by Jacobus Arminius (1560-1609), Dutch theologian. He rejected the Reformers’ understanding of predestination, teaching instead that God’s predestination of individuals was based on His foreknowledge of their accepting or rejecting Christ by their own free will. 9 See The Doctrine of Human Depravity by A. W. Pink; available from CHAPEL LIBRARY. 10 corporeal – bodily.

94

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

human experience. Man is unable to realize his own aspirations and materialize his own ideals. He cannot do the things that he would. There is a moral inability that paralyzes him. This is proof positive that he is no free man, but instead, the slave of sin and Satan. “Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts [desires] of your father ye will do” (Joh 8:44). Sin is more than an act or a series of acts; it is a state or condition. It is that which lies behind and produces the acts. Sin has penetrated and permeated 11 the whole of man’s make-up. It has blinded the understanding, corrupted the heart, and alienated the mind from God. And the will has not escaped. The will is under the dominion of sin and Satan, therefore the will is not free. In short, the affections love as they do and the will chooses as it does because of the state of the heart, and because the heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, “There is none that seeketh after God” (Rom 3:11). 2. The power of the sinner’s will We repeat our question: Does it lie within the power of the sinner’s will to yield himself up to God? Let us attempt an answer by asking several others: Can water (of itself) rise above its own level? Can a clean thing come out of an unclean? Can the will reverse the whole tendency and strain of human nature? Can that which is under the dominion of sin originate that which is pure and holy? Manifestly not. If ever the will of a fallen and depraved creature is to move Godward, a divine power must be brought to bear upon it that will overcome the influences of sin that pull in a counter direction. This is only another way of saying, “No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me, draw him” (Joh 6:44). In other words, God’s people must be made willing in the day of His power (Psa 110:3). As said Mr. Darby, If Christ came to save that which is lost, free will has no place. Not that God prevents men from receiving Christ; far from it. But even when God uses all possible inducements, all that is capable of exerting influence in the heart of man, it only serves to show that man will have none of it, that so corrupt is his heart, and so decided his will not to submit to God (however much it may be the devil who encourages him to sin), that nothing can induce him to receive the Lord and to give up sin. If by the words freedom of man they mean that no one forces him to reject the Lord, this liberty fully exists. But if it is said that, on account of the dominion of sin, of which he is the slave, and that voluntarily, he cannot escape from his condition, and make choice of the good— even while acknowledging it to be good, and approving of it—then he has no liberty whatever [italics ours]. He is not subject to the Law, neither indeed can be; hence, they that are in the flesh cannot please God (Rom 8:7-8). The will is not sovereign; it is a servant because influenced and controlled by the other faculties of man’s being. The sinner is not a free agent because he is a slave of sin—this was clearly implied in our Lord’s words, “If the Son shall therefore make you free, ye shall be free indeed” (Joh 8:36). Man is a rational being and as such responsible and accountable to God, but to affirm that he is a free moral agent is to deny that he is totally depraved—i.e., depraved in will as in everything else. Because man’s will is governed by his mind and heart, and because these have been vitiated 12 and corrupted by sin, then it follows that if ever man is to turn 11 12

permeated – diffused through; pervaded; saturated.
vitiated – made ineffective.

7. God’s Sovereignty and the Human Will

95

or move in a Godward direction, God Himself must work in him “both to will and to do of his good pleasure” (Phi 2:13). Man’s boasted freedom is in truth “the bondage of corruption”; he “serves divers lusts and pleasures.” Said a deeply taught servant of God, Man is impotent as to his will. He has no will favorable to God. I believe in free will; but then it is a will only free to act according to nature [italics ours]. A dove has no will to eat carrion; a raven no will to eat the clean food of the dove. Put the nature of the dove into the raven and it will eat the food of the dove. Satan could have no will for holiness. We speak it with reverence: God could have no will for evil. The sinner in his sinful nature could never have a will according to God. For this he must be born again (J. Denham Smith). This is just what we have contended for throughout this chapter: the will is regulated by the nature. 3. Roman Catholicism’s position Among the “decrees” of the Council of Trent (1563), which is the avowed standard of Popery, we find the following. If any one shall affirm that man’s free will, moved and excited by God, does not, by consenting, cooperate with God, the mover and exciter, so as to prepare and dispose itself for the attainment of justification; if moreover, anyone shall say that the human will cannot refuse complying, if it pleases; but that it is unactive, and merely passive; let such an one be accursed. If any one shall affirm that, since the fall of Adam, man’s free will is lost and extin13 guished; or, that it is a thing titular, yea, a name without a thing, and a fiction introduced by Satan into the Church; let such an one be accursed. Thus, those who today insist on the free will of the natural man believe precisely what Rome teaches on the subject! That Roman Catholics and Arminians walk hand in hand may be seen from others of the decrees issued by the Council of Trent: If any one shall affirm that a regenerate and justified man is bound to believe that he is certainly in the number of the elect [which 1Th 1:4-5 plainly teaches—A.W.P.], let such an one be accursed. If any one shall affirm with positive and absolute certainty, that he shall surely have the gift of perseverance to the end [which John 10:28-30 assuredly guarantees—A.W.P.], let him be accursed. 4. Invitation to salvation? In order for any sinner to be saved, three things [are] indispensable: God the Father had to purpose his salvation, God the Son had to purchase it, God the Spirit has to apply it. God does more than “propose” to us; were He only to “invite,” every last one of us would be lost. This is strikingly illustrated in the Old Testament. In Ezra 1:1-3 we read, Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing saying, 13

titular – existing or being such in title only.

96

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, the LORD God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and he hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build the house of the LORD God of Israel. Here was an “offer” made, made to a people in captivity, affording them opportunity to leave and return to Jerusalem, God’s dwelling-place. Did all Israel eagerly respond to this offer? No indeed. The vast majority were content to remain in the enemy’s land. Only an insignificant “remnant” availed themselves of this overture of mercy! And why did they? Hear the answer of Scripture: “Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, with all whose spirit God had stirred up, to go up to build the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem” (Ezr 1:5)! In like manner, God “stirs up” the spirits of His elect when the effectual call comes to them, and not till then do they have any willingness to respond to the divine proclamation. 5. Erroneous preaching The superficial work of many of the professional evangelists of the last fifty years is largely responsible for the erroneous views now current upon the bondage of the natural man, encouraged by the laziness of those in the pew in their failure to “prove all things” (1Th 5:21). The average evangelical pulpit conveys the impression that it lies wholly in the power of the sinner whether or not he shall be saved. It is said that “God has done His part, now man must do his.” Alas, what can a lifeless man do, and man by nature is “dead in trespasses and sins” (Eph 2:1)! If this were really believed, there would be more dependence upon the Holy Spirit to come in with His miracle-working power, and less confidence in our attempts to “win men for Christ.” When addressing the unsaved, preachers often draw an analogy between God’s sending of the gospel to the sinner, and a sick man in bed with some healing medicine on a table by his side: all he needs to do is reach forth his hand and take it. But in order for this illustration to be in any wise true to the picture that Scripture gives us of the fallen and depraved sinner, the sick man in bed must be described as one who is blind (Eph 4:18) so that he cannot see the medicine, his hand paralyzed (Rom 5:6) so that he is unable to reach forth for it, and his heart not only devoid of all confidence in the medicine but filled with hatred against the physician himself (Joh 15:18). O what superficial views of man’s desperate plight are now entertained! Christ came here not to help those who were willing to help themselves, but to do for His people what they were incapable of doing for themselves: “To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house” (Isa 42:7). 14 6. Objection: Why preach? Now, in conclusion, let us anticipate and dispose of the usual and inevitable objection: Why preach the gospel if man is powerless to respond? why did the sinner come to Christ if sin has so enslaved him that he has no power in himself to come? Reply: We do not preach the gospel because we believe that men are free moral agents and therefore capable of receiving Christ, but we preach it because we are commanded to do so (Mar 16:15); and though to them that perish it is foolishness, yet “unto us which are saved it is the power of God” (1Co 1:18). “The 14

For more on this, see Human Inability by Charles Spurgeon (1834-1892), available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.

7. God’s Sovereignty and the Human Will

97

foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the weakness of God is stronger than men” (1Co 1:25). The sinner is dead in trespasses and sins (Eph 2:1), and a dead man is utterly incapable of willing anything; hence it is that “they that are in the flesh [the unregenerate] cannot please God” (Rom 8:8). To fleshly wisdom it appears the height of folly to preach the gospel to those that are dead, and therefore beyond the reach of doing anything themselves. Yes, but God’s ways are different from ours. It pleases God “by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe” (1Co 1:21). Man may deem it folly to prophesy to “dead bones” and to say unto them, “ye dry bones, hear the word of the Lord” (Eze 37:4). Ah! but then it is the word of the Lord, and the words He speaks “they are spirit, and they are life” (Joh 6:63). Wise men standing by the grave of Lazarus might pronounce it an evidence of insanity when the Lord addressed a dead man with the words, “Lazarus, come forth.” Ah, but He Who thus spake was and is Himself the Resurrection and the Life, and at His word even the dead live! We go forth to preach the gospel, then, not because we believe that sinners have within themselves the power to receive the Saviour it proclaims, but because the gospel itself is the power of God unto salvation to everyone that believeth (Rom 1:16), and because we know that “as many as were ordained to eternal life” (Act 13:48) shall believe (Joh 6:37; 10:16—note the shalls!) in God’s appointed time, for it is written “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power” (Psa 110:3)!

E. Summary What we have set forth in this chapter is not a product of “modern thought”; no indeed, it is at direct variance with it. It is those of the past few generations who have departed so far from 15 the teachings of their scripturally-instructed fathers. In the Thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England we read, The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us [being before-hand with us], that we may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will (Article 10). In the Westminster Larger Catechism (adopted by the Presbyterians; 1647) we read, The sinfulness of that state whereinto man fell, consisteth in the guilt of Adam’s first sin, the wont 16 of that righteousness wherein he was created, and the corruption of his nature, whereby he is utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite unto all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that continually (Answer to question 25). So in the Baptists’ Philadelphian Confession of Faith (1742) we read, Man, by his fall into a state of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of will to any spiritual good accompanying salvation; so as a natural man, being altogether averse from good and

15

Thirty-nine Articles – confession of faith of the Church of England and the Episcopal Church, formulated in the Canterbury Convocation in 1563. All ministers were required to acquiesce to them or face penalties or imprisonment. 16 wont – lack

98

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

dead in sin, is not able by his own strength to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto (Chapter 9). 

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

Chapter 6 1. Define “fore-ordain.” Define “prophecies.” 2. What is God’s design for the world? 3. What is it to be “born of the spirit” (see Joh 3:3, 6; 5:24; 2Pe 1:4; Col 1:13)? Describe all that God does when one is born-again. Chapter 7 4. Describe the “free-will” of man; include “alternatives” and “preference.” 5. What are the key points of Romans 3:11, 8:7; John 1:12-13, 5:40? 6. What determines the will; include immediate and primary cause. 7. In what does the sinner’s freedom consist? How is he not free? 8. What is sin? What are its consequences in man?

8 GOD’S SOVEREIGNTY AND HUMAN RESPONSIBILITY “So then every one of us shall give account of himself to God.”—Romans 14:12

A. Introduction 1. Overview In our last chapter, we considered at some length the much debated and difficult question of the human will. We have shown that the will of the natural man is neither sovereign nor free, but instead, a servant and slave. We have argued that a right conception of the sinner’s will—its servitude—is essential to a just estimate of his depravity and ruin. The utter corruption and degradation of human nature is something that man hates to acknowledge, and which he will hotly and insistently deny until he is “taught of God.” Much, very much, of the unsound doctrine that we now hear on every hand is the direct and logical outcome of man’s repudiation of God’s expressed estimate of human depravity. Men are claiming that they are “increased with goods, and have need of nothing,” and know not that they are “wretched, and 1 miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked” (Rev 3:17). They prate about the “Ascent of Man,” and deny his fall. They put darkness for light and light for darkness (Isa 5:20). They boast of the “free moral agency” of man when, in fact, he is in bondage to sin and enslaved by Satan— “taken captive by him at his will” (2Ti 2:26). But if the natural man is not a “free moral agent,” does it also follow that he is not accountable? “Free moral agency” is an expression of human invention; and, as we have said before, to talk of the freedom of the natural man is flatly to repudiate his spiritual ruin. Nowhere does Scripture speak of the freedom or moral ability of the sinner; on the contrary, it insists on his moral and spiritual inability. This is, admittedly, the most difficult branch of our subject. Those who have ever devoted much study to this theme have uniformly recognized that the harmonizing of God’s sovereignty with man’s responsibility is the Gordian knot 2 of theology.

1

Reference is to The Ascent of Man by Henry Drummond (1851-1897), published in 1894, which advocated man’s increasing prosperity due to his innate abilities. 2 Gordian knot – (Greek legend) a knot tied by King Gordius of Phrygia, which an oracle revealed would be undone only by the future ruler of Asia. Alexander the Great, failing to untie it, cut the knot with his sword. Thus: any perplexing problem.

100

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

2. Relation of God’s sovereignty and man’s responsibility The main difficulty encountered is to define the relationship between God’s sovereignty and man’s responsibility. Many have summarily disposed of the difficulty by denying its existence. A certain class of theologians, in their anxiety to maintain man’s responsibility, have magnified it beyond all due proportions until God’s sovereignty has been lost sight of, and in not a few instances flatly denied. Others have acknowledged that the Scriptures present both the sovereignty of God and the responsibility of man, but affirm that in our present finite condition and with our limited knowledge, it is impossible to reconcile the two truths, though it is the bounden duty of the believer to receive both. 3 The present writer believes that it has been too readily assumed that the Scriptures themselves do not reveal the several points that show the conciliation of God’s sovereignty and man’s responsibility. While perhaps the Word of God does not clear up all the mystery (and this is said with reserve), it does throw much light upon the problem, and it seems to us more honoring to God and His Word to prayerfully search the Scriptures for the completer solution of the difficulty. Even though others have thus far searched in vain, that ought only to drive us more and more to our knees. God has been pleased to reveal many things out of His Word during the last century that were hidden from earlier students. Who then dare affirm that there is not much to be learned yet respecting our inquiry! As we have said above, our chief difficulty is to determine the meeting-point of God’s sovereignty and man’s responsibility. To many it has seemed that for God to assert His sovereignty, for Him to put forth His power and exert a direct influence upon man, for Him to do anything more than warn or invite, would be to interfere with man’s freedom, destroy his responsibility, and reduce him to a machine. It is sad indeed to find one like the late Dr. A. T. Pierson, 4 whose writings are generally so scriptural and helpful, saying, “It is a tremendous thought that even God Himself cannot control my moral frame, or constrain my moral choice. He cannot prevent me defying and denying Him, and would not exercise His power in such directions if He could, and could not if He would” (A Spiritual Clinique). It is sadder still to discover that many other respected and loved brethren are giving expression to the same sentiments—sad, because directly at variance with the Holy Scriptures. It is our desire to face honestly the difficulties involved, and to examine them carefully in what light God has been pleased to grant us. The chief difficulties might be expressed thus: first, How is it possible for God to so bring His power to bear upon men that they are prevented from doing what they desire to do, and impelled to do other things they do not desire to do, and yet to preserve their responsibility? Second, How can the sinner be held responsible for the doing of what he is unable to do? And how can he be justly condemned for not doing what he could not do? Third, How is it possible for God to decree that men shall commit certain sins, hold them responsible in the committal of them, and adjudge them guilty because they committed them? Fourth, How can the sinner be held responsible to receive Christ, and be damned for rejecting Him, when God had foreordained him to condemnation? We shall now

3
4

See God’s Sovereignty and Human Responsibility by J. I. Packer; available from CHAPEL LIBRARY. Arthur Tappan Pierson (1837-1911) – American Presbyterian pastor; prolific preacher and writer. He was friends with C. I. Scofield, D. L. Moody, George Müller, and C. H. Spurgeon, whom he succeeded at the Metropolitan Tabernacle, London.

8. God’s Sovereignty and Human Responsibility
