PURITAN GOLD -- The Reformed Pastor by Richard Baxter: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 10
The Oversight of the Flock: The Manner of This Oversight

---

Having thus considered the nature of this oversight, we shall next speak of
the manner; not of each part distinctly, lest we be tedious, but of the whole
in general.
1. The ministerial work must be carried on purely for God and the salvation
of souls, not for any private ends of our own. A wrong end makes all the
work bad as from us, how good soever it may be in its own nature. It is not
serving God, but ourselves, if we do it not for God, but for ourselves. They
who engage in this as a common work, to make a trade of it for their
worldly livelihood, will find that they have chosen a bad trade, though a
good employment. Self-denial is of absolute necessity in every Christian,
but it is doubly necessary in a minister, as without it he cannot do God an
hour’s faithful service. Hard studies, much knowledge, and excellent
preaching, if the ends be not right, is but more glorious hypocritical sinning.
The saying of Bernard is commonly known: ‘Some desire to know merely
for the sake of knowing, and that is shameful curiosity. Some desire to
know that they may sell their knowledge, and that too is shameful. Some
desire to know for reputation’s sake, and that is shameful vanity. But there
are some who desire to know that they may edify others, and that is

praiseworthy; and there are some who desire to know that they themselves
may be edified, and that is wise.’
2. The ministerial work must be carried on diligently and laboriously, as
being of such unspeakable consequence to ourselves and others. We are
seeking to uphold the world, to save it from the curse of God, to perfect the
creation, to attain the ends of Christ’s death, to save ourselves and others
from damnation, to overcome the devil, and demolish his kingdom, to set
up the kingdom of Christ, and to attain and help others to the kingdom of
glory. And are these works to be done with a careless mind, or a lazy hand?
O see, then, that this work be done with all your might! Study hard, for the
well is deep, and our brains are shallow; and, as Cassiodorus says: ‘Here the
common level of knowledge is not to be the limit; here a true ambition is
demonstrated; the more a deep knowledge is sought after, the greater the
honor in attaining it.’ But especially be laborious in the practice and
exercise of your knowledge. Let Paul’s words ring continually in your ears,
‘Necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me, if I preach not the gospel!’
Ever think with yourselves what lieth upon your hands: ‘If I do not bestir
myself, Satan may prevail, and the people everlastingly perish, and their
blood be required at my hand. By avoiding labor and suffering, I shall draw
on myself a thousand times more than I avoid; whereas, by present
diligence, I shall prepare for future blessedness.’ No man was ever a loser
by God.
3. The ministerial work must be carried on prudently and orderly. Milk must
go before strong meat; the foundation must be laid before we attempt to
raise the superstructure. Children must not be dealt with as men of full
stature. Men must be brought into a state of grace, before we can expect
from them the works of grace. The work of conversion, and repentance
from dead works, and faith in Christ, must be first and frequently and
thoroughly taught. We must not ordinarily go beyond the capacities of our
people, nor teach them the perfection, that have not learned the first
principles of religion: for, as Gregory of Nyssa saith: ‘We teach not infants
the deep precepts of science, but first letters, and then syllables, etc. So the
guides of the Church do first propound to their hearers certain documents,
which are as the elements; and so by degrees do open to them the more
perfect and mysterious matters.’ Therefore did the Church take so much

pains with their catechumens, before they baptized them, and would not lay
unpolished stones into the building.
4. Throughout the whole course of our ministry, we must insist chiefly upon
the greatest, most certain, and most necessary truths, and be more seldom
and sparing upon the rest. If we can but teach Christ to our people, we shall
teach them all. Get them well to heaven, and they will have knowledge
enough. The great and commonly acknowledged truths of religion are those
that men must live upon, and which are the great instruments of destroying
men’s sins, and raising the heart to God. We must, therefore, ever have our
people’s necessities before our eyes. To remember the ‘one thing needful’
will take us off gauds and needless ornaments, and unprofitable
controversies. Many other things are desirable to be known; but this must
be known, or else our people are undone for ever. I confess I think
NECESSITY should be the great disposer of a minister’s course of study
and labor. If we were sufficient for everything, we might attempt
everything, and take in order the whole Encyclopaedia: but life is short, and
we are dull, and eternal things are necessary, and the souls that depend on
our teaching are precious. I confess, necessity hath been the conductor of
my studies and life. It chooseth what book I shall read, and tells me when,
and how long. It chooseth my text, and makes my sermon, both for matter
and manner, so far as I can keep out my own corruption. Though I know the
constant expectation of death hath been a great cause of this, yet I know no
reason why the most healthy man should not make sure of the most
necessary things first, considering the uncertainty and shortness of all men’s
lives. Xenophon thought, ‘there was no better teacher than necessity, which
teacheth all things most diligently.’ Who can, in studying, preaching, or
laboring, be doing other matters, if he do but know that this MUST be
done? Who can trifle or delay, that feeleth the urgent spurs of necessity? As
the soldier saith, ‘No lengthy discussing, but speedy and strong contending
is needed where necessity urges on’, so much more must we, as our
business is more important. Doubtless this is the best way to redeem time,
to see that we lose not an hour, when we spend it only on necessary things.
This is the way to be most profitable to others, though not always to be
most pleasing and applauded; because, through men’s frailty, it is true what
Seneca says, that ‘We are attracted to novelties rather than to great things.’

Hence it is, that a preacher must be oft upon the same things, because the
matters of necessity are few. We must not either feign necessaries, or fall
much upon unnecessaries, to satisfy them that look for novelties, though we
must clothe the same truths with a grateful variety in the manner of our
delivery. The great volumes and tedious controversies that so much trouble
us and waste our time, are usually made up more of opinions than of
necessary verities; for, as Ficinus saith , ‘Necessity is shut up within narrow
limits ; not so with opinion’: and, as Gregory Nazianzen and Seneca often
say, ‘Necessaries are common and obvious; it is superfluities that we waste
our time for, and labor for, and complain that we attain them not.’ Ministers,
therefore, must be observant of the case of their flocks, that they may know
what is most necessary for them, both for matter and for manner; and
usually the matter is to be first regarded, as being of more importance than
the manner. If you are to choose what authors to read yourselves, will you
not rather take those that tell you what you know not, and that speak the
most necessary truths in the clearest manner, though it be in barbarous or
unhandsome language, than those that will most learnedly and elegantly tell
you that which is false or vain, and ‘by a great effort say nothing.’ I purpose
to follow Augustine’s counsel: ‘Give first place to the meaning of the Word,
so that the soul is given preference over the body; from which it follows
that we seek the more true as much as the more discerning discourses to be
met with, just as we seek the more sensible, as much as the more handsome,
to be our friends.’ And surely, as I do in my studies for my own edification,
I should do in my teaching for other men’s. It is commonly empty, ignorant
men who want the matter and substance of true learning, that are over
curious and solicitous about words and ornaments, when the old,
experienced, and most learned men, abound in substantial verities delivered
usually in the plainest dress. As Aristotle makes it the reason why women
are more addicted to pride in apparel than men, that, being conscious of
little inward worth, they seek to make it up with outward borrowed
ornaments; so is it with empty, worthless preachers, who affect to be
esteemed that which they are not, and have no other way to procure that
esteem.
5. All our teaching must be as plain and simple as possible. This doth best
suit a teacher’s ends. He that would be understood must speak to the
capacity of his hearers. Truth loves the light, and is most beautiful when

most naked. It is the sign of an envious enemy to hide the truth; and it is the
work of a hypocrite to do this under pretense of revealing it; and therefore
painted obscure sermons (like painted glass in windows which keeps out the
light) are too oft the marks of painted hypocrites. If you would not teach
men, what do you in the pulpit? If you would, why do you not speak so as
to be understood? I know the height of the matter may make a man not
understood, when he hath studied to make it as plain as he can; but that a
man should purposely cloud the matter in strange words, and hide his mind
from the people, whom he pretendeth to instruct, is the way to make fools
admire his profound learning, and wise men his folly, pride, and hypocrisy.
Some men conceal their sentiments, under the pretense of necessity,
because of men’s prejudices, and the unpreparedness of common
understandings to receive the truth. But truth overcomes prejudice by the
mere light of evidence, and there is no better way to make a good cause
prevail, than to make it as plain, and as generally and thoroughly known as
we can; it is this light that will dispose an unprepared mind. It is, at best, a
sign that a man hath not well digested the matter himself, if he is not able to
deliver it plainly to others. I mean as plainly as the nature of the matter will
bear, in regard of capacities prepared for it by prerequisite truths; for I know
that some men cannot at present understand some truths, if you speak them
as plainly as words can express them; as the easiest rules in grammar, most
plainly taught, will not be understood by a child that is but learning his
alphabet.
6. Our work must be carried on with great humility. We must carry
ourselves meekly and condescendingly to all; and so teach others, as to be
as ready to learn of any that can teach us, and so both teach and learn at
once; not proudly venting our own conceits, and disdaining all that any way
contradict them, as if we had attained to the height of knowledge, and were
destined for the chair, and other men to sit at our feet. Pride is a vice that ill
beseems them that must lead men in such an humble way to heaven: let us,
therefore, take heed, lest, when we have brought others thither, the gate
should prove too strait for ourselves. For, as Grotius saith, ‘Pride is born in
heaven, but as if unmindful that the way from that place is closed, it is
impossible for it to return afterwards!’ God, that thrust out a proud angel,
will not entertain there a proud preacher. Methinks we should remember, at
least the title of a Minister, which, though the popish priests disdain, yet so

do not we. It is this pride at the root that feedeth all the rest of our sins.
Hence the envy, the contention, and unpeaceableness of ministers; hence the
stops to all reformation; all would lead, and few will follow or concur.
Hence, also, is the non-proficiency of too many ministers, because they are
too proud to learn. Humility would teach them another lesson. I may say of
ministers as Augustine to Jerome, even of the aged among them, ‘Although
it is more fitting for the aged to teach than to learn, much more is it fitting
to learn than to be ignorant.’
7. There must be a prudent mixture of severity and mildness both in our
preaching and discipline; each must be predominant, according to the
quality or character of the person, or matter, that we have in hand. If there
be no severity, our reproofs will be despised. If all severity, we shall be
taken as usurpers of dominion, rather than persuaders of the minds of men
to the truth.
8. We must be serious, earnest, and zealous in every part of our work. Our
work requireth greater skill, and especially greater life and zeal than any of
us bring to it. It is no small matter to stand up in the face of a congregation,
and to deliver a message of salvation or damnation, as from the living God,
in the name of the Redeemer. It is no easy matter to speak so plainly, that
the most ignorant may understand us; and so seriously that the deadest
hearts may feel us; and so convincingly, that the contradicting cavillers may
be silenced. The weight of our matter condemneth coldness and sleepy
dullness. We should see that we be well awakened ourselves, and our spirits
in such a plight as may make us fit to awaken others. If our words be not
sharpened, and pierce not as nails, they will hardly be felt by stony hearts.
To speak slightly and coldly of heavenly things is nearly as bad as to say
nothing of them at all.
9. The whole of our ministry must be carried on in tender love to our
people. We must let them see that nothing pleaseth us but what profiteth
them; and that what doeth them good doth us good; and that nothing
troubleth us more than their hurt. We must feel toward our people, as a
father toward his children: yea, the tenderest love of a mother must not
surpass ours. We must even travail in birth, till Christ be formed in them.
They should see that we care for no outward thing, neither wealth, nor

liberty, nor honor, nor life, in comparison of their salvation; but could even
be content, with Moses, to have our names blotted out of the book of life,
i.e. to be removed from the number of the living: rather than they should not
be found in the Lamb’s book of life. Thus should we, as John saith, be ready
to ‘lay down our lives for the brethren,’ and, with Paul, not count our lives
dear to us, so we may but ‘finish our course with joy, and the ministry
which we have received of the Lord Jesus.’ When the people see that you
unfeignedly love them, they will hear any thing and bear any thing from
you; as Augustine saith, ‘Love God, and do what you please.’ We ourselves
will take all things well from one that we know doth entirely love us. We
will put up with a blow that is given us in love, sooner than with a foul
word that is spoken to us in malice or in anger. Most men judge of the
counsel, as they judge of the a affection of him that gives it: at least, so far
as to give it a fair hearing. Oh, therefore, see that you feel a tender love to
your people in your breasts, and let them perceive it in your speeches, and
see it in your conduct. Let them see that you spend, and are spent, for their
sakes; and that all you do is for them, and not for any private ends of your
own. To this end the works of charity are necessary, as far as your estate
will reach; for bare words will hardly convince men that you have any great
love to them. But, if you are not able to give, show that you are willing to
give if you had it, and do that sort of good you can. But see that your love
be not carnal, flowing from pride, as one that is a suitor for himself rather
than for Christ, and, therefore, doth love because he is loved, or that he may
be loved. Take heed, therefore, that you do not connive at the sins of your
people, under pretense of love, for that were to cross the nature and end of
love. Friendship must be cemented by piety. A wicked man cannot be a true
friend; and, if you befriend their wickedness, you show that you are wicked
yourselves. Pretend not to love them, if you favor their sins, and seek not
their salvation. By favoring their sins, you will show your enmity to God;
and then how can you love your brother? If you be their best friends, help
them against their worst enemies. And think not all sharpness inconsistent
with love: parents correct their children, and God himself ‘chastens every
son whom he receiveth.’ Augustine saith, ‘Better it is to love even with the
accompaniment of severity, than to mislead by (excess of) lenity.’

10. We must carry on our work with patience. We must bear with many
abuses and injuries from those to whom we seek to do good. When we have
studied for them, and prayed for them, and exhorted them, and beseeched
them with all earnestness and condescension, and given them what we are
able, and tended them as if they had been our children, we must look that
many of them will requite us with scorn and hatred and contempt, and
account us their enemies, because we ‘tell them the truth.’ Now, we must
endure all this patiently, and we must unweariedly hold on in doing good,
‘in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God,
peradventure, will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.’
We have to deal with distracted men who will fly in the face of their
physician, but we must not, therefore, neglect their cure. He is unworthy to
be a physician, who will be driven away from a frenetic patient by foul
words. Yet, alas, when sinners reproach and slander us for our love, and are
more ready to spit in our faces, than to thank us for our advice, what heartrisings will there be, and how will the remnants of old Adam (pride and
passion) struggle against the meekness and patience of the new man! And
how sadly do many ministers come off under such trials!
11. All our work must be managed reverently, as beseemeth them that
believe the presence of God, and use not holy things as if they were
common. Reverence is that affection of the soul which proceedeth from
deep apprehensions of God and indicateth a mind that is much conversant
with him. To manifest irreverence in the things of God is to manifest
hypocrisy, and that the heart agreeth not with the tongue. I know not how it
is with others, but the most reverent preacher, that speaks as if he saw the
face of God, doth more affect my heart, though with common words, than
an irreverent man with the most exquisite preparations. Yea, though he bawl
it out with never so much seeming earnestness, if reverence be not
answerable to fervency, it worketh but little. Of all preaching in the world,
(that speaks not stark lies) I hate that preaching which tends to make the
hearers laugh, or to move their minds with tickling levity, and affect them as
stage-plays used to do, instead of affecting them with a holy reverence of
the name of God. Jerome says, ‘Teach in thy church, not to get the applause
of the people, but to set in motion the groan; the tears of the hearers are thy
praises.’ The more of God appeareth in our duties, the more authority will
they have with men. We should, as it were, suppose we saw the throne of

God, and the millions of glorious angels attending him, that we may be
awed with his majesty when we draw near him in holy things, lest we
profane them and take his name in vain.
12. All our work must be done spiritually, as by men possessed of the Holy
Ghost. There is in some men’s preaching a spiritual strain, which spiritual
hearers can discern and relish; whereas, in other men’s, this sacred tincture
is so wanting, that, even when they speak of spiritual things, the manner is
such as if they were common matters. Our evidence and illustrations of
divine truth must also be spiritual, being drawn from the Holy Scriptures,
rather than from the writings of men. The wisdom of the world must not be
magnified against the wisdom of God; philosophy must be taught to stoop
and serve, while faith doth bear the chief sway. Great scholars in Aristotle’s
school must take heed of glorying too much in their master, and despising
those that are below them, lest they themselves prove lower in the school of
Christ, and ‘least in the kingdom of God,’ while they would be great in the
eyes of men. As wise a man as any of them would glory in nothing but the
cross of Christ, and determined to know nothing but him crucified. They
that are so confident that Aristotle is in hell, should not too much take him
for their guide in the way to heaven. It is an excellent memorandum that
Gregory hath left: ‘God in the first place gathers together the unlearned;
afterwards the wise ones. And not of orators does he make fishermen, but of
fishermen he produces orators.’ The most learned men should think of this.
Let all writers have their due esteem, but compare none of them with the
Word of God. We will not refuse their service, but we must abhor them as
rivals or competitors. It is the sign of a distempered heart that loseth the
relish of Scripture excellency. For there is in a spiritual heart a conaturality
to the Word of God, because this is the seed which did regenerate him. The
Word is that seal which made all the holy impressions that are in the hearts
of true believers, and stamped the image of God upon them; and, therefore,
they must needs be like that Word and highly esteem it as long as they live.
13. If you would prosper in your work, be sure to keep up earnest desires
and expectations of success. If your hearts be not set on the end of your
labors, and you long not to see the conversion and edification of your
hearers, and do not study and preach in hope, you are not likely to see much

success. As it is a sign of a false, self-seeking heart, that can be content to
be still doing, and yet see no fruit of his labor; so I have observed that God
seldom blesseth any man’s work so much as his, whose heart is set upon the
success of it. Let it be the property of a Judas to have more regard to the bag
than to his work, and not to care much for what they pretend to care; and to
think, if they have their salaries, and the love and commendations of their
people, they have enough to satisfy them: but, let all who preach for Christ
and men’s salvation, be unsatisfied till they have the thing they preach for.
He never had the right ends of a preacher, who is indifferent whether he
obtain them, and is not grieved when he misseth them, and rejoiced when
he can see the desired issue. When a man doth only study what to say, and
how, with commendation, to spend the hour, and looks no more after it,
unless it be to know what people think of his abilities, and thus holds on
from year to year, I must needs think that this man doth preach for himself,
and not for Christ, even when he preacheth Christ, how excellently soever
he may seem to do it. No wise or charitable physician is content to be
always giving physic, and to see no amendment among his patients, but to
have them all die upon his hands: nor will any wise and honest
schoolmaster be content to be still teaching, though his scholars profit not
by his instructions; but both of them would rather be weary of the
employment.
I know that a faithful minister may have comfort when he wants success;
and ‘though Israel be not gathered, our reward is with the Lord,” and our
acceptance is not according to the fruit, but according to our labor: but then,
he that longeth not for the success of his labors can have none of this
comfort, because he was not a faithful laborer. What I say is only for them
that are set upon the end, and grieved if they miss it. Nor is this the full
comfort that we must desire, but only such a part as may quiet us, though
we miss the rest. What if God will accept a physician, though the patient
die? He must, notwithstanding that, work in compassion, and long for a
better issue, and be sorry if he miss it. For it is not merely our own reward
that we labor for, but other men’s salvation. I confess, for my part, I marvel
at some ancient reverend men, that have lived twenty, thirty, or forty years
with an unprofitable people, among whom they have scarcely been able to
discern any fruits of their labors, how they can, with so much patience,
continue among them. Were it my case, though I durst not leave the

vineyard, nor quit my calling, yet I should suspect that it was God’s will I
should go somewhere else, and another come in my place that might be
fitter for them; and I should not be easily satisfied to spend my days in such
a manner.
14. Our whole work must be carried on under a deep sense of our own
insufficiency, and of our entire dependence on Christ. We must go for light,
and life, and strength to him who sends us on the work. And when we feel
our own faith weak, and our hearts dull, and unsuitable to so great a work as
we have to do, we must have recourse to him, and say, ‘Lord, wilt thou send
me with such an unbelieving heart to persuade others to believe? Must I
daily plead with sinners about everlasting life and everlasting death, and
have no more belief or feeling of these weighty things myself? O, send me
not naked and unprovided to the work; but, as thou commandest me to do it,
furnish me with a spirit suitable thereto.’ Prayer must carry on our work as
well as preaching: he preacheth not heartily to his people, that prayeth not
earnestly for them. If we prevail not with God to give them faith and
repentance, we shall never prevail with them to believe and repent. When
our own hearts are so far out of order, and theirs so far out of order, if we
prevail not with God to mend and help them, we are like to make but
unsuccessful work.
15. Having given you these concomitants of our ministerial work, as singly
to be performed by every minister, let me conclude with one other, that is
necessary to us as we are fellow-laborers in the same work; and that is this,
we must be very studious of union and communion among ourselves, and of
the unity and peace of the churches that we oversee. We must be sensible
how needful this is to the prosperity of the whole, the strengthening of our
common cause, the good of the particular members of our flock, and the
further enlargement of the kingdom of Christ. And, therefore, ministers
must smart when the Church is wounded, and be so far from being the
leaders in divisions, that they should take it as a principal part of their work
to prevent and heal them. Day and night should they bend their studies to
find out means to close such breaches. They must not only hearken to
motions for unity, but propound them and prosecute them; not only
entertain an offered peace, but even follow it when it flieth from them. They
must, therefore, keep dose to the ancient simplicity of the Christian faith,

and the foundation and center of catholic unity. They must abhor the
arrogancy of them that frame new engines to rack and tear the Church of
Christ under pretense of obviating errors and maintaining the truth. The
Scripture sufficiency must be maintained, and nothing beyond it imposed on
others; and if papists, or others, call to us for the standard and rule of our
religion, it is the Bible that we must show them, rather than any confessions
of churches, or writings of men. We must learn to distinguish between
certainties and uncertainties, necessaries and unnecessaries, catholic verities
and private opinions; and to lay the stress of the Church’s peace upon the
former, not upon the latter. We must avoid the common confusion of
speaking of those who make no difference between verbal and real errors,
and hate that ‘madness formerly among theologians,’ who tear their
brethren as heretics, before they understand them. And we must learn to see
the true state of controversies, and reduce them to the very point where the
difference lieth, and not make them seem greater than they are. Instead of
quarrelling with our brethren, we must combine against the common
adversaries; and all ministers must associate and hold communion, and
correspondence, and constant meetings to these ends; and smaller
differences of judgment are not to interrupt them. They must do as much of
the work of God, in unity and concord, as they can, which is the use of
synods; not to rule over one another, and make laws, but to avoid
misunderstandings, and consult for mutual edification, and maintain love
and communion, and go on unanimously in the work that God hath already
commanded us. Had the ministers of the gospel been men of peace, and of
catholic, rather than factious spirits, the Church of Christ had not been in
the case it now is. The nations of Lutherans and Calvinists abroad, and the
differing parties here at home, would not have been plotting the subversion
of one another, nor remain at that distance, and in that uncharitable
bitterness, nor strengthen the common enemy, and hinder the building and
prosperity of the Church as they have done.
SECTION 3 — MOTIVES TO THE OVERSIGHT OF THE FLOCK