PURITAN GOLD -- The Reformed Pastor by Richard Baxter: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 10
The Oversight of the Flock: The Nature of This Oversight

---

Having showed you, What it is to take heed to ourselves, I am to show you,
next, What it is to take heed to all the flock.
It was first necessary to take into consideration, what we must be, and what
we must do for our own souls, before we come to that which must be done
for others: ‘He cannot succeed in healing the wounds of others who is
himself unhealed by reason of neglecting himself. He neither benefits his
neighbors nor himself. He does not raise up others, but himself falls.” Yea,
lest all his labors come to naught, because his heart and life are naught that
doth perform them. ‘For some persons there are who, though expert in
spiritual ministry, go about it in a headstrong manner, and while acting
intelligently, tread underfoot any good they do. They teach too hurriedly
what can only be rendered holy by meditation; and what they proclaim in
public they impugn by their conduct. Whence it is that as pastors they walk
in paths too rugged for the flock to follow.” When we have led them to the
living waters, if we muddy it by our filthy lives, we may lose our labor, and
they be never the better. Before we speak of the work itself, we shall notice
somewhat that is pre-supposed in the words before us.
1. It is here implied, that every flock should have its own pastor, and every
pastor his own flock. As every troop or company in a regiment of soldiers
must have its own captain and other officers, and every soldier knows his
own commander and colors; so it is the will of God, that every church
should have its own pastor, and that all Christ’s disciples ‘should know their
teachers that are over them in the Lord.’ Though a minister is an officer in

the Church universal, yet is he in a special manner the overseer of that
particular church which is committed to his charge. When we are ordained
ministers without a special charge, we are licensed and commanded to do
our best for all, as we shall have opportunity for the exercise of our gifts:
but when we have undertaken a particular charge, we have restrained the
exercise of our gifts so specially to that congregation, that we must allow
others no more than it can spare of our time and help, except where the
public good requireth it, which must, no doubt, be first regarded. From this
relation of pastor and flock, arise all the duties which they mutually owe to
each other.
2. When we are commanded to take heed to all the flock, it is plainly
implied, that flocks must ordinarily be no greater than we are capable of
overseeing, or ‘taking heed to.’ God will not lay upon us natural
impossibilities: he will not bind men to leap up to the moon, to touch the
stars, or to number the sands of the sea. If the pastoral office consists in
overseeing all the flock, then surely the number of souls under the care of
each pastor must not be greater than he is able to take such heed to as is
here required. Will God require one bishop to take the charge of a whole
county, or of so many parishes or thousands of souls, as he is not able to
know or to oversee? Yea, and to take the sole government of them, while
the particular teachers of them are free from that undertaking? Will God
require the blood of so many parishes at one man’s hands, if he do not that
which ten, or twenty, or a hundred, or three hundred men can no more do,
than I can move a mountain Then woe to poor prelates! Is it not, then, a
most doleful case, that learned, sober men should plead for this as a
desirable privilege; that they should wilfully draw on themselves such a
burden; and that they do not rather tremble at the thoughts of so great an
undertaking? O, happy had it been for the Church, and happy for the
bishops themselves, if this measure, that is intimated by the apostle here,
had still been observed: that the diocese had been no greater than the elders
or bishops could oversee and rule, so that they might have taken heed to all
the Rock: or that pastors had been multiplied as churches increased, and the
number of overseers been proportioned to the number of souls, that they
might not have let the work be undone, while they assumed the empty titles,
and undertook impossibilities! And that they had rather prayed the Lord of
the harvest to send forth more laborers, even so many as were proportioned

to the work, and not to have undertaken all themselves. I should scarcely
commend the prudence or humility of that laborer, let his parts be ever so
great, that would not only undertake to gather in all the harvest in this
county himself, and that upon pain of death, yea, of damnation, but would
also earnestly contend for this prerogative.
But it may be said, there are others to teach, though one only have the rule.
To this I answer: Blessed be God it is so; and no thanks to some of them.
But is not government of great concernment to the good of souls, as well as
preaching? If it be no , then what use is there for church governors? If it be,
then they that nullify it by undertaking impossibilities, do go about to ruin
the churches and themselves. If only preaching be necessary, let us have
none but mere preachers: what needs there then such a stir about
government? But if discipline, in its place, be necessary too, what is it but
enmity to men’s salvation to exclude it? and it is unavoidably excluded,
when it is made to be his work that is naturally incapable of performing it.
The general that will command an army alone, may as well say, Let it be
destroyed for want of command: and the schoolmaster that will oversee or
govern all the schools in the county alone, may as well say, Let them all be
ungoverned: and the physician that will undertake the care of all the sick
people in a whole nation, or county, when he is not able to visit the
hundredth man of them, may as well say, Let them perish. Yet still it must
be acknowledged, that in case of necessity, where there are not more to be
had, one man may undertake the charge of more souls than he is well able
to oversee particularly. But then he must undertake only to do what he can
for them, and not to do all that a pastor ordinarily ought to do. This is the
case of some of us, who have greater parishes than we are able to take that
special heed to which their state requireth. I profess for my own part, I am
so far from their boldness that dare venture on the sole government of a
county, that I would not, for all England, have undertaken to be one of the
two that should do all the pastoral work that God requireth, in the parish
where I live, had I not this to satisfy my conscience, that, through the
Church’s necessities, more cannot be had; and therefore, I must rather do
what I can, than leave all undone because I cannot do all. But cases of
unavoidable necessity are not to be the ordinary condition of the Church; or
at least, it is not desirable that it should so be. O happy Church of Christ,

were the laborers but able and faithful, and proportioned in number to the
number of souls; so that the pastors were so many, or the particular
churches so small, that we might be able to ‘take heed to all the flock.’
Having noticed these things, which are presupposed, we shall now proceed
to consider the duty which is recommended in the text, Take heed to all the
flock. It is, you see, all the flock, or every individual member of our charge.
To this end it is necessary, that we should know every person that belongeth
to our charge; for how can we take heed to them, if we do not know them?
We must labor to be acquainted, not only with the persons, but with the
state of all our people, with their inclinations and conversations; what are
the sins of which they are most in danger, and what duties they are most apt
to neglect, and what temptations they are most liable to; for if we know not
their temperament or disease, we are not likely to prove successful
physicians.
Being thus acquainted with all the flock, we must afterward take heed to
them. One would imagine that every reasonable man would be satisfied of
this, and that it would need no further proof. Doth not a careful shepherd
look after every individual sheep? and a good schoolmaster after every
individual scholar? and a good physician after every particular patient? and
a good commander after every individual soldier? Why then should not the
shepherds, the teachers, the physicians, the guides of the churches of Christ,
take heed to every individual member of their charge? Christ himself, the
great and good Shepherd, that hath the whole to look after, doth yet take
care of every individual; like him whom he describes in the parable, who
left ‘the ninety and nine sheep in the wilderness, to seek after one that was
lost.’ The prophets were often sent to single men. Ezekiel was made a
watchman over individuals, and was commanded to say to the wicked,
‘Thou shalt surely die.’ Paul taught his hearers not only ‘publicly but from
house to house.” and in another place he tells us, that he ‘warned every
man, and taught every man, in all wisdom, that he might present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus.’ Many other passages of Scripture make it evident
that it is our duty to take heed to every individual of our flock; and many
passages in the ancient Councils do plainly show that this was the practice
of the primitive times. But I shall quote only one from Ignatius: ‘Let
assemblies,’ says he, ‘be often gathered; inquire after all by name: despise

not servant-men or maids.’ You see it was then considered as a duty to look
after every member of the flock by name, not excepting the meanest
servant-man or maid.
But, some one may object, ‘The congregation that I am set over is so great
that it is impossible for me to know them all, much more to take heed to all
individually.’ To this answer, ‘Is it necessity or is it not, that hath cast you
upon such a charge If it be not, you excuse one sin by another. How durst
you undertake that which you knew yourself unable to perform, when you
were not forced to it? It would seem you had some other ends in
undertaking it, and never intended to be faithful to your trust. But if you
think that you were necessitated to undertake it, I would ask you, might you
not have procured assistance for so great a charge? Have you done all that
you could with your friends and neighbors, to get maintenance for another
to help you? Have you not as much maintenance yourself, as might serve
yourself and another? What though it will not serve to maintain you in
fullness? Is it not more reasonable that you should pinch your flesh and
family, then undertake a work that you cannot perform, and neglect the
souls of so many of your flock I know, that what I say will seem hard to
some; but to me it is an unquestionable thing, that, if you have but a
hundred pounds a year, it is your duty to live upon part of it, and allow the
rest to a competent assistant, rather than that the flock which you are over
should be neglected. If you say, that is a hard measure, and that your wife
and children cannot so live, I answer, Do not many families in your parish
live on less? Have not many able ministers in the prelates’ days been glad
of less, with liberty to preach the gospel There are some yet living, as I have
heard, who have offered the bishops to enter into bond to preach for
nothing, if they might but have liberty to preach the gospel. If you shall still
say, that you cannot live so meanly as poor people do, I further ask, Can
your parishioners better endure damnation, than you can endure want and
poverty? What! do you call yourselves ministers of the gospel, and yet are
the souls of men so base in your eyes, that you had rather they should
eternally perish, than that you and your family should live in a low and poor
condition? Nay, should you not rather beg your bread, than put so great a
matter as men’s salvation upon a hazard, or disadvantage? Yea, as hazard
the damnation of but one soul? O sirs, it is a miserable thing when men
study and talk of heaven and hell, and the fewness of the saved, and the

difficulty of salvation, and be not all the while in good earnest. If you were,
you could never surely stick at such matters as these, and let your people go
down to hell, that you might live in higher style in this world. Remember
this, the next time you are preaching to them, that they cannot be saved
without knowledge; and hearken whether conscience does not tell you, ‘It is
likely they might be brought to knowledge, if they had but diligent
instruction and exhortation privately, man by man; and if there were another
minister to assist me, this might be done: and if I would live sparingly and
deny my flesh, I might have an assistant. Dare I, then, let my people live in
that ignorance which I myself have told them is damning, rather than put
myself and family to a little want?’
Must I turn to my Bible to show a preacher where it is written, that a man’s
soul is worth more than a world, much more therefore than a hundred
pounds a year, much more are many souls more worth? Or that both we and
all that we have are God’s, and should be employed to the utmost for his
service? Or that it is inhuman cruelty to let souls go to hell, for fear my wife
and children should fare somewhat the harder, or live at lower rates; when,
according to God’s ordinary way of working by means, I might do much to
prevent their misery, if I would but a little displease my flesh, which all,
who are Christ’s, have crucified with its lusts? Every man must render to
God the things that are God’s, and that, let it be remembered, is all he is and
all he possesses. How are all things sanctified to us, but in the separation
and dedication of them to God? Are they not all his talents, and must be
employed in his service? Must not every Christian first ask, In what way
may I most honor God with my substance? Do we not preach these things to
our people? Are they true as to them, and not as to us? Yea more, is not the
church-maintenance devoted, in a special manner, to the service of God for
the church? And should we not then use it for the utmost furtherance of that
end? If any minister who hath two hundred pounds a year can prove that a
hundred pounds of it may do God more service, if it be laid out on himself,
or wife and children, than if it maintain one or two suitable assistants to
help forward the salvation of the flock, I shall not presume to reprove his
expenses; but where this cannot be proved, let not the practice be justified.
And I must further say, that this poverty is not so intolerable and dangerous
a thing as it is pretended to be. If you have but food and raiment, must you
not therewith be content? and what would you have more than that which

may fit you for the work of God? It is not ‘being clothed in purple and fine
linen, and faring sumptuously every day,’ that is necessary for this end. ‘A
man’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things that he possesseth.’
If your clothing be warm, and your food be wholesome, you may be as well
supported by it to do God service as if you had the fullest satisfaction to
your flesh. A patched coat may be warm, and bread and water are
wholesome food. He that wanteth not these, hath but a poor excuse to make
for hazarding men’s souls, that he may live on dainties.
But, while it is our duty to take heed to all the flock, we must pay special
attention to some classes in particular. By many, this is very imperfectly
understood, and therefore I shall dwell a little upon it.
1. We must labor, in a special manner, for the conversion of the
unconverted.
The work of conversion is the first and great thing we must drive at; after
this we must labor with all our might. Alas! the misery of the unconverted
is so great, that it calleth loudest to us for compassion. If a truly converted
sinner do fall, it will be but into sin which will be pardoned, and he is not in
that hazard of damnation by it as others are. Not but that God hateth their
sins as well as others’, or that he will bring them to heaven, let them live
ever so wickedly; but the spirit that is within them will not suffer them to
live wickedly, nor to sin as the ungodly do. But with the unconverted it is
far otherwise. They ‘are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity,’ and have yet no part nor fellowship in the pardon of their sins, or
the hope of glory. We have, therefore, a work of greater necessity to do or
them, even ‘to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of
sins, and an inheritance among them that are sanctified.’ He that seeth one
man sick of a mortal disease, and another only pained with the toothache,
will be moved more to compassionate the former, than the latter; and will
surely make more haste to help him, though he were a stranger, and the
other a brother or a son. It is so sad a case to see men in a state of
damnation, wherein, if they should die, they are lost for ever, that methinks
we should not be able to let them alone, either in public or private, whatever
other work we may have to do. I confess, I am frequently forced to neglect

that which should tend to the further increase of knowledge in the godly,
because of the lamentable necessity of the unconverted. Who is able to talk
of controversies, or of nice unnecessary points, or even of truths of a lower
degree of necessity, how excellent soever, while he seeth a company of
ignorant, carnal, miserable sinners before his eyes, who must be changed or
damned? Methinks I even see them entering upon their final woe! Methinks
I hear them crying out for help, for speediest help! Their misery speaks the
louder, because they have not hearts to ask for themselves. Many a time
have I known, that I had some hearers of higher fancies, that looked for
rarities, and were addicted to despise the ministry, if I told them not
somewhat more than ordinary; and yet I could not find in my heart to turn
from the necessities of the impenitent, for the humouring of them; nor even
to leave speaking to miserable sinners for their salvation, in order to speak
to such novelists; no, nor so much as should otherwise be done, to weak
saints for their confirmation and increase in grace. Methinks, as Paul’s
‘spirit was stirred within him, when he saw the Athenians wholly given to
idolatry,’ so it should cast us into one of his paroxysms, to see so many men
in the utmost danger of being everlastingly undone. Methinks, if by faith we
did indeed look upon them as within a step of hell, it would more
effectually untie our tongues, than Croesus’ danger, as they tell us, did his
son’s. He that will let a sinner go down to hell for want of speaking to him,
doth set less by souls than did the Redeemer of souls; and less by his
neighbor, than common charity will allow him to do by his greatest enemy.
O, therefore, brethren, whomsoever you neglect, neglect not the most
miserable! Whatever you pass over, forget not poor souls that are under the
condemnation and curse of the law, and who may look every hour for the
infernal execution, if a speedy change do not prevent it. O call after the
impenitent, and ply this great work of converting souls, whatever else you
leave undone.
2. We must be ready to give advice to inquirers, who come to us with cases
of conscience; especially the great case which the Jews put to Peter, and the
gaoler to Paul and Silas, ‘What must we do to be saved?’ A minister is not
to be merely a public preacher, but to be known as a counsellor for their
souls, as the physician is for their bodies, and the lawyer for their estates: so
that each man who is in doubts and straits, may bring his case to him for
resolution; as Nicodemus came to Christ, and as it was usual with the

people of old to go to the priest, ‘whose lips must keep knowledge, and at
whose mouth they must ask the law, because he is the messenger of the
Lord of hosts.’ But as the people have become unacquainted with this office
of the ministry, and with their own duty and necessity in this respect, it
belongeth to us to acquaint them with it, and publicly to press them to come
to us for advice about the great concerns of their souls. We must not only be
willing to take the trouble, but should draw it upon ourselves, by inviting
them to come. What abundance of good might we do, could we but bring
them to this! And, doubtless, much might be done in it, if we did our duty.
How few have I ever heard of, who have heartily pressed their people to
their duty in this way! Oh! it is a sad case that men’s souls should be so
injured and hazarded by the total neglect of so great a duty, and that
ministers should scarcely ever tell them of it, and awaken them to it. Were
your hearers but duly sensible of the need and importance of this, you
would have them more frequently knocking at your doors, and making
known to you their sad complaints, and begging your advice. I beseech you,
then, press them more to this duty for the future; and see that you perform it
carefully when they do seek your help. To this end it is very necessary that
you be well acquainted with practical cases, and especially that you be
acquainted with the nature of saving grace, and able to assist them in trying
their state, and in resolving the main question that concerns their everlasting
life or death. One word of seasonable, prudent advice, given by a minister
to persons in necessity, may be of more use than many sermons. ‘A word
fitly spoken,’ says Solomon, ‘how good is it!’
3. We must study to build up those who are already truly converted. In this
respect our work is various, according to the various states of Christians.
(1) There are many of our flock that are young and weak, who, though they
are of long standing, are yet of small proficiency or strength. This, indeed,
is the most common condition of the godly. Most of them content
themselves with low degrees of grace, and it is no easy matter to get them
higher. To bring them to higher and stricter opinions is easy, that is, to bring
them from the truth into error, on the right hand as well as on’ the left; but
to increase their knowledge and gifts is not easy, and to increase their graces
is the hardest of all. It is a very sad thing for Christians to be weak: it
exposeth us to dangers; it abateth our consolations and delight in God, and

taketh off the sweetness of wisdom’s ways; it maketh us less serviceable to
God and man, to bring less honor to our Master, and to do less good to all
about us. We get small benefit in the use of the means of grace. We too
easily play with the serpent’s baits, and are ensnared by his wiles. A seducer
will easily shake us, and evil may be made to appear to us as good, truth as
falsehood, sin as duty; and so on the contrary. We are less able to resist and
stand in an encounter; we sooner fall; we hardlier rise; and are apter to
prove a scandal and reproach to our profession. We less know ourselves,
and are more apt to be mistaken as to our own estate, not observing
corruptions when they have got advantage of us. We are dishonorable to the
gospel by our very weakness, and little useful to any about us. In a word,
though we live to less profit to ourselves or others, yet are we unwilling and
too unready to die.
Now, seeing the case of weakness in the converted is so sad, how diligent
should we be to cherish and increase their grace! The strength of Christians
is the honor of the Church. When they are inflamed with the love of God,
and live by a lively working faith, and set light by the profits and honors of
the world, and love one another with a pure heart fervently, and can bear
and heartily forgive a wrong, and suffer joyfully for the cause of Christ, and
study to do good, and walk inoffensively and harmlessly in the world, are
ready to be servants to all men for their good, becoming all things to all
men in order to win them to Christ, and yet abstaining from the appearance
of evil, and seasoning all their actions with a sweet mixture of prudence,
humility, zeal, and heavenly mindedness – oh, what an honor are such to
their profession! What an ornament to the Church; and how serviceable to
God and man! Men would sooner believe that the gospel is from heaven, if
they saw more such effects of it upon the hearts and lives of those who
profess it. The world is better able to read the nature of religion in a man’s
life than in the Bible. ‘They that obey not the word, may be won by the
conversation’ of such as are thus eminent for godliness. It is, therefore, a
most important part of our work, to labor more in the polishing and
perfecting of the saints, that they may be strong in the Lord, and fitted for
their Master’s service.
(2) Another class of converts that need our special help, are those who labor
under some particular corruption, which keeps under their graces,

and makes them a trouble to others, and a burden to themselves. Alas! there
are too many such persons. Some are specially addicted to pride, and others
to worldly-mindedness; some to sensual desires, and others to frowardness
or other evil passions. Now it is our duty to give assistance to all these; and
partly by dissuasions, and clear discoveries of the odiousness of the sin, and
partly by suitable directions about the remedy, to help them to a more
complete conquest of their corruptions. We are leaders of Christ’s army
against the powers of hell, and must resist all the works of darkness
wherever we find them, even though it should be in the children of light.
We must be no more tender of the sins of the godly, than of the ungodly, nor
any more befriend them or favor them. By how much more we love their
persons, by so much the more must we manifest it, by making opposition to
their sins. And yet we must look to meet with some tender persons here,
especially when iniquity hath got any head, and made a party, and many
have fallen in love with it; they will be as pettish and as impatient of
reproof as some worse men, and perhaps will interest even piety itself in
their faults. But the ministers of Christ must do their duty, notwithstanding
their peevishness; and must not so far hate their brother, as to forbear
rebuking him, or suffer sin to lie upon his soul. It must, no doubt, be done
with much prudence, yet done it must be.
(3) Another class who demand special help are declining Christians, that are
either fallen into some scandalous sin, or else abate their zeal and diligence,
and show that they have lost their former love. As the case of backsliders is
very sad, so our diligence must be very great for their recovery. It is sad to
them to lose so much of their life, and peace, and serviceableness to God;
and to become so serviceable to Satan and his cause. It is sad to us to see
that all our labor is come to this; and that, when we have taken so much
pains with them, and have had so much hopes of them, all should be so far
frustrated. It is saddest of all, to think that God should be so dishonored by
those whom he hath so loved, and for whom he hath done so much; and that
Christ should be so wounded in the house of his friends. Besides, partial
backsliding hath a natural tendency to total apostasy, and would effect it, if
special grace did not prevent it.
Now, the more sad the case of such Christians is, the more must we exert
ourselves for their recovery. We must ‘restore those that are overtaken in a

fault, in the spirit of meekness,’ and yet see that the sore be thoroughly
searched and healed, and the joint be well set again, what pain soever it may
cost. We must look especially to the honor of the gospel, and see that they
give such evidence of true repentance, and make such free and full
confession of their sin, that some reparation be thereby made to the Church
and their holy profession, for the wound they have given to religion. Much
skill is required for restoring such a soul.
(4) The last class whom I shall here notice, as requiring our attention, are
the strong; for they, also, have need of our assistance: partly to preserve the
grace they have; partly to help them in making further progress; and partly
to direct them in improving their strength for the service of Christ, and the
assistance of their brethren; and, also, to encourage them to persevere, that
they may receive the crown.
All these are the objects of the ministerial work, and in respect to each of
them, we must ‘take heed to all the flock.’
4. We must have a special eye upon families, to see that they are well
ordered, and the duties of each relation performed. The life of religion, and
the welfare and glory of both the Church and the State, depend much on
family government and duty. If we suffer the neglect of this, we shall undo
all. What are we like to do ourselves to the reforming of a congregation, if
all the work be cast on us alone; and masters of families neglect that
necessary duty of their own, by which they are bound to help us? If any
good be begun by the ministry in any soul, a careless, prayerless, worldly
family is like to stifle it, or very much hinder it; whereas, if you could but
get the rulers of families to do their duty, to take up the work where you left
it, and help it on, what abundance of good might be done! I beseech you,
therefore, if you desire the reformation and welfare of your people, do all
you can to promote family religion. To this end, let me entreat you to attend
to the following things:
(1) Get information how each family is ordered, that you may know how to
proceed in your endeavors for their further good.
(2) Go occasionally among them, when they are likely to be most at leisure,
and ask the master of the family whether he prays with them, and reads the

Scripture, or what he doth? Labor to convince such as neglect this, of their
sin; and if you have opportunity, pray with them before you go, and give
them an example of what you would have them do. Perhaps, too, it might be
well to get a promise from them, that they will make more conscience of
their duty for the future.
(3) If you find any, through ignorance and want of practice, unable to pray,
persuade them to study their own wants, and to get their hearts affected with
them, and, in the meanwhile, advise them to use a form of prayer, rather
than not pray at all. Tell them, however, that it is their sin and shame that
they have lived so negligently, as to be so unacquainted with their own
necessities as not to know how to speak to God in prayer, when every
beggar can find words to ask an alms; and, therefore, that a form of prayer
is but for necessity, as a crutch to a cripple, while they cannot do well
without it; but that they must resolve not to be content with it, but to learn
to do better as speedily as possible, seeing that prayer should come from the
feelings of the heart, and be varied according to our necessities and
circumstances.
(4) See that in every family there are some useful moving books, beside the
Bible. If they have none, persuade them to buy some: if they be not able to
buy them, give them some if you can. If you are not able yourself, get some
gentlemen, or other rich persons, that are ready to good works, to do it. And
engage them to read them at night, when they have leisure, and especially
on the Lord’s day.
(5) Direct them how to spend the Lord’s day; how to despatch their worldly
business, so as to prevent encumbrances and distractions; and when they
have been at church, how to spend the time in their families. The life of
religion dependeth much on this, because poor people have no other free
considerable time; and, therefore, if they lose this, they lose all, and will
remain ignorant and brutish. Persuade the master of every family to cause
his children and servants to repeat the Catechism to him, every Sabbath
evening, and to give him some account of what they have heard at church
during the day.
Neglect not, I beseech you, this important part of your work. Get masters of
families to do their duty, and they will not only spare you a great deal of

labor, but will much further the success of your labors. If a captain can get
the officers under him to do their duty, he may rule the soldiers with much
less trouble, than if all lay upon his own shoulders. You are not like to see
any general reformation, till you procure family reformation. Some little
religion there may be, here and there; but while it is confined to single
persons, and is not promoted in families, it will not prosper, nor promise
much future increase.
5. We must be diligent in visiting the sick, and helping them to prepare
either for a fruitful life, or a happy death. Though this should be the
business of all our life and theirs, yet doth it, at such a season, require
extraordinary care both of them and us. When time is almost gone, and they
must now or never be reconciled to God, oh, how doth it concern them to
redeem those hours, and to lay hold on eternal life! And when we see that
we are like to have but a few days or hours more to speak to them, in order
to their everlasting welfare, who, that is not a block or an infidel, would not
be much with them, and do all he can for their salvation in that short space?
Will it not awaken us to compassion, to look on a languishing man, and to
think that within a few days his soul will be in heaven or in hell? Surely it
will try the faith and seriousness of ministers, to be much about dying men!
They will thus have opportunity to discern whether they themselves are in
good earnest about the matters of the life to come. So great is the change
that is made by death, that it should awaken us to the greatest sensibility to
see a man so near it, and should excite in us the deepest pangs of
compassion, to do the office of inferior angels for the soul, before it departs
from the body, that it may be ready for the convoy of superior angels to the
‘inheritance of the saints in light.’ When a man is almost at his journey’s
end, and the next step brings him to heaven or hell, it is time for us, while
there is hope, to help him if we can.
And as their present necessity should move us to embrace that opportunity
for their good, so should the advantage that sickness and the prospect of
death affordeth. Even the stoutest sinners will hear us on their death-bed,
though they scorned us before. They will then let fall their fury, and be as
gentle as lambs, who were before as untractable as lions. I find not one in
ten, of the most obstinate scornful wretches in my parish, but when they
come to die, will humble themselves, confess their faults, and seem

penitent, and promise, if they should recover, to reform their lives. Cyprian
saith to those in health, ‘He who everyday reminds himself that he is dying,
despises the present and hastens to things to come. Much more he who feels
himself to be in the very act of dying.’ O how resolvedly will the worst of
sinners seem to cast away their sins and promise reformation, and cry out of
their folly, and of the vanity of this world, when they see that death is in
good earnest with them, and away they must without delay! Perhaps you
will say, that these forced changes are not cordial, and that, therefore, we
have no great hope of doing them any saving good. I confess it is very
common for sinners to be frightened into ineffectual purposes, but not so
common to be at such a season converted to the Savior. It is a remark of
Augustine, ‘He cannot die badly who lives well; and scarcely shall he die
well who lives badly.’ Yet ‘scarcely’ and ‘never’ are not all one. It should
make both them and us the more diligent in the time of health, because it is
‘scarcely’; but yet we should bestir us at the last, in the use of the best
remedies, because it is not ‘never’.
But as I do not intend to furnish a directory for the whole ministerial work, I
will not stop to tell you particularly what must be done for men in their last
extremity; but shall notice only three or four things, as specially worthy of
your attention.
(1) Stay not till their strength and understanding are gone, and the time so
short that you scarcely know what to do; but go to them as soon as you hear
they are sick, whether they send for you or not.
(2) When the time is so short, that there is no opportunity to instruct them in
the principles of religion in order, be sure to ply the main points, and to
dwell on those truths which are most calculated to promote their
conversion, showing them the glory of the life to come, and the way by
which it was purchased for us, and the great sin and folly of their having
neglected it in time of health; but yet the possibility that remaineth of their
still obtaining it, if they will believe in Christ, the only Savior, and repent of
their sins.
(3) If they recover, be sure to remind them of their promises and resolutions
in time of sickness. Go to them purposely to set these home to their
consciences; and whenever, afterwards, you see them remiss, go to them,

and put them in mind of what they said when they were stretched on a sickbed. And because it is of such use to them who recover, and hath been the
means of the conversion of many a soul, it is very necessary that you go to
them whose sickness is not mortal, as well as to those who are dying, that
so you may have some advantage to move them to repentance, and may
afterward have this to plead against their sins; as a bishop of Cologne is said
to have answered the Emperor Sigismund, when he asked him what was the
way to be saved, ‘He must be what he purposed, or promised to be, when he
was last troubled with the stone and the gout.’
6. We must reprove and admonish those who live offensively or
impenitently. Before we bring such matters before the church, or its rulers,
it is ordinarily most fit for the minister to try himself what he can do in
private to bow the sinner to repentance, especially if it be not a public
crime. Here there is required much skill, and a difference must be made,
according to the various tempers of the offenders; but with the most it will
be necessary to speak with the greatest plainness and power, to shake their
careless hearts, and make them see what it is to dally with sin; to let them
know the evil of it, and its sad effects as regards both God and themselves.
7. The last part of our oversight, which I shall notice, consisteth in the
exercise of Church discipline. This consisteth, after the aforesaid private
reproofs, in more public reproof, combined with exhortation to repentance,
in prayer for the offender, in restoring the penitent, and in excluding and
avoiding the impenitent.
(1) In the case of public offenses, and even of those of a more private
nature, when the offender remains impenitent, he must be reproved before
all, and again invited to repentance. This is not the less our duty, because
we have made so little conscience of the practice of it. It is not only Christ’s
command to tell the church, but Paul’s to ‘rebuke before all,’ and the
Church did constantly practice it, till selfishness and formality caused them
to be remiss in this and other duties. There is no room to doubt whether this
be our duty, and as little is there any ground to doubt whether we have been
unfaithful as to the performance of it. Many of us, who would be ashamed
to omit preaching or praying half so much, have little considered what we
are doing, while living in the wilful neglect of this duty, and other parts of

discipline, so long as we have done. We little think how we have drawn the
guilt of swearing, and drunkenness, and fornication, and other crimes upon
our own heads, by neglecting to use the means which God has appointed for
the cure of them.
If any shall say, There is little likelihood that public reproof will do them
good, that they will rather be enraged by the shame of it; I answer –
[a] It ill becomes a creature to implead the ordinances of God as useless, or
to reproach God’s service instead of doing it, and to set his wits in
opposition to his Maker. God can render useful his own ordinances, or else
he would never have appointed them.
[b] The usefulness of discipline is apparent, in the shaming of sin and
humbling the sinner, and in manifesting the holiness of Christ, and of his
doctrine and Church, before all the world.
[c] What will you do with such sinners? Will you give them up as hopeless?
That would be more cruel than administering reproof to them. Will you use
other means? Why , it is supposed that all other means have been used
without success; for this is the last remedy.
[d] The principal use of this public discipline is not for the offender himself,
but for the Church. It tendeth exceedingly to deter others from the like
crimes, and so to keep the congregation and their worship pure. Seneca
could say, ‘He who excuses present evils transmits them to posterity.’ And
elsewhere, ‘He who spares the guilty harms the good.’
(2) With reproof we must join exhortation of the offender to repentance, and
to the public profession of it for the satisfaction of the church. As the
church is bound to avoid communion with impenitent scandalous sinners,
so, when they have had evidence of their sin, they must also have some
evidence of their repentance; for we cannot know them to be penitent
without evidence; and what evidence can the church have but their
profession of repentance, and afterwards their actual reformation Much
prudence, I confess, is to be exercised in such proceedings, lest we do more
hurt than good; but it must be such Christian prudence as ordereth duties,
and suiteth them to their ends, not such carnal prudence as shall enervate or

exclude them. In performing this duty, we should deal humbly, even when
we deal most sharply, and make it appear that it is not from any ill will, nor
any lordly disposition, nor from revenge for any injury, but a necessary duty
which we cannot conscientiously neglect; and, therefore, it may be meet to
show the people the commands of God obliging us to do what we do, in
some such words as the following: ‘Brethren, sin is so hateful an evil in the
eyes of the most holy God, how light soever impenitent sinners make of it,
that he hath provided the everlasting torments of hell for the punishment of
it; and no lesser means can prevent that punishment than the sacrifice of the
Son of God, applied to those who truly repent of and forsake it; and
therefore God, who calleth all men to repentance, hath commanded us to
“exhort one another daily, while it is called To-day, lest any be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin,” (Hebrews 3:13) and that we do not hate
our brother in our heart, but in any wise rebuke our neighbor, and not suffer
sin upon him, (Leviticus 19:17) and that if our brother offend us, we should
tell him his fault between him and us; and if he hear us not, we should take
two or three more with us; and if he hear not them, we should tell the
church; and if he hear not the church, he must be to us as a heathen man and
a publican; (Matthew 18:15–17) and those that sin, we must rebuke before
all, that others may fear, (1 Timothy 5:20) and rebuke with all authority:
(Titus 2:15) yea, were it an apostle of Christ that should sin openly, he must
be reproved openly, as Paul did Peter; (Galatians 2:11,14) and if they repent
not, we must avoid them, and with such not so much as eat, (2
Thessalonians 3:6, 11, 12, 14; 1 Corinthians 5:11-13.) ‘Having heard of the
scandalous conduct of A.B. of this church, or parish, and having received
sufficient proof that he hath committed the odious sin of –, we have
seriously dealt with him to bring him to repentance; but, to the grief of our
hearts, we perceive no satisfactory result of our endeavors; but he seemeth
still to remain impenitent (or he still liveth in the same sin, though he
verbally professes repentance). We therefore judge it our duty to proceed to
the use of that further remedy which Christ hath commanded us to try; and
hence we beseech him, in the name of the Lord, without further delay, to lay
to heart the greatness of his sin, the wrong he hath done to Christ and to
himself, and the scandal and grief that he hath caused to others. And I do
earnestly beseech him, for the sake of his own soul, that he will consider,
what it is that he can gain by his sin and impenitency, and whether it will
pay for the loss of everlasting life; and how he thinks to stand before God in

judgment, or to appear before the Lord Jesus, when death shall snatch his
soul from his body, if he be found in this impenitent state. And I do beseech
him, for the sake of his own soul, and, as a messenger of Jesus Christ,
require him, as he will answer the contrary at the bar of God, that he lay
aside the stoutness and impenitency of his heart, and unfeignedly confess
and lament his sin before God and this congregation. And this desire I here
publish, not out of any ill will to his person, as the Lord knoweth, but in
love to his soul, and in obedience to Christ, who hath made it my duty;
desiring that, if it be possible, he may be saved from his sin, and from the
power of Satan, and from the everlasting wrath of God, and may be
reconciled to God and to his church; and, therefore, that he may be humbled
by true contrition, before he be humbled by remediless condemnation.’
To this purpose I conceive our public admonitions should proceed; and, in
some cases, where the sinner considereth his sin to be small, it may be
necessary to point out the aggravations of it, particularly by citing some
passages of Scripture which speak of its evil and its danger.
(3) With these reproofs and exhortations, we must join the prayers of the
congregation in behalf of the offender. This should be done in every case of
discipline, but particularly if the offender will not be present to receive
admonition, or gives no evidence of repentance, and shows no desire for the
prayers of the congregation. In such cases, especially, it will be meet that
we beg the prayers of the congregation for him ourselves, entreating them
to consider what a fearful condition the impenitent are in, and to have pity
on a poor soul that is so blinded and hardened by sin and Satan, that he
cannot pity himself; and to think what it is for a man to appear before the
living God in such a case, and, therefore, that they would join in earnest
prayer to God, that he would open his eyes, and soften, and humble his
stubborn heart, before he be in hell beyond remedy. And, accordingly, let us
be very earnest in prayer for him, that the congregation may be excited
affectionately to join with us; and who knows but God may hear our
prayers, and the sinner’s heart may relent under them, more than under all
our exhortations?
It is, in my judgment, a very laudable course of some churches, that use, for
the next three days together, to desire the congregation to join in earnest

prayer to God for the opening of the sinner’s eyes, and the softening of his
heart, and the saving of him from impenitency and eternal death. If
ministers would be conscientious in performing this duty entirely and selfdenyingly, they might make something of it, and expect a blessing upon it;
but when we shrink from all that is dangerous or ungrateful in our work,
and shift off all that is costly or troublesome, we cannot expect that any
great good should be effected by such a carnal, partial use of means; and
though some may here and there be wrought upon, yet we cannot look that
the gospel should run and be glorified when we do our duty so lamely and
so defectively.
(4) We must restore the penitent to the fellowship of the church. As we must
not teach an offender to make light of discipline by too much facility, so
neither must we discourage him by too much severity. If he appear to be
truly sensible of the sinfulness of his conduct, and penitent on account of it,
we must see that he confess his guilt, and that he promise to fly from such
sins for the time to come, to watch more narrowly and to walk more warily,
to avoid temptation, to distrust his own strength, and to rely on the grace
which is in Christ Jesus.
We must assure him of the riches of God’s love, and the sufficiency of
Christ’s blood to pardon his sins, if he believe and repent.
We must see that he begs to be restored to the communion of the church,
and desires their prayers to God for his pardon and salvation.
We must charge the church that they imitate Christ, in forgiving and in
retaining the penitent person; or, if he were cast out, in restoring him to
their communion; and that they must never reproach him with his sins, nor
cast them in his teeth, but forgive them, even as Christ doth.
Finally, we must give God thanks for his recovery, and pray for his
confirmation and future preservation.
(5) The last part of’ discipline is the excluding from the communion of the
church those who, after sufficient trial, remain impenitent.

Exclusion from church communion, commonly called excommunication, is
of divers sorts or degrees, which are not to be confounded; but that which is
most commonly to be practiced amongst us, is, only to remove an
impenitent sinner from our communion, till it shall please the Lord to give
him repentance.
In this exclusion or removal, the minister or governors of the church are
authoritatively to charge the people, in the name of the Lord, to have no
communion with him, and to pronounce him one whose communion the
church is bound to avoid; and it is the people’s duty carefully to avoid him,
provided the pastor’s charge contradict not the Word of God. Nevertheless,
we must pray for the repentance and restoration even of the
excommunicated; and if God shall give them repentance, we must gladly
receive them again into the communion of the church.
Would we were but so far faithful in the practice of this discipline, as we are
satisfied both of the matter and manner of it; and did not dispraise and
reproach it by our negligence, while we write and plead for it with the
highest commendations! It is worthy of our consideration, who is like to
have the heavier charge about this matter at the bar of God – whether those
who have reproached and hindered discipline by their tongues, because they
knew not its nature and necessity; or we who have so vilified it by our
constant omission, while with our tongues we have magnified it? If
hypocrisy be no sin, or if the knowledge of our Master’s will by no
aggravation of disobedience, then we may be in a better case than they; but
if these be great evils, we must be much worse than the very persons whom
we so loudly condemn. I will not advise the zealous maintainers, and
obstinate neglecters of discipline, to unsay all that they have said, till they
are ready to do as they say; nor to recant their defences of discipline, till
they mean to practice it; nor to burn all the books which they have written
for it, and all the records of their cost and hazards for it, lest they rise up in
judgment against them, to their confusion. But I would persuade them,
without any more delay, to conform their practice to these testimonies
which they have given, lest the more they are proved to have commended
discipline, the more they are proved to have condemned themselves for
neglecting it. It hath somewhat amazed me to hear some, that I took for
reverend, godly divines, reproach, as a sect, the Sacramentarians and

Disciplinarians. And, when I desired to know whom they meant, they told
me they meant them that will not give the sacrament to all the parish, and
them that will make distinctions by their discipline. I had thought the
tempter had obtained a great victory, if he had got but one godly pastor of a
church to neglect discipline, as well as if he had got him to neglect
preaching; much more if he had got him to approve of that neglect: but it
seems that he hath got some to scorn at the performers of the duty which
they neglect. Sure I am, if it were well understood how much of the pastoral
authority and work consisteth in church guidance, it would be also
discerned, that to be against discipline, is near to being against the ministry;
and to be against the ministry is near to being absolutely against the church;
and to be against the church, is near to being absolutely against Christ.
Blame not the harshness of the inference, till you can avoid it, and free
yourselves from the charge of it before the Lord.
SECTION 2 — THE MANNER OF THIS OVERSIGHT