PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 11 The Sovereignty of God in Operation

The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 6. The Sovereignty of God in Operation.

6. The Sovereignty of God in Operation

77

unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world” (Act 15:18), which shows that God has a plan, [and] that God did not begin His work at random or without a knowledge of how His plan would succeed. God created all things. This truth no one who bows to the testimony of Holy Writ will question; nor would any such be prepared to argue that the work of creation was an accidental work. God first formed the purpose to create, and then put forth the creative act in fulfillment of that purpose. All real Christians will readily adopt the words of the psalmist and say, “O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all” (Psa 104:24). Will any who endorse what we have just said, deny that God purposed to govern the world which He created? Surely the creation of the world was not the end of God’s purpose concerning it. Surely He did not determine simply to create the world and place man in it, and then leave both to their fortunes. It must be apparent that God has some great end or ends in view worthy of His infinite perfections, and that He is now governing the world so as to accomplish these ends. “The counsel of the LORD standeth for ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations” (Psa 33:11). “Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure” (Isa 46:9-10). Many other passages might be adduced to show that God has many counsels concerning this world and concerning man, and that all these counsels will most surely be realized. It is only when they are thus regarded that we can intelligently appreciate the prophecies of Scripture. In prophecy, the mighty God has condescended to take us into the secret chamber of His eternal counsels and make known to us what He has purposed to do in the future. The hundreds of prophecies that are found in the Old and New Testaments are not so much predictions of what will come to pass, as they are revelations to us of what God has purposed shall come to pass. 2. What was God’s purpose in creating? What then was the great purpose for which this world and the human race were created? The answer of Scripture is, “The LORD hath made all things for himself ” (Pro 16:4). And again, “Thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created” (Rev 4:11). The great end of creation was the manifestation of God’s glory. “The heavens declare the glory of God and the firmament sheweth his handiwork” (Psa 19:1); but it was by man, originally made in His own image and likeness, that God designed chiefly to manifest His glory. But how was the great Creator to be glorified by man? Before his creation, God foresaw the fall of Adam and the consequent ruin of his race, therefore He could not have designed that man should glorify Him by continuing in a state of innocency. Accordingly we are taught that Christ was “foreordained before the foundation of the world” to be the Saviour of fallen men (1Pe 1:20). The redemption of sinners by Christ was no mere after-thought of God: it was no expediency to meet an un-looked-for calamity. No; it was a divine provision, and therefore when man fell he found mercy walking hand in hand with justice. From all eternity God designed that our world should be the stage on which He would display His manifold grace and wisdom in the redemption of lost sinners: “To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God, According to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our

78

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Lord” (Eph 3:10-11). For the accomplishment of this glorious design, God has governed the world from the beginning, and will continue it to the end. It has been well said, “We can never understand the providence of God over our world, unless we regard it as a complicated machine having ten thousand parts, directed in all its operations to one glorious end: the display of the manifold wisdom of God in the salvation of the Church,” i.e., the “called out” ones. Everything else down here is subordinated to this central purpose. It was the apprehension of this basic truth that the apostle, moved by the Holy Spirit, was led to write, “Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory” (2Ti 2:10). What we would now contemplate is the operation of God’s sovereignty in the government of this world. In regard to the operation of God’s government over the material world, little needs now be said. In previous chapters we have shown that inanimate matter and all irrational creatures are absolutely subject to their Creator’s pleasure. While we freely admit that the material world appears to be governed by [natural] laws that are stable and more or less uniform in their operations, yet Scripture, history, and observation compel us to recognize the fact that God suspends these laws and acts apart from them whenever it pleaseth Him to do so. In sending His blessings or judgments upon His creatures, He may cause the sun itself to stand still, and the stars in their courses to fight for His people (Jdg 5:20); He may send or withhold “the early and latter rain” (Jam 5:7) according to the dictates of His own infinite wisdom; He may smite with plague or bless with health. In short, being God, being absolute sovereign, He is bound and tied by no laws of nature, but governs the material world as seemeth Him best. But what of God’s government of the human family? What does Scripture reveal in regard to the modus operandi of the operations of His governmental administration over mankind? To what extent and by what influence does God control the sons of men? We shall divide our answer to this question into two parts and consider: first, God’s method of dealing with the righteous, His elect; and then, His method of dealing with the wicked.

B. God’s Method of Dealing with the Righteous 1. Quickening influence God exerts upon His own elect a quickening influence or power. By nature they are spiritually dead, dead in trespasses and sins, and their first need is spiritual life, for “Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God” (Joh 3:3). In the new birth God brings us from death unto life (Joh 5:24). He imparts to us His own nature (2Pe 1:4). He delivers us from the power of darkness and translates us into the kingdom of His dear Son (Col 1:13). Now, manifestly, we could not do this ourselves, for we were “without strength” (Rom 5:6); hence it is written, “we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus” (Eph 2:10). In the new birth, we are made partakers of the divine nature: a principle, a “seed,” a life is communicated to us that is “‘born of the Spirit,” and therefore “is spirit” (Joh 3:6); is born of the Holy Spirit and therefore is holy. Apart from this divine and holy nature, which is imparted to us at the new birth, it is utterly impossible for any man to generate a spiritual impulse, form a spiritual concept, think a spiritual thought, understand spiritual things, still less engage in spiritual works. Without holiness “no man shall see the Lord” (Heb 12:14); but the natural man has no desire for holiness, and the provision that God has made, he does not want. Will then a man pray for, seek for, strive after that which he dislikes? Surely not. If then

6. The Sovereignty of God in Operation

79

a man does “follow after” that which by nature he cordially 2 dislikes, if he does now love the One he once hated, it is because a miraculous change has taken place within him; a power outside of himself has operated upon him, a nature entirely different from his old one has been imparted to him—and hence it is written, “Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creation: old things are passed away; behold all things are become new” (2Co 5:17). Such an one as we have just described has passed from death unto life, has been turned from darkness to light and from the power of Satan unto God (Act 26:18). In no other way can the great change be accounted for. The new birth is very, very much more than simply shedding a few tears due to a temporary remorse over sin. It is far more than changing our course of life, the leaving off of bad habits and the substituting of good ones. It is something different from the mere cherishing and practising of noble ideals. It goes infinitely deeper than coming forward to take some popular evangelist by the hand, signing a pledge-card, or “joining the church.” The new birth is no mere turning over a new leaf, but is the inception and reception of a new life. It is no mere reformation, but a complete transformation. In short, the new birth is a miracle, the result of the supernatural operation of God. It is radical, revolutionary, lasting. Here then is the first thing, in time, that God does in His own elect. He lays hold of those who are spiritually dead and quickens them into newness of life. He takes up one who was shapen in iniquity and conceived in sin, and conforms him to the image of His Son. He seizes a captive of the devil and makes him a member of the household of faith. He picks up a beggar and makes him joint-heir with Christ. He comes to one who is full of enmity against Him, and gives him a new heart that is full of love for Him. He stoops to one who by nature is a rebel, and works in him both to will and to do of His own good pleasure. By His irresistible power He transforms a sinner into a saint, an enemy into a friend, a slave of the devil into a child of God. Surely then we are moved to say, When all Thy mercies, O my God, My wondering soul surveys; Transported with the view, I’m lost In wonder, love and praise. 2. Energizing influence God exerts upon His own elect an energizing influence or power. The apostle prayed to God for the Ephesian saints that the eyes of their understanding might be enlightened in order that, among other things, they might know “what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who believe” (Eph 1:19), and that they might be “strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man” (3:16). “For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death” (Psa 48:14). 3. Directing influence God exerts upon His own elect a directing influence or power. Of old He led His people across the wilderness, directing their steps by a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by night; and today He still directs His saints, though now from within rather than from without. “For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto death” (Psa 48:14), but He “guides” us by working in us both to will and to do His good pleasure. That He does so guide us is clear from the words of the apostle in Ephesians 2:10, “For we are his workman2

cordially – heartily; with all one’s heart.

80

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

ship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them.” Thus all ground for boasting is removed and God gets all the glory, for with the prophet we have to say, “LORD, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought all our works in us” (Isa 26:12). How true then that “A man’s heart deviseth his way: but the LORD directeth his steps” (Pro 16:9; cf. Psa 65:4; Eze 36:27)! 4. Preserving influence God exerts upon His own elect a preserving influence or power. Many are the Scriptures that set forth this blessed truth. “He preserveth the souls of his saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked” (Psa 97:10). “For the LORD loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; they are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off ” (Psa 37:28). “The LORD preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked will he destroy” (Psa 145:20). It is needless to multiply texts or to raise an argument at this point respecting the believer’s responsibility and faithfulness—we can no more “persevere” without God preserving us, than we can breathe when God ceases to give us breath. We are “kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation ready to be revealed in the last time” (1Pe 1:5; cf. 1Ch 18:6).

C. God’s Method of Dealing with the Wicked It remains for us now to consider God’s method of dealing with the wicked. In contemplating His governmental dealings with the non-elect, we find that He exerts upon them a fourfold influence or power. We adopt the clear-cut divisions suggested by Dr. Rice. 3 1. Restraining influence God exerts upon the wicked a restraining influence by which they are prevented from doing what they are naturally inclined to do. A striking example of this is seen in Abimelech, king of Gerar. Abraham came down to Gerar and, fearful lest he might be slain on account of his wife, he instructed her to pose as his sister. Regarding her as an unmarried woman, Abimelech sent and took Sarah unto himself; and then we learn how God put forth His power to protect her honor—“And God said unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me: therefore suffered I thee not to touch her” (Gen 20:6). Had not God interposed, Abimelech would have grievously wronged Sarah, but the Lord restrained him and allowed him not to carry out the intentions of his heart. A similar instance is found in connection with Joseph and his brethren’s treatment of him. Owing to Jacob’s partiality for Joseph, his brethren “hated him,” and when they thought they had him in their power, “they conspired against him to slay him” (Gen 37:18). But God did not allow them to carry out their evil designs. First He moved Reuben to deliver him out of their hands, and next he caused Judah to suggest that Joseph should be sold to the passing Ishmaelites, who carried him down into Egypt. That it was God Who thus restrained them is clear: [when] he made known himself to his brethren, said he, “So now it was not you that sent me hither, but God” (Gen 45:8)! The restraining influence that God exerts upon the wicked was strikingly exemplified in the person of Balaam, the prophet hired by Balak to curse the Israelites. One cannot read the in3

Nathan Lewis Rice (1807-1877), God Sovereign and Man Free: or the Doctrine of Divine Foreordination and Man’s Free Agency, Stated, Illustrated and Proved from the Scriptures (Presbyterian Board of Publication, Philadelphia, 1850).

6. The Sovereignty of God in Operation

81

spired narrative without discovering that, left to himself, Balaam had readily and certainly accepted the offer of Balak. How evidently God restrained the impulses of his heart is seen from his own acknowledgment—“How shall I curse, whom God hath not cursed? or how shall I defy, whom the LORD hath not defied? Behold I have received commandment to bless: and he hath blessed; and I cannot reverse it” (Num 23:8, 20). Not only does God exert a restraining influence upon wicked individuals, but He does so upon whole peoples as well. A remarkable illustration of this is found in Exodus 34:24: “For I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou shalt go up to appear before the LORD thy God thrice in the year.” Three times every male Israelite, at the command of God, left his home and inheritance, and journeyed to Jerusalem to keep the feasts of the Lord; and in the above Scriptures, we learn He promised them that while they were at Jerusalem, He would guard their unprotected homes by restraining the covetous designs and desires of their heathen neighbors. 2. Softening influence God exerts upon the wicked a softening influence: disposing them contrary to their natural inclinations to do that which will promote His cause. Above, we referred to Joseph’s history as an illustration of God exerting a restraining influence upon the wicked, let us note now his experiences in Egypt as exemplifying our assertion that God also exerts a softening influence upon the unrighteous. We are told that while he was in the house of Potiphar “The LORD was with Joseph…And his master saw the LORD was with him,” and in consequence, “Joseph found [favor] in his sight…and he made him overseer over his house” (Gen 39:2-4). Later, when Joseph was unjustly cast into prison, we are told “But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison” (Gen 39:21), and in consequence the prison-keeper showed him much kindness and honor. Finally, after his release from prison, we learn from Acts 7:10 that the Lord “gave him favor and wisdom in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt; and he made him governor over Egypt and all his house.” An equally striking evidence of God’s power to melt the hearts of his enemies, was seen in Pharaoh’s daughter’s treatment of the infant Moses. The incident is well known. Pharaoh had issued an edict commanding the destruction of every male child of the Israelites. A certain Levite had a son born to him who for three months was kept hidden by his mother. No longer able to conceal the infant Moses, she placed him in an ark of bulrushes and laid him by the river’s brink. The ark was discovered by none less than the king’s daughter, who had come down to the river to bathe; but instead of heeding her father’s wicked decree and casting the child into the river, we are told that “she had compassion on him” (Exo 2:6)! Accordingly, the young life was spared and later Moses became the adopted son of this princess! God has access to the hearts of all men, and He softens or hardens them according to His sovereign purpose. The profane Esau swore vengeance upon his brother for the deception that he had practiced upon his father, yet when next he met Jacob, instead of slaying him, we are told that Esau “fell on his neck and kissed him” (Gen 33:4)! Ahab, the weak and wicked consort of Jezebel, was highly enraged against Elijah the prophet, at whose word the heavens had been shut up for three years and a half. So angry was he against the one whom he regarded as his enemy that we are told he searched for him in every nation and kingdom, and when he could not be found “he took an oath” (1Ki 18:10). Yet, when they met, instead of killing the prophet, Ahab meekly obeyed Elijah’s behest and “sent unto all the children of Israel and gathered the

82

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

prophets together unto mount Carmel” (v. 20). Again, Esther, the poor Jewess, is about to enter the presence-chamber of the august4 Medo-Persian monarch, which, said she, “is not according to the law” (Est 4:16). She went in expecting to “perish,” but we are told “She obtained favor in his sight, and the king held out to Esther the golden sceptre” (5:2). Yet again, the boy Daniel is a captive in a foreign court. The king “appointed” a daily provision of meat and drink for Daniel and his fellows. But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the allotted portion, and accordingly made known his purpose to his master, the prince of the eunuchs. What happened? His master was a heathen and “feared” the king. Did he turn then upon Daniel and angrily demand that his orders be promptly carried out? No, for we read, “Now God had brought Daniel into favor and tender love with the prince of the eunuchs” (Dan 1:9)! “The king’s heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will” (Pro 21:1). A remarkable illustration of this is seen in Cyrus, the heathen king of Persia. God’s people were in captivity, but the predicted end of their captivity was almost reached. Meanwhile, the Temple at Jerusalem lay in ruins, and, as we have said, the Jews were in bondage in a distant land. What hope was there, then, that the Lord’s house would be re-built? Mark now what God did: Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The LORD God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him a house at Jerusalem (Ezr 1:1-2). Cyrus, be it remembered, was a pagan, and as secular history bears witness, a very wicked man. Yet the Lord moved him to issue this edict that His Word—through Jeremiah seventy years before—might be fulfilled. A similar and further illustration is found in Ezra 7:27, where we find Ezra returning thanks for what God had caused King Artaxerxes to do in completing and beautifying the house that Cyrus had commanded to be erected: “Blessed be the LORD God of our fathers which hath put such a thing as this in the king’s heart, to beautify the house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem” (Ezr 7:27). 3. Directing influence God exerts upon the wicked a directing influence so that good is made to result from their intended evil. Once more we revert to the history of Joseph as a case in point. In selling Joseph to the Ishmaelites, his brethren were actuated by cruel and heartless motives. Their object was to make away with him, and the passing of these traveling traders furnished an easy way out for them. To them the act was nothing more than the enslaving of a noble youth for the sake of gain. But now observe how God was secretly working and over-ruling their wicked actions. Providence so ordered it that these Ishmaelites passed by just in time to prevent Joseph being murdered, for his brethren had already taken counsel together to put him to death. Further, these Ishmaelites were journeying to Egypt, which was the very country to which God had purposed to send Joseph, and He ordained they should purchase Joseph just when they did. That the hand of God was in this incident, that it was something more than a fortunate coincidence, is clear from the words of Joseph to his brethren at a later date, “God sent me before 4

august – majestic; inspiring awe; solemnly grand.

6. The Sovereignty of God in Operation

83

you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance” (Gen 45:7). Another equally striking illustration of God directing the wicked is found in Isaiah 10:5-7: “O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is mine indignation. I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.” Assyria’s king had determined to be a world-conqueror, to “cut off nations not a few.” But God directed and controlled his military lust and ambition, and caused him to confine his attention to the conquering of the insignificant nation of Israel. Such a task was not in the proud king’s heart—“he meant it not so”—but God gave him this charge and he could do nothing but fulfill it (cf. Jdg 7:22). The supreme example of the controlling, directing influence that God exerts upon the wicked, is the cross of Christ with all its attending circumstances. If ever the superintending providence of God was witnessed, it was there. From all eternity God had predestined every detail of that event of all events. Nothing was left to chance or the caprice 5 of man. God had decreed when and where and how His blessed Son was to die. Much of what He had purposed concerning the crucifixion had been made known through the Old Testament prophets; and in the accurate and literal fulfillment of these prophecies we have clear proof, full demonstration, of the controlling and directing influence that God exerts upon the wicked. Not a thing occurred except as God had ordained, and all that He had ordained took place exactly as He purposed. Had it been decreed (and made known in Scripture) that the Saviour should be betrayed by one of His own disciples—by His “familiar friend” (see Psa 41:9; cf. Mat 26:50)—then the apostle Judas is the one who sold Him. Had it been decreed that the betrayer should receive for his awful perfidy 6 thirty pieces of silver, then are the chief priests moved to offer him this very sum. Had it been decreed that this betrayal sum should be put to a particular use, namely, purchase of the potter’s field, then the hand of God directs Judas to return the money to the chief priests, and so guided their “counsel” (Mat 27:7) that they did this very thing. Had it been decreed that there should be those who bore “false witness” against our Lord (Psa 35:11), then accordingly such were raised up. Had it been decreed that the Lord of Glory should be spat upon and “scourged” (Isa 50:6), then there were not found wanting those who were vile enough to do so. Had it been decreed that the Saviour should be “numbered with the transgressors,” then unknown to himself, Pilate, directed by God, gave orders for His crucifixion along with two thieves. Had it been decreed that vinegar and gall should be given Him to drink while He hung upon the cross (Joh 19:29), then this decree of God was executed to the very letter. Had it been decreed that the heartless should gamble for His garments, then sure enough they did this very thing (Mat 27:35). Had it been decreed that not a bone of Him should be broken (Psa 34:20), then the controlling hand of God, which suffered the Roman soldier to break the legs of the thieves, prevented him from doing the same with our Lord (Joh 19:32-33). Ah! there were not enough soldiers in all the Roman legions, there were not sufficient demons in all the hierarchies of Satan, to break one bone in the body of Christ! And why? Because the almighty Sovereign had decreed that not a bone should be broken. Do we need to extend this paragraph 5 6

caprice – whim or impulse.
perfidy – deliberate betrayal of trust.

84

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

any farther? Does not the accurate and literal fulfillment of all that Scripture had predicted in connection with the crucifixion, demonstrate beyond all controversy that an Almighty power was directing and superintending everything that was done on that day of days? 4. Hardening influence God also hardens the hearts of wicked men and blinds their minds. [Some may respond:] “God hardens men’s hearts!? God blinds men’s minds!?” Yes, so Scripture represents Him. In developing this theme of the sovereignty of God in operation, we recognize that we have now reached its most solemn aspect of all, and that here especially, we need to keep very close indeed to the words of Holy Writ. God forbid that we should go one fraction further than His Word goes, but may He give us grace to go as far as His Word goes. It is true that secret things belong unto the Lord, but it is also true that those things which are revealed in Scripture belong unto us and to our children (Deu 29:29). a. Pharaoh “He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtly with his servants” (Psa 105:25). The reference here is to the sojourn of the descendants of Jacob in the land of Egypt when, after the death of the Pharaoh who had welcomed the old patriarch and his family, there “arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph” (Exo 1:8); and in his days the children of Israel had “increased abundantly,” so that they outnumbered the Egyptians. Then it was that God “turned their heart to hate his people.” The consequence of the Egyptians’ “hatred” is well known: they brought them into cruel bondage and placed them under merciless taskmasters until their lot became unendurable. Helpless and wretched, the Israelites cried unto Jehovah, and in response He appointed Moses to be their deliverer. God revealed Himself unto His chosen servant, gave him a number of miraculous signs that he was to exhibit at the Egyptian court, and then bade him to go to Pharaoh and demand that the Israelites should be allowed to go to a three days’ journey into the wilderness that they might worship the Lord. But before Moses started out on his journey, God warned him concerning Pharaoh, “I will harden his heart that he shall not let the people go” (Exo 4:21). If it be asked, Why did God harden Pharaoh’s heart? the answer, furnished by Scripture itself, is: In order that God might show forth His power in him (Rom 9:17). In other words, it was so that the Lord might demonstrate that it was just as easy for Him to overthrow this haughty and powerful monarch, as it was for Him to crush a worm. If it should be pressed further, Why did God select such a method of displaying His power? then the answer must be that, being sovereign, God reserves to Himself the right to act as He pleases. Not only are we told that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh so that he would not let the Israelites go, but after God had plagued his land so severely that he reluctantly gave a qualified permission, and after that the first-born of all the Egyptians had been slain, and Israel had actually left the land of bondage, God told Moses, And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall follow them: and I will get me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen. And the Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD, when I have gotten me honor upon Pharaoh (Exo 14:17-18).

6. The Sovereignty of God in Operation

85

b. Canaanites The same thing happened subsequently in connection with Sihon, king of Heshbon, through whose territory Israel had to pass on their way to the promised land. When reviewing their history, Moses told the people, “But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him: for the LORD thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand” (Deu 2:30)! So it was also after that Israel had entered Canaan. We read, “There was not a city that made peace with the children of Israel, save the Hivites…all other they took in battle. For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in battle, that He might destroy them…as the Lord commanded Moses” (Jos 11:19-20). From other Scriptures we learn why God purposed to “destroy utterly” the Canaanites: it was because of their awful wickedness and corruption. c. New Testament Nor is the revelation of this solemn truth confined to the Old Testament. In John 12:37-40 we read, But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: [in order] That the saying of Esaias [i.e., Isaiah] the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord, who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed? Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, He hath blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. It needs to be carefully noted here that these whose eyes God “blinded” and whose heart He “hardened” were men who had deliberately scorned the Light and rejected the testimony of God’s own Son. Similarly we read in 2 Thessalonians 2:11-12, “And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie: That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.” What God did unto the Jews of old He is yet going to do unto Christendom. Just as the Jews of Christ’s day despised His testimony, and in consequence were “blinded,” so a guilty Christendom, which has rejected the truth, shall yet have sent them from God a “strong delusion” that they may believe a lie.

D. Summary Is God really governing the world? Is He exercising rule over the human family? What is the modus operandi of His governmental administration over mankind? To what extent and by what means does He control the sons of men? How does God exercise an influence upon the wicked, seeing their hearts are at enmity against Him? These are some of the questions we have sought to answer from Scripture in the previous sections of this chapter. Upon His own elect God exerts a quickening, an energizing, a directing, and a preserving power. Upon the wicked God exerts a restraining, softening, directing, and hardening and blinding power, according to the dictates of His own infinite wisdom and unto the outworking of His own eternal purpose. God’s decrees are being executed. What He has ordained is being accomplished. Man’s wickedness is bounded. The limits of evil-doing and of evildoers has been divinely defined and cannot be exceeded. Though many are in ignorance of it, all men, good and bad, are

86

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

under the jurisdiction of and are absolutely subject to the administration of the supreme Sovereign—“Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth” (Rev 19:6), reigneth over all. 7 

7

Questions for study and discussion appear at the end of chapter 7.

7 GOD’S SOVEREIGNTY AND THE HUMAN WILL “It is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.”—Philippians 2:13

A. Introduction Concerning the nature and the power of fallen man’s will, the greatest confusion prevails today, and the most erroneous views are held even by many of God’s children. The popular idea now prevailing, and that is taught from the great majority of pulpits, is that man has a “free will,” and that salvation comes to the sinner through his will co-operating with the Holy Spirit. To deny the “free will” of man, i.e., his power to choose that which is good, his native ability to accept Christ, is to bring one into disfavor at once, even before most of those who profess to be orthodox. And yet Scripture emphatically says, “It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy” (Rom 9:16). Which shall we believe: God, or the preachers? But some one may reply, Did not Joshua say to Israel, “Choose you this day whom ye will serve”? Yes, he did; but why not complete his sentence—“whether the gods which your fathers served which were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell” (Jos 24:15)! But why attempt to pit Scripture against Scripture? The Word of God never contradicts itself, and the Word expressly declares, “There is none that seeketh after God” (Rom 3:11). Did not Christ say to the men of His day “Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life” (Joh 5:40)? Yes, but some did “come” to Him, some did receive Him. True, and who were they? John 1:12-13 tells us: “But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, to them that believe on his name: which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God”! But does not Scripture say, Whosoever will may come (Rev 22:17)? It does, but does this signify that everybody has the will to come? What of those who won’t come? “Whosoever will may come” no more implies that fallen man has the power (in himself) to come, than “Stretch forth thine hand” implied that the man with the withered arm had ability (in himself) to comply (Mar 3:5). In and of himself, the natural man has power to reject Christ; but in and of himself he has not the power to receive Christ. And why? Because he has a mind that is “enmity against” Him (Rom 8:7); because he has a heart that hates Him (Joh 15:18). Man chooses that which is according to his nature, and therefore before he will ever choose or prefer that which is divine and spiritual, a new nature must be imparted to him—in other words, he must be born again.

88

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Should it be asked, But does not the Holy Spirit overcome a man’s enmity and hatred when He convicts the sinner of his sins and his need of Christ; and does not the Spirit of God produce such conviction in many that perish? Such language betrays confusion of thought: were such a man’s enmity really “overcome,” then he would readily turn to Christ; that he does not come to the Saviour demonstrates that his enmity is not overcome. But that many are, through the preaching of the Word, convicted by the Holy Spirit, who nevertheless die in unbelief, is solemnly true. Yet, it is a fact, which must not be lost sight of, that the Holy Spirit does something more in each of God’s elect than He does in the non-elect: He works in them “both to will and to do of his good pleasure” (Phi 2:13). In reply to what we have said above, Arminians would answer, No, the Spirit’s work of conviction is the same both in the converted and in unconverted; that which distinguishes the one class from the other is that the former yielded to His strivings whereas the latter resist them. But if this were the case, then the Christian would have ground for boasting and self-glorying over his cooperation with the Spirit; but this would flatly contradict Ephesians 2:8, “For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God.” Let us appeal to the actual experience of the Christian reader. Was there not a time (may the remembrance of it bow each of us into the dust) when you were unwilling to come to Christ? There was. Since then you have come to Him. Are you now prepared to give Him all the glory for that (Psa 115:1)? Do you not acknowledge you came to Christ because the Holy Spirit brought you from unwillingness to willingness? You do. Then is it not also a patent fact that the Holy Spirit has not done in many others what He has in you—granting that many others have heard the gospel, been shown their need of Christ, yet they are still unwilling to come to Him. Thus He has wrought more in you than in them. Do you answer, Yet I remember well the time when the great issue was presented to me, and my consciousness testifies that my will acted and that I yielded to the claims of Christ upon me. Quite true. But before you “yielded,” the Holy Spirit overcame the native enmity of your mind against God, and this “enmity” He does not overcome in all. Should it be said, That is because they are unwilling for their enmity to be overcome. Ah, none are thus “‘willing” till He has put forth His all-mighty power and wrought a miracle of grace in the heart!

B. The Nature of the “Will” 1. Definition But let us now inquire, What is the human will? Is it a self-determining agent, or is it, in turn, determined by something else? Is it sovereign or servant? Is the will superior to every other faculty of our being so that it governs them, or is it moved by their impulses and subject to their pleasure? Does the will rule the mind, or does the mind control the will? Is the will free to do as it pleases, or is it under the necessity of rendering obedience to something outside of itself ? Does the will stand apart from the other great faculties or powers of the soul, a man within a man, who can reverse the man and fly against the man and split him into segments, as a glass snake breaks in pieces? Or, is the will connected with the other faculties, as the tail of the serpent is with his body, and that again with his head, so that where the head goes, the whole creature goes—and, as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he (Pro 23:7)? First thought, then heart (desire or aversion), and then act. Is it this way:

7. God’s Sovereignty and the Human Will
