PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 14
Confirmation

---

CONFIRMATION

I

WANT YOU TO NOTICE the security which Paul confidently
expected for all the saints. He says — “Who shall confirm you unto the
end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.”
This is the kind of confirmation which is above all things to be desired.
You see it supposes that the persons are right, and it proposes to confirm
them in the right. It would be an awful thing to confirm a man in ways of
sin and error. Think of a confirmed drunkard, or a confirmed thief, or a
confirmed liar. It would be a deplorable thing for a man to be confirmed in
unbelief and ungodliness. Divine confirmation can only be enjoyed by
those to whom the grace of God has been already manifested. It is the
work of the Holy Ghost. He who gives faith strengthens and establishes it:
He who kindles love in us preserves it and increases its flame. What He
makes us to know by His first teaching, the good Spirit causes us to know
with greater clearness and certainty by still further instruction. Holy acts
are confirmed till they become habits, and holy feelings are confirmed till
they become abiding conditions. Experience and practice confirm our
beliefs and our resolutions. Both our joys and our sorrows, our successes
and our failures, are sanctified to the selfsame end: even as the tree is
helped to root itself both by the soft showers and the rough winds. The
mind is instructed, and in its growing knowledge it gathers reasons for
persevering in the good way: the heart is comforted, and so it is made to
cling more closely to the consoling truth. The grip grows tighter, and the
tread grows firmer, and the man himself becomes more solid and
substantial.
This is not a merely natural growth, but is as distinct a work of the Spirit
as conversion. The Lord will surely give it to those who are relying upon
Him for eternal life. By His inward working He will deliver us from being
“unstable as water,” and cause us to be rooted and grounded. It is a part of
the method by which He saves us — this building us up into Christ Jesus
and causing us to abide in Him. Dear reader, you may daily look for this;
and you shall not be disappointed. He whom you trust will make you to
be as a tree planted by the rivers of waters, so preserved that even your
leaf shall not wither.

81

What a strength to a church is a confirmed Christian! He is a comfort to
the sorrowful, and a help to the weak. Would you not like to be such?
Confirmed believers are pillars in the house of our God. These are not
carried away by every wind of doctrine, nor overthrown by sudden
temptation. They are a great stay to others, and act as anchors in the time
of church trouble. You who are beginning the holy life hardly dare to hope
that you will become like them. But you need not fear; the good Lord will
work in you as well as in them. One of these days you who are now a
“babe” in Christ shall be a “father” in the church. Hope for this great thing;
but hope for it as a gift of grace, and not as the wages of work, or as the
product of your own energy.
The inspired apostle Paul speaks of these people as to be confirmed unto
the end. He expected the grace of God to preserve them personally to the
end of their lives, or till the Lord Jesus should come. Indeed, he expected
that the whole church of God in every place and in all time would be kept
to the end of the dispensation, till the Lord Jesus as the Bridegroom should
come to celebrate the wedding-feast with his perfected Bride. All who are
in Christ will be confirmed in Him till that illustrious day. Has He not said,
“Because I live ye shall live also”? He also said, “I give unto my sheep
eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them
out of my hand.” He that hath begun a good work in you will confirm it
unto the day of Christ. The work of grace in the soul is not a superficial
reformation; the life implanted as the new birth comes of a living and
incorruptible seed, which liveth and abideth for ever; and the promises of
God made to believers are not of a transient character, but involve for their
fulfillment the believer’s holding on his way till he comes to endless glory.
We are kept by the power of God, through faith unto salvation. “The
righteous shall hold on his way.” Not as the result of our own merit or
strength, but as a gift of free and undeserved favor those who believe are
“preserved in Christ Jesus.” Of the sheep of His fold Jesus will lose none;
no member of His Body shall die; no gem of His treasure shall be missing
in the day when He makes up His jewels. Dear reader, the salvation which
is received by faith is not a thing of months and years; for our Lord Jesus
hath “obtained eternal salvation for us,” and that which is eternal cannot
come to an end.

82

Paul also declares his expectation that the Corinthian saints would be
“Confirmed to the end blameless.” This blamelessness is a precious part of
our keeping. To be kept holy is better than merely to be kept safe. It is a
dreadful thing when you see religious people blundering out of one
dishonor into another; they have not believed in the power of our Lord to
make them blameless. The lives of some professing Christians are a series
of stumbles; they are never quite down, and yet they are seldom on their
feet. This is not a fit thing for a believer; he is invited to walk with God,
and by faith he can attain to steady perseverance in holiness; and he ought
to do so. The Lord is able, not only to save us from hell, but to keep us
from falling. We need not yield to temptation. Is it not written, “Sin shall
not have dominion over you?” The Lord is able to keep the feet of His
saints; and He will do it if we will trust Him to do so. We need not defile
our garments, we may by His grace keep them unspotted from the world;
we are bound to do this, “for without holiness no man shall see the Lord.”
The apostle prophesied for these believers, that which he would have us
seek after — that we may be preserved, blameless unto the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” The revised version has “unreproveable,” instead of
“blameless.” Possibly a better rendering would be “unimpeachable.” God
grant that in that last great day we may stand free from all charge, that
none in the whole universe may dare to challenge our claim to be the
redeemed of the Lord. We have sins and infirmities to mourn over, but
these are not the kind of faults which would prove us to be out of Christ;
we shall be clear of hypocrisy, deceit, hatred, and delight in sin; for these
things would be fatal charges. Despite our failings, the Holy Spirit can
work in us a character spotless before men; so that, like Daniel, we shall
furnish no occasion for accusing tongues, except in the matter of our
religion. Multitudes of godly men and women have exhibited lives so
transparent, so consistent throughout, that none could gainsay them. The
Lord will be able to say of many a believer, as he did of Job, when Satan
stood before Him, “Hast thou considered my servant, a perfect and an
upright man, one that feareth God and escheweth evil?” This is what my
reader must look for at the Lord’s hands. This is the triumph of the saints
— to continue to follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth, maintaining
our integrity as before the living God. May we never turn aside into
crooked ways, and give cause to the adversary to blaspheme. Of the true

83

believer it is written, “He keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth
him not.” May it be so written concerning us!
Friend just beginning in the divine life, the Lord can give you an
irreproachable character. Even though in your past life you may have gone
far into sin, the Lord can altogether deliver you from the power of former
habits, and make you an example of virtue. He can not only make you
moral, but He can make you abhor every false way and follow after all that
is saintly. Do not doubt it. The chief of sinners need not be a whit behind
the purest of the saints. Believe for this, and according to your faith shall it
be unto you.
Oh, what a joy it will be to be found blameless in the day of judgment! We
sing not amiss, when we join in that charming hymn:
Bold shall I stand in that great day,
For who aught to my charge shall lay;
While through Thy blood absolved I am,
From sin’s tremendous curse and shame?

What bliss it will be to enjoy that dauntless courage, when heaven and
earth shall flee away from the face of the Judge of all! This bliss shall be
the portion of everyone who looks alone to the grace of God in Christ
Jesus, and in that sacred might wages continual war with all sin.

84