PURITAN GOLD -- Female Piety by John Angell James: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 13
Christian Zeal

---

Female Piety: or, The Young Woman's Guide Through Life to Immortality. By John Angell James.

Chapter 6. Christian Zeal.

CHRISTIAN ZEAL
"Those women who labored with me in the Gospel." Philippians
4:3
The subject of this chapter harmonizes with the scenes which we
often witness in the metropolis of our country, I mean the missionary
and other religious meetings, which are held annually in that great
center of the world's family. The month of May is wisely selected for
the time of holding the anniversaries of these organizations of
Christian zeal. Then, when the principle of fertility, after the
dreariness of another winter, is flowing in a thousand channels, and
when all nature in this country is verdant and blossoms with the
hopes of another year, it is well for the church of Christ to exhibit
those institutions which are, in the moral world, the vernal signs of
retiring frosts and approaching summer. It is a glorious sight to
behold the trooping multitudes hastening with willing feet and joyful
countenances, and beating hearts, to the place of convocation, and
blending all the joys of friendly greetings with all the sublimer
delights of Christian zeal. We feel called upon there to bless God, not
only that we live in a world which he has visited in mercy by the
person and work of his incarnate Son, but in an age and country in
which so much is done for the spread of the knowledge of this great
fact to the ends of the earth. At these meetings all is matter of
delight. The crowded platforms, containing the pastors, deacons, and
members of our churches, who have connected themselves with the
Missionary Society; the presence of missionaries from the fields of
holy labor; the eloquent addresses of the speakers; the vast crowd of
listening hearers, the thunders of eloquence reverberated in other

thunders of applause; all, all, are calculated to make one feel how
happy an exchange we have made in giving up the pleasures of sin
and the world for those of religion.
But there is one other sight on these occasions which is as delightful
as it is common; and that is the number of women, and especially of
young women, that are always present—thus reminding us how deep
an interest they have in these proceedings, and how large a share
they bear in them. And indeed, without going to the metropolis in the
month of May, or witnessing the scenes of Exeter Hall, what public
meeting for any religious object is ever held in our own, or any other
town, of which women do not form by far the larger portion? But I do
not adopt the world's vocabulary and talk of the beautiful and
elegantly dressed women who are there, I would rather speak of "the
holy women," like one apostle, and refer to them as another apostle
does, as "those women who labor in the gospel."
Let us attend to what the passage at the head of the chapter says,
"Help those women who labored with me in the gospel." Then
women may labor in the gospel, for they did so in apostolic times,
and received the commendation of the apostle for it. If they did then,
they may now; and if they may, they ought. Hard would be woman's
lot, bitter her privation, and degraded her condition, if on account of
her sex she was excluded from all participation, beyond her own
personal religion, in the most sublime enterprise in the universe. She
might well deplore her misfortune, if while man was permitted the
exercise of religious zeal, she was denied all service at the altar of
God. "Even heathenism," she would mournfully exclaim, "honored
our sex, as it was represented by the Vestals, to whose vigilance was
committed the guardianship of the sacred fire; and also by its
priestesses, to whose inspiration was entrusted the responses of the
oracles. And does the religion of Jesus exclude us?" No, it does not,

and I refer you back to the first two chapters for proof that it does
not; and I call your attention in the present one to learn how you may
avail yourselves of the honor placed within your reach, and discharge
the obligations which you are under to promote the interests of
religion in this dark, disordered world.
To be useful in the cause of God! How noble, how vast, how sublime,
how godlike an idea! Dwell for a moment upon it. Did you ever weigh
the import of that very common, but very delightful word,
'usefulness'? Did you ever ponder in sober seriousness of thought the
kindred phrase, "To be useful?" Have you never had your admiration
excited by hearing it said of any one, "She is a useful woman?" I
cannot let you read another syllable until I have endeavored to
fascinate you if possible by the beauty, and to captivate you by the
force, of that glorious word, usefulness.
Look at its opposite, uselessness. How low, and dull, and mean a
sound; and how despicable the character it represents! A rational,
social, and immortal being, useless—doing no good, carrying on no
benevolent activity, exerting no beneficial influence—a worthless
weed, and not a flower; a pebble, and not a gem, a piece of dead
wood floating down the stream, instead of a living fruit tree growing
on its bank! Yes, worse than all these, for the weeds, stones, and
wood may be converted to some good purpose; but to what purpose
can one who does no good be turned, except it be to serve as a
warning to others? Let your young hearts, then, beat with a desire to
do good. Aspire to the honor of doing good. Contract not, shrivel not,
into a despicable selfishness. Cherish a yearning after benevolent
activity, and feel as if it were but half-living to live only for
yourselves.

In this cause I want you to be even zealous. The apostle says, "It is
good to be zealously affected always in a good thing." Zeal, as you
know, means an earnest, ardent desire, giving rise to a
correspondent energy of action, to obtain some favorite object; and
when directed to a right object is a noble and elevated state of mind.
It is, however, a state of mind that requires great caution in its
exercise, especially in the young, and most of all in young women. It
is like fire, which may be applied to many useful purposes when
under wise direction, but which if not kept in its proper place and
under proper restraint may cause a conflagration. Or to change the
illustration, it may be only as the healthful vital heat which keeps the
body in comfort and in action, or it may become a fever of the soul,
to consume its strength and destroy its life. Or, to venture, for the
sake of emphasis, even upon a third comparison, many a zealous
mind is set on fire by the speed of its own action, and for lack of
some regulator to check its speed, and some lubricator to lessen its
friction, bursts into a flame and consumes the whole machine, and
does mischief to others as well as to itself.
A warm heart requires a cool judgment to prevent these
consequences from a misguided zeal. The female mind being so
susceptible, is far more liable to incautious action than that of the
other sex, and is less disposed to reflection. In man the judgment
more generally keeps the heart in check until it is itself enlightened
and convinced. In woman the heart is often engaged before the
judgment; and hence the danger of female zeal being sometimes
wrong in its object, excessive in its degree, and impetuous in its
action. Almost all new theories, whether relating to medicine,
theology, or any other practical matters, find favor first of all chiefly
with women. Too often led more by their feelings than by their
reason, they get entangled, like their first mother, by appeals to their
passions and affections, and allow their hearts to lead astray their

judgment. The Greek philosophers classed zeal under three heads—
zeal of envy, the zeal of achievement, and the zeal of piety.
Extinguish all feelings of the first, as so many sparks thrown off from
a flame kindled by the fire of the bottomless pit. Have very little to do
with the second beyond an unenvious imitation of what is good; and
let the third be put under the guardianship of a sound judgment, and
the guidance of the Holy Scripture.
I will first of all advert to the OBJECTS of your zealous activity. You
dwell in a valley of tears, and amid the groans of creation, occasioned
by poverty, disease, misfortune, and death, and are not to be
insensible to the sights and sounds of affliction by which you are
surrounded. The female heart is supposed to be the very dwellingplace of mercy, and an unfeeling woman is a libel upon her sex—
formed by nature to weep with those who weep, and to minister to
the bodily woes of humanity, she should enter into the design of
Providence, and become a ministering angel in the chamber of
sickness. You have seen those cloaked and demure women who issue
from Catholic convents on errands of mercy to the abodes of sickness
and poverty, deeming no office too menial, no service too selfdenying, which can alleviate the pains, or promote the comfort, of
the sufferer. We would not question the purity of their motives, or
the tenderness of the offices which they perform for the children of
want and woe; but they look, after all, like a device of the church
which employs them, to obtrude itself on public notice and to win
converts to itself. We call upon you, without cutting the ties of your
connection with society and abjuring the characters of wives and
mothers, to be our Sisters of Mercy, and to make it your business and
your pleasure to visit the scenes of sickness and the abodes of
poverty. Even in youth, acquire the habits, the tenderness, the
delicate tact, of a nurse. Loathe that spurious sentimentality which
can weep over the imaginary woes of a novel—but turns away, either

with a callous or a coward heart, from the real sufferings which
abound on every hand.
But I now more particularly refer to zeal for Biblical religion, or for
matters connected with it. Religion is every one's business, not only
as regards the possession and practice of it as a personal concern, but
also as regards its diffusion. Everyone can not only be truly pious,
but, by the blessing of God, can do something to make others so. To
spread religion in our world is not merely the work and duty of its
ministers, but of all Christians without exception, whether young or
old, rich or poor, learned or illiterate, male or female. Everyone who
understands the nature, feels the influence, and values the privileges,
of the gospel of Christ, can do something to bring others into the
same happy condition. Where there is no desire and no effort to do
this, there can be no real piety. Those who have no concern for the
salvation of others have no right to conclude they are in a state of
salvation themselves. There is room, and opportunity, and
obligation, for all to work in this cause. Even children can do
something here, and have done it.
God sometimes employs the humblest instruments for
accomplishing great purposes, as I observed when remarking upon
the conduct of the little Hebrew maid in Naaman's family. Paganism
teaches us something here; for what said Jehovah to the prophet
when referring to the heathen practices which the Jews had
imitated? "Do you not see what they are doing throughout the towns
of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem? No wonder I am so angry!
Watch how the children gather wood and the fathers build sacrificial
fires. See how the women knead dough and make cakes to offer to
the Queen of Heaven. And they give drink offerings to their other
idol gods!" Jeremiah 7:17-18. What a busy scene—all minds engaged,
all hands employed, men, women, and children! Let us be instructed

by this example of misguided zeal, and show a zeal for the true God
equal to that which the apostate Jews did for false ones. Christianity
can find work for women and children as well as Paganism; and how
solemn are the obligations to propagate it which it imposes on all
who profess it!
As no service can be well performed by those who are not
QUALIFIED for it, I will here enumerate the chief prerequisites for a
course of female activity in the cause of religion.
Religious zeal should in every case be the offspring of personal piety.
Without this there can be no intelligent, well-sustained, or very
efficient effort. Something no doubt may be accomplished without it.
God may make use of labors which were not directed to his glory. But
it is only the truly pious mind that can understand the object of
religious zeal, be actuated by right motives, and be likely long to
continue the work, or to bring down the blessing of God upon what is
done. Your own heart must be right with God or you will know little
about the way of making others so. Example must support
exhortation, or the latter will have little effect. Much of the effort of
the present day is sadly lacking in devout seriousness, spiritual
earnestness, and holy solemnity. It is a bustling, prayerless,
unsanctified activity. There is, in too many, a frivolity about it that
looks as if those who are engaged in it know not, or forget, that they
are doing the work of the Lord—all is so light and trifling that it is
evident in this case zeal is only another species of amusement. The
zeal that is likely to be continuous, to honor God, to do good to our
fellow-creatures, is that which is cherished in the closet of devotion,
fed by the oil of Scripture, and fanned by the breath of prayer. There
is upon the minds of those who manifest it that awe which warns
them how they touch a holy thing.

Scriptural knowledge is essential to well-directed efforts to do good. I
now more particularly refer to a knowledge of the object to be
accomplished, and of the means of accomplishing it. A young person
anxious to do spiritual good should well understand three great
principles in religion—the ruin of human nature by sin, its
redemption by Christ, and its regeneration by the Spirit—and should
consider that all efforts of zeal must be directed to the
accomplishment of the two latter. To fit her for this work, she should
study well the Word of God, read some of the many treatises on the
subject of religion with which the press teems, and make herself
acquainted with some of the best tracts and books for putting into
the handy of those who become anxious about religion.
An intense and longing desire to be useful must lie at the bottom of
all her efforts. It is not a mere love of activity, a taste for social union
and occupation, a desire for power and influence over others, an
ambition for distinction, which are the impulsive causes of religious
activity; but a tender pity for the immortal souls of our fellowcreatures, and an earnest solicitude for their salvation, coupled with
an enlightened and fervent zeal for the glory of God. It is that piety
which melted the heart of David when he said, "Rivers of waters run
down my eyes because they keep not your law;" which agitated the
soul of Paul, when amid the splendors of Athenian architecture and
sculpture, he was insensible to all the magnificence that surrounded
him, in consequence of the sin with which it was associated, and felt
his spirit moved within him at seeing the city "wholly given to
idolatry;" and which, indeed, is taught in the first three petitions of
our Lord's prayer—"Hallowed be your name, your kingdom come,
your will be done on earth, as it is in heaven."
Understand, my young friends, then, what you have to do; not the
work of a low and narrow sectarianism, in proselyting people from

one denomination to another, nothing resembling the operations of
female Jesuitism, nothing of zeal to establish one denomination
upon the ruins of another—no, but the nobler and holier work of
saving the souls of your fellow-creatures, especially those of your
own sex, from the dominion of sin here, and from "the wrath to
come" hereafter. Begin life with an abhorrence of bigotry, and never
let your zeal degenerate into the baseness and malignity of that
earth-born spirit; let it be a fire kindled by a coal taken by the
seraphim from the altar of God—and not a flame lighted by a spark
from the bottomless pit. Be it your aim to spread that religion which
consists not in forms of government and religious ceremonies—but
in faith in Christ, love to God, and love to man. To accomplish this,
let there be a real engagement of your heart. Give up your soul to a
passion for being useful. Cherish the most expansive benevolence.
Feel as if you did not understand, or secure, or enjoy, the end of life—
unless you lived to be useful. Consider usefulness the charm of
existence, the sugar that sweetens the cup of life. Ever feel as if you
heard a voice saying to you, "Do something—do it at once—do it
heartily—do good, this good, good to the soul."
A habit of self-denial is essential to the exercise of religious zeal and
Christian benevolence. Our Lord said, "If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and follow me." This
is true of the way of holiness, but it is especially so of that of
benevolent activity. Christ could do us no good without his cross—
nor can we do others much good without ours. We would not deceive
you, and endeavor to lure you into the career of holy activity by
representing it as leading through a garden of Eden where all is
blooming and beautiful, ease and enjoyment. No such thing. The
course of religious zeal is often in a wilderness, over sharp stones and
bare rocks, and amid thorns and nettles. You must make sacrifices of
time, ease, enjoyment, feeling, perhaps of friendship. You must bear

hardships, and encounter many disagreeable things. You must be
prepared to give up self-will, your own comfort, and claims to preeminence. Can you be zealous of good works on such terms? If so,
come on; if not, go back; for the career of mercy is not for such
tender feet as yours to tread.
But, my young friends, can you allow yourselves to sink into such
delicacy and feebleness of character? Can you be content to
degenerate into littleness, and pass through life as a species of
nonentity, because you cannot endure noble self-denial? I do not
appeal to your love of romance. I would not set your imagination on
fire, in order that you may offer up yourselves a burnt offering to
benevolence, in the flames of enthusiasm. I do not stimulate you to
become heroines of mercy, and to set all the comforts of life at
defiance. There are some who love the adventures of a career of
active mercy. There may be romance in everything, even in pity. I do
not want this—but I do want to see young women practicing a sober
self-denial, a judicious disregard of ease and comfort—in order to do
good. Unite a masculine hardihood of endurance with a feminine
tenderness of feeling and delicacy of manner. Passive fortitude
belongs to you.
Patience and endurance is another qualification for doing good.
Those who would accomplish this must not be "weary in well-doing."
There are many things to make them so, the neglect of others,
opposition, disappointment, ingratitude, perhaps censure. Those
who expect to benefit their fellow-creatures with as much ease and as
speedily as some do them injury, had better not make the attempt,
for they are sure to fail. Scarcely any people in the world have more
need of patience than those who set themselves to instruct the
ignorance, to relieve the needs, to alleviate the sorrows, and to
reform the vices, of their fellow-creatures.

See how this was illustrated in the history of our Lord. Consider how
his benevolence was ever resisted by the malignity of those whom he
sought to benefit. He lavished upon them his mercy, and it was
repaid by their ingratitude. They refused his offers, rejected his
invitations, misrepresented his actions, disbelieved his words, and
misconstrued his motives. Never was so much goodness met by so
much envenomed opposition! Yet behold his patience. A thousandth
part of the opposition which he met with, would have exhausted the
forbearance of an archangel; and yet "he endured the contradiction
of sinners against himself;" gave them his tears when they had
refused his miracles; shed for them his blood when they despised his
tears; and bade his disciples to make to them the first proclamation
of his grace, when they had even scoffed at his death.
Study the history of Christ, my young friends, for the purpose of
seeing an example for you to imitate in the career of mercy. Follow
him who "went about doing good," in order to teach you with what
patience you should go and do likewise. Many who are all ardor at
starting, soon grow tired, because they do not find the course easy,
and reach the goal, at a bound—or are opposed in the way. It is a
despicable as well as pitiable sight, to behold a young person
entering into the work of benevolence as confident and eager as if
she would surpass all others, and then almost at the first stage, when
the novelty is over, and difficulties arise, and the expected flowers do
not appear in the path, giving all up, and turning back to indolence,
ease, and uselessness. On the contrary, it is a sight on which angels
and God himself look down with delight, to see another holding on
her way in her humble career of benevolence, amid disappointment
and opposition, persevering in her attempts to do good, and finding
in the consciousness of her aims and motives, and her knowledge of
the excellence of her object, a sufficient inducement to persevere—

though at present she reaps little else but discouragement and
defeat.
A spirit of dependence upon God for success, united with a high
sense of the importance and necessity of human effort, is essential to
religious zeal. This gives a twofold boldness of mind, and firmness of
step; and makes us strong, not only as instruments, in ourselves, but
also in the Lord and in the power of his might. What courage is
derived in the career of benevolence from such a consideration as
this—"I know I am seeking a good object by right means, and I will
go in the strength of the Lord!" Young women, even in your humble
sphere and feeble efforts to do good, a spirit of believing prayer,
(which indeed is the spirit in which everything should be done) will
bring the God of angels to your help, the Lord Almighty to your aid!
Go forth with the consciousness that you are doing right, and with a
belief that Omnipotence is by your side. It does not betoken pride
nor self-conceit, but only that proper sense of capability which every
one should cherish, to say, "I feel I am something, and can do
something; I need not be a cipher, for God has not made me one. I
have a mind, and heart, and will, and tongue, and with these I may
do something for God and my fellow-creatures. Others of my own
age and sex, feeble and humble as I am, have done something, and so
may I, and by God's help and blessing, I will." You are right; it is all
true. This is self-knowledge, and right self-esteem. Cherish these
thoughts; act upon them, and you will do something. With such
qualifications you may go to the work of religious zeal.
Permit me now to point out to you the WAYS in which your zeal may
be employed appropriately to your sex, age, and circumstances. "As
we have opportunity," said the apostle, "let us do good."
Opportunities are more precious than rubies, and should never be
lost by neglect. There are three things which, if lost, can never be

recovered—time, the soul, and an opportunity. And it is of
importance for you to ponder this. It becomes us all to remember the
advice of the sage to his disciples, "Be mindful of opportunities."
Youth is your opportunity for doing good; not indeed if you live, your
only one, but it is a very precious one. The remarks made in the last
chapter on the subject of the leisure afforded by your present
situation for the cultivation of piety, apply with equal force to the
opportunities it affords for usefulness. In married life, with a family
around you, and all the cares it brings with it, you will have
comparatively little opportunity, at least for some of those activities
which you can now carry forward.
Among the ways in which female activity could be appropriately
carried on, I must begin of course with the education of children in
our Sunday Schools. The instruction of the girls is entrusted to
women, and what an honor is thus assigned to them! It is strange
how any young woman pretending to religion can satisfy herself that
she is doing all she can, or all she ought, for God's glory and the good
of her fellow creatures—who is not devoting her youthful energies to
this blessed work. And yet it is painful to observe how many of the
young women of the more respectable families of our congregations,
withhold their services from this useful and valuable sphere of
female activity. I am not unaware of some difficulties and objections
to this engagement for her daughters, which present themselves to
the mind of a careful, judicious, and anxious mother. But surely the
proper exercise of maternal influence and authority would, in most
cases, be sufficient to counterbalance those contingent evils to which
the mixed society of the Sunday-school community might expose
young women, I mean in the way of forming acquaintances and
unsuitable connections. A well-taught and wisely-trained girl will
know, and ought to know, how to avoid general and undesirable
familiarity—without being suspected of haughty disdain or proud

neglect of those who are not upon her level in the ranks of social life.
It does require care, I admit, but care will be sufficient to avoid the
evils alluded to. And I freely confess that the frequent and mixed
meetings of teachers of both sexes which are held in some schools,
are by no means necessary for the good working of the system, and
are very undesirable on other accounts; and it is not to be wondered
at, that for this reason, many mothers do not allow their daughters to
become teachers, and that daughters themselves do not wish to
engage in the work. Acquaintances, by no means suitable, have, no
doubt, in some cases been formed. It is therefore incumbent upon all
who are thus engaged to be anxiously watchful that no part of their
conduct give to those who seek it, occasion to speak ill of the effect of
Sunday-school teaching upon the character and conduct of the
women who devote themselves to it.
District-visiting Societies and benevolent institutions for affording
temporal relief and spiritual instruction to the sick poor, conducted
by female agency, are become very common both in the Church of
England and among Dissenters. It would not be desirable, of course,
that these should be chiefly conducted by young women. Matronly
age, experience, and weight, are necessary to give propriety and
effect to such a labor of love, but surely there is no impropriety in
associating even in these good works, a youthful female with an
elderly one.
The Bible and Missionary Societies, and other religious institutions,
have called into operation a large number of women who are
employed in collecting money for those important organizations, and
for supplying the poor with copies of the word of God. There can be
no objection to this, provided the more youthful portion of the sex so
employed be associated with those who are older, and also that very
young girls be not employed at all in the work. Nothing can be more

repugnant to my sense of propriety, than for young women to be sent
out with what are called "collecting cards," to wander over a town
knocking at the doors of anybody and everybody for the purpose of
begging money, and sometimes even entering counting-houses, and
assailing young men with their importunities.
The distribution of religious tracts is another line of female activity in
which many may be eminently useful. This is a means of doing good
universally characteristic of the age. The press was never so active
either for good or for evil as it is now. Its productions are
instruments which every hand can wield—even that of a young and
even comparatively illiterate female. But the same caution must be
here applied also, that nothing be done to break down the barriers of
female modesty.
Perhaps it will be thought I ought not to overlook one line of female
usefulness peculiar to the sex, and especially to the youthful portion
of it, and that is, furnishing articles of the pencil and needle, the
products of which when sold shall go to the support of the cause of
Christ. There is one way of doing this, about which I confess I have
serious doubt; I mean the modern practice of bazaars, or as they are
now called, "Fancy Sales." I am aware of all the arguments that are
employed in favor of them, such as their gainfulness, and their
calling forth contributions from those who would give or could give
in no other way. A very beautiful little tract, entitled "The Bazaar,"
was published two years ago, in which the writer, not without a show
of argument, endeavored to prove that these means for the support
of religion hardly comport with the sanctity of the object. A certain
air of frivolity and worldliness at these sales is thrown over the
whole; so that such a scene looks like piety keeping a stall at "Vanity
Fair." "Recall," says this writer, "the scene itself—the gay dress, the
music and the raffle, flattery and compliment instead of truth.

Purchases made from regard to man, and not free-will offerings to
God. Mortification and disappointment in place of the approving
consciousness of her who 'had done what she could.' Skill exercised
in making that which is worthless pass for much. Arts practiced,
advantages taken, with the excuse that it is for a religious purpose,
that would be thought dishonorable in the common business
transactions of the world. Then follows the feeling of weariness and
dissatisfaction after excitement; the gaze at the heap of left things to
be disposed of, or that will do for other bazaars, with the false
estimate of the result of this. There is another fact in the history of
such sales; some who shun the ball-room and the concert, and never
entered a theater, act there the shop-woman, talk the nonsense
befitting the bazaar room, and are as worldly, vain, and foolish, as
she who seldom dreams of anything but pleasure, earth, and time."
Now this, I admit, is rather severe, and is perhaps a little
exaggerated. Still there is much truth in it, and it may serve as a
corrective, if it should not as a dissuasive. To the pure, all things are
pure, and there may be those who can enter, pass through, and leave
such scenes, without receiving the smallest injury to the devout and
happy seriousness of their religious character. At any rate it is
coming near "the appearance of evil," and should excite caution and
prayer on the part of those who consider the matter as innocent and
therefore lawful. Bazaars, however, are not the only way in which the
needle is employed by pious women for works of charity. Working
parties are very common—one meets periodically in my vestry, at
which articles of utility are made and shipped for sale in India, the
produce of which, amounting sometimes for one year's labor to
eighty pounds, is devoted to the support of orphan schools connected
with our missionary stations abroad. At these meetings, piety,
friendship, and zeal, all blend their feelings of enjoyment, and
furnish happy seasons for those who attend them.

I knew a most accomplished woman, long since in heaven, who was
called by grace out of the mirthful world, and who after her
conversion felt an irresistible desire to do something for the spiritual
welfare of her fellow creatures and the glory of God—but her means
were more limited than her aspirations. She thoroughly understood
the science of music, and her most exquisite singing had been the
delight of mirthful and fashionable circles. Her taste in drawing and
painting was equal to her skill in music. After her conversion to God
she turned these abilities to the purpose of glorifying God, "who does
instruct man to discretion," by setting some of the most admired
Italian and German tunes to sacred words, and painting Scripture
subjects, and selling the music and pictures in the circle of her
friends, often for large sums, especially the paintings, and
consecrating all, like the woman who broke her alabaster box of
ointment, to the honor of the Savior whom she intensely loved.
Perhaps there may range over these pages the eye of some similarly
gifted woman, with a heart for Christ and his cause, but with as
scanty property to serve him, as the female above alluded to; to her I
would say, "Go and do likewise!"
Is there not one way in which young women, unable to do much in
producing tasteful works, may be occupied in doing good for God
and their fellow-creatures, without in the smallest degree violating
the rule of decorum or infringing on the delicacy of female modesty—
I mean visiting the chamber of sickness, or the cottage of poverty, to
read to the invalid or the ignorant of their own sex, the Word of God
and religious tracts? Surely it is no invasion of either the rights of
man or the duties of the minister, for a pious modest female, though
young, (of course I do not mean a child,) to go to the bedside of a
sufferer, and pour into her ears the words, and into her heart the
sacred truths, of that precious volume, which is the best balm for a
wounded spirit, and the only consolation for a broken heart. Nor can

it be improper for her to take her chair by the side of a poor mother
who, while she is plying her needle, or watching the cradle, is ready
to hear words whereby she may be saved.
What a field of usefulness, almost unoccupied, is here opened to the
ambition and the energies of our pious young women who have
leisure for such occupation! How many thousands of women of the
laboring classes are there in every large town, who are so occupied by
the cares of their families and the demands of their husbands, as
never to join the public assemblies for worship, or to hear the joyful
sound of the sermon, or the psalm, who would hail as a ministering
angel a female coming to their scene of constant monotonous care
and labor, and causing their dreary abode to echo with the music that
tells of a present salvation even for them, and of a land hereafter
where the "wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are forever at
rest."
Oh you "devout women, not a few," if you have hearts of pity for the
poor; or compassion for the souls that are likely to be lost amid their
"being anxious and troubled about many things and their much
serving;" or if you have any zeal for the glory of God, do, do, employ
your leisure hours in paying these visits of mercy to the houses of
poverty, ignorance, sickness, and misery. Here there can be nothing
in opposition to female modesty, nothing that can minister to female
vanity. The seclusion of the scene prevents all this—no crude or
inquisitive gaze follows a young woman there; no language of
fulsome compliment or sickly adulation is addressed to her there;
she is alone with sorrow, or witnessed only by her conscience and her
God. Oh, what compared with a young female so occupied is the
most elegant and beautiful woman glittering in the gay scene of
fashionable folly—the admiration of many eyes and the envy of
more? What is all the adulation poured by the lip of flattery into the

ear of beauty, compared with the blessing of her who was ready to
perish, so gratefully bestowed on that sister of mercy, who had thus
"caused the widow's heart to sing for joy."
Friendship affords a means of usefulness of which you ought not to
be slow in availing yourself. It may be you have formed friendships in
the days of your thoughtlessness with some as thoughtless as
yourselves. But you have been awakened to solemn and holy
reflection. You have through the work of divine grace passed from
death unto life; but your friends still remain under the power of the
world and far from God. Here then is a most legitimate object of
pious zeal, to seek by all affectionate and judicious means their
conversion to Christ. What an honor and felicity would it be, should
you be the means of saving the soul of your companion! How close
and tender would be your friendship from that hour, when the tie of
affection was doubled and sanctified by the bond of saving faith!
How happy would be your friendship, how sweet your communion! A
friendship is made between you which will go with you to heaven; for
all friendships formed on the basis of religion will last forever. Take
with you then if you can, to that happy world, the friend of your
heart, there to renew, perfect, and perpetuate the communion which
you have commenced on earth, and realize the idea that the closest
and happiest friendship commenced below is but the bud, and
scarcely even that, which will blossom with unending freshness
through eternity in heaven!
Women's talent for a flowing easy tender style of correspondence is
generally acknowledged; and ought they not to employ this as a
means for serving God and their fellow-creatures? How many have
been thus led to an acquaintance with religion. There is a great moral
power in a well-written religious letter. It is known and felt to be an
effusion of love from one heart to another. It is read alone, when no

one is a witness of the effect. There is not the reproving or monitory
presence of the writer. There is no disposition to feel offended and to
resent the intrusive advice or warning. Young women, employ your
pen and let your affection in this manner breathe from your letters.
I shall now lay down some RULES for the direction of female
activity, which must be very rigidly observed in order to prevent it
from doing harm in one way as well as good in another.
The zeal of young women must ever be exercised with the strictest
regard to the MODESTY of youth, and especially of youthful women.
It must never be forgotten that bashful modesty is the beauty of
female character—like the violet, which seems to court seclusion, and
indicates its retreat only by its fragrance—bashful modesty in her,
adds to her attractions. Anything that would destroy this; that would
strip off this delicate veil of modesty, and make her bold and
obtrusive; that would thrust her by the impulsive ambition of her
own mind upon the public notice, instead of being sought out for
usefulness; that would make her clamorous in her complaints of
neglect, and imperious in her demands for employment; would
inflict an irreparable injury on society by depriving her of that
passive power of gentleness by which her influence can be most
effectually exerted in society.
I confess that with all my desires for female activity within its proper
sphere, and the legitimate exercise of woman's zeal, the extent to
which in the active spirit of the age, the female sex is employed,
makes me not a little jealous for the delicate beauties and excellences
of the female character. Money might flow into the treasury of our
societies, and numbers might be added to their friends, spirit might
be given to our operations, and the triumphs of the cause might seem
to be multiplied—but if any injury were sustained by the female

character, all that was otherwise achieved would be accomplished at
a dreadful cost and a fearful loss.
Therefore I entreat you, my young friends, to guard against this evil.
Cultivate the meekness, gentleness, and bashful modesty which are
your brightest ornaments. Make it appear that in what you are doing
for God and his cause, you neither seek publicity, nor aim to attract
attention, nor to court applause. Avoid all that undue familiarity,
flippancy, and trifling with the other sex, which would look as if your
object was rather to attract notice from them, than really to do good.
I ask for nothing prim, prudish, or repulsive; for no dread of
converse with men, or flight from their company, as if there were
moral contamination in their presence and pollution in their words.
Excessive prudery is no indication of the highest toned purity; nor is
an easy, artless frankness of manner, the indication of a bold and
forward disposition. Still, be reserved, without pride or coldness—
and frank, easy, and ingenuous, without familiarity and
obtrusiveness. In this age your danger lies in the latter extreme
rather than in the former. Be contented that your influence should
flow through society like the blood in the human frame, carrying life
and energy with it, but by channels where it is neither heard nor
seen.
Female zeal in religious matters must ever be carried forward with
due regard to the duties of home. If, as I have stated, home is the
sphere of woman's mission, and the first and chief place of her duty,
no public objects of any kind must be allowed to interfere with them.
This I have already alluded to, but on account of its importance I
refer to it again. It is not to the honor of religion, nor to the credit of
a wife and mother, for a husband to come home at the dinner hour
expecting to see everything ready and in order, and to find all in
confusion, and nothing properly arranged, and have his time wasted

by waiting for his wife, who has not finished her benevolent rambles,
or her morning's attendance at some women's meeting. Nor is it
much for his happiness on coming home in the evening, suffering
from the fatigue and vexation of the world's rough business, and
when needing the soothing influence of a wife's sweet voice, to have
to sit hours in sadness and solitude, because she is away at some
public service. This is not the way to promote wedded felicity, or to
interest his mind on behalf of the objects of his wife's zeal. It will
never do to serve the Lord with time taken from domestic order,
comfort, and family duty! A neglected husband and family are a sad
comment upon some women's religious activity—and it is a comment
not infrequently expressed by those who see it in the appearance of
the children and the house.
On the opposite extreme, there are many who could do much
Christian service without infringing on domestic claims, but who will
do nothing—and avail themselves to justify their own selfishness and
indolence.
Still a woman may look well to the ways of her household, and yet
have time to devote to the cause of religion and humanity; and some
do so, who by method, diligence, and efficiency, set their house in
order. The description of the virtuous woman comprehends both of
these—"She looks well to the ways of her household. The heart of her
husband does safely trust her, so that he shall have no need of spoil.
Her children rise up and call her blessed. She gives food to her
household, and her portion to her maidens. She eats not the bread of
idleness." Here is domestic order, management, economy, in
perfection. Yet with all this is associated, "She stretches out her
hands to the poor yes, she reaches forth her hands to the needy; and
in her tongue is the law of kindness." There the good housewife is
supposed to find time for works of mercy abroad as well as of

industry at home. When the comfort of a husband is never neglected,
and he has no reason to complain, and does not complain, of the lack
of his wife's friendship; and the supervision of the children, as to
their general well-being, and their education and home-training are
properly attended to; and the whole course of domestic order is
maintained with regularity and precision—it is to a Christian
woman's honor that her method of efficiency and order in the
regulation of her household affairs is such as to leave her ample time
for usefulness—without infringing on her duties as a wife, a mother,
or a manager of the household. Except in the case of a large family, a
lack of all Christian service is no credit to any female. She cannot be
educating her family as she ought to do, if she is not, by her example
as well as by her precept, training them to habits of benevolence.
The two extremes then are to be avoided by a married woman, of
allowing, on the one hand, the duties of home so entirely to engross
her heart, as to feel no interest in anything that is going on in the
world for the alleviation of its sorrows or the reformation of its vices,
and to cherish no desire to promote the great objects of Christian
zeal—and, on the other hand, of allowing Christian service to occupy
her attention so far as to neglect the claims of her husband, children,
and servants. The chief danger in this age lies in giving too much
attention to public duties, especially in the metropolis, the seat and
center of all our great societies, and the place of their annual
convocation. It is not much to the credit of a mother, nor for the
advantage of her daughters, to be fond of taking them to many of
these public gatherings. The month of May affords a strong
temptation to this, and it should be most assiduously guarded
against. It is not only lawful, but proper and desirable, that our wives
and daughters should be present at such meetings. Who would debar
them from all these assemblies, or shut them out from all these feasts
of holy charity, or exclude them from all these scenes in which they

take as deep an interest, and to which they have contributed equally
with ourselves? Their sex is more benefited by them even than the
other. Let woman's heart there bleed over the woes of humanity, and
especially of her down-trodden sisters in the lands of darkness; let
woman's hand be there stretched out to lift them up from their
degradation, and woman's eye there sparkle with a brighter luster as
it rejoices over the records of our missions, and the triumphs of
Christianity. But let not this rise into such a passion as shall spoil her
for partaking of interest in home duties.
In order to this, let younger women in these days of general
benevolence guard against acquiring in youth that taste for public
activity which, though it will not prevent them from entering into
domestic life, will to a very considerable extent disqualify them for its
duties. A love of activity is good; a passion for it is an evil. There is
such a thing as well-regulated, temperate, religious zeal—and there is
also such a thing as a species of religious excessiveness. When a
young person loves home and home duties, but is ever willing and
ready on suitable occasions, and for a proper object, to leave them
for works of religious and common benevolence, she has a right
disposition. But when home and home duties are irksome, and she is
ever longing for the excitement of public services, her taste has been
corrupted, her character damaged, and her prospects for future life
have become somewhat beclouded. If she has abandoned the
intention or wish ever to become a wife, and has determined to be a
sister of charity, it may be all very well to desire to give herself wholly
to works of benevolent activity—but if not, let her beware how she
acquires tendencies, and forms habits, which would equally unfit and
indispose her for the duties of wedded life.
Young women while at home should be generally regulated by the
wishes of their parents, and especially by their mothers. They are

not, and should neither wish nor attempt to be, independent of
parental control. A good and wise daughter will ever look up with
affectionate deference to a good and wise mother, and will not
therefore enter on any career of religious activity without consulting
her. It may be that the wishes of the child and the opinions of the
parent, on this point, are sometimes in opposition to each other, and
it requires little argument to prove which in this case ought to give
way.
Perhaps, some zealous, ardent, young female will put such a question
as this—"I feel it my duty to God to attempt to spread religion, and to
do good to my fellow-creatures, especially in the way of saving their
souls; but my parents, not being themselves Christians, oppose it,
and will not allow me either to engage in Sunday-school instruction,
to collect for missionary or Bible societies, to distribute tracts, or to
read the Scriptures to the poor. Is it my duty to follow out my own
convictions, or yield up my wishes to my parents?" It would be very
proper for you, in a respectful and deferential manner, to state your
wishes, and use every argument to obtain their compliance—but if
this should prove ineffectual, you must then submit and bear the
privation without resentful sullenness. To be moody, ill-tempered,
and petulant under the refusal, would too plainly indicate that you
have much yet to do in your own heart, to foster religion there,
before you seek to communicate it to others. You are under no such
obligation to exercise your religious zeal in any particular way—as
you are to seek your own salvation. It is manifestly your duty to do
good, and you can do it, even under such restrictions as those I am
now supposing; for you can set a holy example, and you can pray for
the spiritual welfare of others, and correspond with absent friends,
and perhaps influence by conversation your companions—and thus
are not, and cannot be, shut out from all methods of doing good. And
as for those from which you are debarred by parental authority, God

will take the desire for the deed, and reward the intention, as he
would have done the action, had you been permitted to perform it.
Consider also that as your parents do not enter into your views of
religion, they will regard your conduct, if you persist, in no other
light than that of a refractory spirit, and will thus receive a prejudice
against religion on account of your conduct—whereas a meek and
good-natured yielding to their wishes, and sacrificing an object
which they perceive to have been near your heart, will dispose them
to think favorably of the religious principle which could produce
such a spirit of unresisting and uncomplaining self-denial.
In order to be useful, it is necessary to cultivate habits of order,
punctuality, and the right employment of TIME. There is no doing
good without the proper use of time. Two things cannot be done at
once. Benevolent service requires time. And how much time is
wasted, which the miseries and needs of society require! "Redeem
the time!"—is a warning that should ever be sounding in our ears. We
need it for the improvement of our own souls—and we need it for the
good of others. We can do much with a proper use of time—and
nothing without it. There is scarcely anything to which the injunction
of our Lord more strictly applies than to time—"Gather up the
fragments that nothing be lost." Order redeems time, so does
punctuality—therefore order and punctuality are ways of supplying
the time necessary for the exercise of deeds of mercy.
Redeem time from useless reading, and other selfish entertainments
—and also from that excessive addictedness to the worldly
accomplishments of music, arts, and fancy craft-works, which are so
characteristic of the present day. That some portion of time may be
given to these things is admitted. I am not for parting with the
exquisite polish which skill in these matters imparts to female

elegance. I love to see the decorations of female mind and manners.
Of this I may have to speak again in a future chapter, and therefore
shall merely now enquire—when the cries of misery are entering into
her ears, and the groans of creation are arising all around her; when
countless millions abroad are living and dying without the light of
the gospel and the hope of salvation; when at our own doors will be
found so many passing in ignorance and wickedness to their eternal
destinies—is it humane for a Christian woman to spend so much
precious time each day over her knitting, crotchet, or embroidery
work? As she sits plying those needles, and bringing out, it may be,
the tasteful design hour after hour—does she never hear the cry of
human woe, "Come over and help us!" Does it never occur to her,
how many souls have gone into eternity unprepared to meet their
God, since she took her chair and commenced her daily
entertainment?
Or, even leaving out of view the employment of her time for deeds of
mercy to others; is it not an afflicting sight to behold so much time
thrown away on these elegant trifles, which might be employed in
cultivating one's own mind and heart, by reading useful Christian
literature? You cannot, systematically, do good either to yourself or
others, without redeeming time for the purpose!
Perhaps the following very striking antithetic description of time will
interest and instruct many of the readers of this chapter—"TIME is
the most undefinable yet paradoxical of things; the past is gone, the
future has not yet come, and the present becomes the past, even
while we attempt to define it, and like the flash of the lightning, at
once exists and expires. Time is the measure of all things, but is itself
immeasurable, and the grand discloser of all things, but is itself
undisclosed. Like space, it is incomprehensible, because it has no
limit, and it would be still more incomprehensible, if it had. Time is

more obscure in its source than the Nile, and in its termination than
the Niger—and advances like the slowest tide, but retreats like the
swiftest torrent. Time give wings of lightning to pleasure, but 'feet of
lead' to pain. Time lends 'expectation' a curb, but 'enjoyment' a spur.
Time robs beauty of her charms. Time builds a monument to merit,
but denies it a house. Time is the transient and deceitful flatterer of
falsehood, but the tried and final friend of truth. Time is the most
subtle yet the most insatiable of predators, and by appearing to take
nothing, is permitted to take all—nor can it be satisfied, until it has
stolen the world from us, and us from the world. Time constantly
flies, yet overcomes all things by flight, and although it is the present
ally, it will be the future conqueror of death. Time—the cradle of
hope but the grave of ambition—is the stern corrector of fools, but
the salutary counselor of the wise, bringing all they dread to the one,
and all they desire to the other; but like Cassandra, it warns us with a
voice that even the sagest discredit too long, and the silliest believe
too late. Wisdom walks before it, opportunity with it, and repentance
behind it—he who has made time his friend, will have little to fear
from his enemies, but he who has made it his enemy, will have little
to hope from his friends."
Permit me now to remind you that all your efforts of religious zeal
should be carried on in a spirit of FAITH and PRAYER. Christian
zeal should not be merely the love of activity, much less an ambitious
fondness for publicity and display, that moves you; but the
overpowering feelings of love to God and love to man. Zeal must not
be a substitute for religion, but the impulse and the constraining
power of it. Instead of weakening your own piety, zeal must
strengthen it. Emanating from your own holy mind, zeal must, like
the newly kindled flame, react upon and increase the fervor of its
source. You must be watchful over your spirit, and take care that
your humility and spirituality be not impaired by a spirit of vanity.

You should look well to your motives, and subject your heart to a
most rigid self-scrutiny. In the retirement of the closet you should
cultivate that spirit of dependence which expresses itself in prayer—
and is cherished by prayer. The more you do for the spiritual welfare
of others, the more you must do for your own. You should take alarm
if you find that the excitements of zeal produce indisposedness for
the more retired and quiet exercises of devotion. A renewed
consecration to your work should often taken place—preceded by a
renewed consecration of yourselves to God.
To encourage you in your career of holy activity, I may call you, in
CONCLUSION, to consider the nature of your work, and the
consequences that will follow even your humble endeavors to carry it
on. It is salvation, the gift of God to man, which Jesus Christ came to
our world to produce, and the Scriptures are written to describe and
impart. It is saving religion, the balm of man's wounded heart, the
renovator of his corrupt nature, the means of his happiness, his
preparation for immortal glory—it is saving religion, the source of
individual comfort, domestic peace, social order, national prosperity,
and the whole world's restoration—it is saving religion, which shall
cover our earth with the glories of millennial bliss, and raise up
countless millions of our race from the ruins of the fall to the heavens
of the eternal God—it is saving religion, which shall be the glory and
the bliss of the redeemed church throughout eternity—it is saving
religion, the cause for which prophets testified, apostles labored,
martyrs bled, ministers toil at home, and missionaries abroad; it is
this that you are promoting by all your efforts of religious zeal!
In this cause you shall not labor in vain, nor without your reward, for
"the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the sea;" and your humble labors, though as drops in that
mighty ocean, shall help to swell and impel the mighty mass; and

after this, shall come the world where you shall be gathered unto
those holy women whose lives were briefly recorded in a past
chapter, and to all those chaste virgins and holy matrons, who have
wrought to weave by their labors, the crown of glory which shall ever
flourish on the head of our Emmanuel!