PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 28
The Call to the Ministry


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 2. The Call to the Ministry.

LECTURE II
THE CALL TO THE MINISTRY
Any Christian has a right to disseminate the gospel who has the
ability to do so; and more, he not only has the right, but it is his duty
so to do as long as he lives. Rev. xxii. 17. The propagation of the
gospel is left, not to a few, but to all the disciples of the Lord Jesus
Christ: according to the measure of grace entrusted to him by the
Holy Spirit, each man is bound to minister in his day and generation,
both to the church and among unbelievers. Indeed, this question
goes beyond men, and even includes the whole of the other sex;
whether believers are male or female, they are all bound, when
enabled by divine grace, to exert themselves to the utmost to extend
the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. Our service, however, need
not take the particular form of preaching--certainly, in some cases it
must not, as for instance in the case of females, whose public
teaching is expressly prohibited: 1 Tim. ii. 12; 1 Cor. xiv. 34. But yet if
we have the ability to preach, we are bound to exercise it. I do not,
however, in this lecture allude to occasional preaching, or any other
form of ministry common to all the saints, but to the work and office
of the bishopric, in which is included both teaching and bearing rule
in the church, which requires the dedication of a man's entire life to
spiritual work, and separation from every secular calling, 2 Tim. ii. 4;
and entitles the man to cast himself for temporal supplies upon the
church of God, since he gives up all his time, energies, and
endeavours, for the good of those over whom he presides. 1 Cor. ix.
11; 1 Tim. v. 18. Such a man is addressed by Peter in the words, "Feed
the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof." 1
Pet. v. 2. Now, all in a church cannot oversee, or rule--there must be
some to be overseen and ruled; and we believe that the Holy Ghost
appoints in the church of God some to act as overseers, while others
are made willing to be watched over for their good. All are not called
to labour in word and doctrine, or to be elders, or to exercise the
office of a bishop; nor should all aspire to such works, since the gifts
necessary are nowhere promised to all; but those should addict

themselves to such important engagements who feel, like the apostle,
that they have "received this ministry." 2 Cor. iv. 1. No man may
intrude into the sheepfold as an under-shepherd; he must have an
eye to the chief Shepherd, and wait his beck and command. Or ever a
man stands forth as God's ambassador, he must wait for the call from
above; and if he does not so, but rushes into the sacred office, the
Lord will say of him and others like him, "I sent them not, neither
commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this people at all,
saith the Lord." Jer. xxiii. 32.
By reference to the Old Testament, you will find the messengers of
God in the old dispensation claiming to hold commissions from
Jehovah. Isaiah tells us that one of the seraphim touched his lips
with a live coal from off the altar, and the voice of the Lord said,
"Whom shall I send, and who will go for us?" Isa. vi. 8. Then said the
prophet, "Here am I, send me." He ran not before he had been thus
especially visited of the Lord and qualified for his mission. "How
shall they preach, except they be sent?" were words as yet unuttered,
but their solemn meaning was well understood. Jeremiah details his
call in his first chapter: "Then the word of the Lord came unto me,
saying, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou
camest forth out of the womb, I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a
prophet unto the nations. Then said I, Ah, Lord God! behold, I
cannot speak: for I am a child. But the Lord said unto me, Say not, I
am a child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee, and
whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak. Be not afraid of their
faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee, saith the Lord. Then the
Lord put forth his hand, and touched my mouth; and the Lord said
unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth. See, I have this
day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out, and
to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, and to build, and to
plant." Jer. 1.4-10. Varying in its outward form, but to the same
purport, was the commission of Ezekiel; it runs thus in his own
words: "And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I
will speak unto thee. And the Spirit entered into me when he spake
unto me, and set me upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto

me. And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of
Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and
their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day."
Ezek. ii. 1-3. "Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou
findest; eat this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel. So I
opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll. And he said
unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with
this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it was in my mouth as
honey for sweetness. And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee
unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them." Ezek.
iii. 1-4. Daniel's call to prophesy, although not recorded, is
abundantly attested by the visions granted to him, and the
exceeding, favour which he had with the Lord, both in his solitary
meditations and public acts. It is not needful to pass all the other
prophets in review, for they all claimed to speak with "thus saith the
Lord." In the present dispensation, the priesthood is common to all
the saints; but to prophesy, or what is analogous thereto, namely, to
be moved by the Holy Ghost to give oneself up wholly to the
proclamation of the gospel, is, as a matter of fact, the gift and calling
of only a comparatively small number; and surely these need to be as
sure of the rightfulness of their position as were the prophets; and
yet how can they justify their office, except by a similar call?
Nor need any imagine that such calls are a mere delusion, and that
none are in this age separated for the peculiar work of teaching and
overseeing, the church, for the very names given to ministers in the
New Testament imply a previous call to their work. The apostle says,
"Now then we are ambassadors for God;" but does not the very soul
of the ambassadorial office lie in the appointment which is made by
the monarch represented? An ambassador unsent would be a
laughing-stock. Men who dare to avow themselves ambassadors for
Christ, must feel most solemnly that the Lord has "committed" to
them the word of reconciliation. 2 Cor. v. 18, 19. If it be said that this
is restricted to the apostles, I answer that the epistle is written not in
the name of Paul only, but of Timothy also, and hence includes other
ministry besides apostleship. In the first epistle to the Corinthians

we read, "Let a man so account of us (the us here meaning, Paul and
Sosthenes, 1. Cor. i. 1), as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of
the mysteries of God." 1 Cor. iv. 1. Surely a steward must hold his
office from the Master. He cannot be a steward merely because he
chooses to be so, or is so regarded by others. If any of us should elect
ourselves stewards to the Marquis of Westminster, and proceed to
deal with his property, we should have our mistake very speedily
pointed out to us in the most convincing manner. There must
evidently be authority ere a man can legally become a bishop, "the
steward of God." Titus i. 7.
The Apocalyptic title of Angel (Rev. ii. 1) means a messenger; and
how shall men be Christ's heralds, unless by his election and
ordination? If the reference of the word Angel to the minister be
questioned, we should be glad to have it shown that it can relate to
anyone else. To whom would the Spirit write in the church as its
representative, but to some one in a position analogous to that of the
presiding elder?
Titus was bidden to make full proof of his ministry--there was surely
something to prove. Some are "vessels unto honour, sanctified and
meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good work." 2
Tim. ii. 21. The Master is not to be denied the choice of the vessels
which he uses, he will still say of certain men as he did of Saul of
Tarsus, "He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the
Gentiles." Acts ix. 15. When our Lord ascended on high he gave gifts
unto men, and it is noteworthy that these gifts were men set apart for
various works: "He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and
some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers" (Eph. iv. 11);
from which it is evident that certain individuals are, as the result of
our Lord's ascension, bestowed upon the churches as pastors; they
are given of God, and consequently not self-elevated to their
position. Brethren, I trust you may be able one day to speak of the
flock over whom" the Holy Ghost has made you overseers" (Acts xx.
28), and I pray that every one of you may be able to say with the
apostle of the Gentiles, that your ministry is not of man, neither by

man, but that you have received it of the Lord. Gal. i. 1. In you may
that ancient promise be fulfilled, "I will give them pastors according
to mine heart." Jer. iii. 15. "I will set up shepherds over them, which
shall feed them." Jer .xxiii. 4. May the Lord himself fulfil in your
several persons his own declaration: "I have set watchmen upon thy
walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace day nor
night." May you take forth the precious from the vile, and so be as
God's mouth. Jer. xv. 19. May the Lord make manifest by you the
savour of the knowledge of Jesus in every place, and make you "unto
God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them
that perish." 2 Cor. ii, 15. Having a priceless treasure in earthen
vessels, may the excellency of the divine power rest upon you, and so
may you both glorify God and clear yourselves from the blood of all
men. As the Lord Jesus went up to the Mount and called to him
whom he would, and then sent them forth to preach (Mark iii, 13),
even so may he select you, call you upward to commune with himself,
and send you forth as his elect servants to bless both the church and
the world.
How may a young man know whether he is called or not? That is a
weighty enquiry, and I desire to treat it most solemnly. O for divine
guidance in so doing! That hundreds have missed their way, and
stumbled against a pulpit is sorrowfully evident from the fruitless
ministries and decaying churches which surround us. It is a fearful
calamity to a man to miss his calling, and to the church upon whom
he imposes himself, his mistake involves an affliction of the most
grievous kind. It would be a curious and painful subject for
reflection--the frequency with which men in the possession of reason
mistake the end of their existence, and aim at objects which they
were never intended to pursue. The writer who penned the following
lines must surely have had his eye upon many ill-occupied pulpits:
"Declare, ye sages, if ye find
'Mongst animals of every kind,
Of each condition, sort, and size,
From whales and elephants to flies,

A creature that mistakes his plan,
And errs so constantly as man!
Each kind pursues its proper good,
And seeks enjoyment, rest and food,
As nature points, and never errs
In what it chooses or prefers;
Man only blunders, though possessed
Of reason far above the rest.
Descend to instances and try:
An ox will not attempt to fly,
Or leave his pasture in the wood
With fishes to explore the flood.
Man only acts of every creature
In opposition to his natur
When I think upon the all but infinite mischief which may result
from a mistake as to our vocation for the Christian pastorate, I feel
overwhelmed with fear lest any of us should be slack in examining
our credentials; and I had rather that we stood too much in doubt,
and examined too frequently, than that we should become cumberers
of the ground. There are not lacking many exact methods by which a
man may test his call to the ministry if he earnestly desires to do so.
It is imperative upon him not to enter the ministry until he has made
solemn quest and trial of himself as to this point. His own personal
salvation being secure, he must investigate as to the further matter of
his call to office; the first is vital to himself as a Christian, the second
equally vital to him as a pastor. As well be a professor without
conversion, as a pastor without calling. In both cases there is a name
and nothing more.
1. The first sign of the heavenly call is an intense, all-absorbing
desire for the work. In order to a true call to the ministry there must
be an irresistible, overwhelming craving and raging thirst for telling
to others what God has done to our own souls; what if I call it a kind

of ÃÄ¿Á³®, such as birds have for rearing their young when the
season is come; when the mother-bird would sooner die than leave
her nest. It was said of Alleine by one who knew him intimately, that
"he was infinitely and insatiably greedy of the conversion of souls."
When he might have had a fellowship at his university, he preferred a
chaplaincy, because he was "inspired with an impatience to be
occupied in direct ministerial work." "Do not enter the ministry if
you can help it," was the deeply sage advice of a divine to one who
sought his judgment. If any student in this room could be content to
be a newspaper editor, or a grocer, or a farmer, or a doctor, or a
lawyer, or a senator, or a king, in the name of heaven and earth let
him go his way; he is not the man in whom dwells the Spirit of God
in its fulness, for a man so filled with God would utterly weary of any
pursuit but that for which his inmost soul pants. If on the other
hand, you can say that for all the wealth of both the Indies you could
not and dare not espouse any other calling so as to be put aside from
preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ, then, depend upon it, if other
things be equally satisfactory, you have the signs of this apostleship.
We must feel that woe is unto us if we preach not the gospel; the
word of God must be unto us as fire in our bones, otherwise, if we
undertake the ministry, we shall be unhappy in it, shall be unable to
bear the self-denials incident to it, and shall be of little service to
those among whom we minister. I speak of self-denials, and well I
may; for the true pastor's work is full of them, and without a love to
his calling he will soon succumb, and either leave the drudgery, or
move on in discontent, burdened with a monotony as tiresome as
that of a blind horse in a mill.
"There is a comfort in the strength of love;
'Twill make a thing endurable which else
'Would break the heart
Girt with that love, you will be undaunted; divested of that more than
magic-belt of irresistible vocation, you will pine away in
wretchedness.

This desire must be a thoughtful one. It should not be a sudden
impulse unattended by anxious consideration. It should be the
outgrowth of our heart in its best moments, the object of our
reverent aspirations, the subject of our most fervent prayers. It must
continue with us when tempting offers of wealth and comfort come
into conflict with it, and remain as a calm, clear-headed resolve after
everything has been estimated at its right figure, and the cost
thoroughly counted. When living as a child at my grandfather's in the
country, I saw a company of huntsmen in their red coats riding
through his fields after a fox. I was delighted! My little heart was
excited; I was ready to follow the hounds over hedge and ditch. I
have always felt a natural taste for that sort of business, and, as a
child, when asked what I would be, I usually said I was going to be a
huntsman. A fine profession, truly! Many young men have the same
idea of being parsons as I had of being a huntsman--a mere childish
notion that they would like the coat and the horn-blowing; the
honour, the respect, the ease; and they are probably even fools
enough to think, the riches of the ministry. (Ignorant beings they
must be if they look for wealth in connection with the Baptist
ministry.) The fascination of the preacher's office is very great to
weak minds, and hence I earnestly caution all young men not to
mistake whim for inspiration, and a childish preference for a call of
the Holy Spirit.
Mark well, that the desire I have spoken of must be thoroughly
disinterested. If a man can detect, after the most earnest selfexamination, any other motive than the glory of God and the good of
souls in his seeking the bishopric, he had better turn aside from it at
once; for the Lord will abhor the bringing of buyers and sellers into
his temple: the introduction of anything mercenary, even in the
smallest degree, will be like the fly in the pot of ointment, and will
spoil it all.
This desire should be one which continues with us, a passion which
bears the test of trial, a longing from which it is quite impossible for
us to escape, though we may have tried to do so; a desire, in fact,

which grows more intense by the lapse of years, until it becomes a
yearning, a pining, a famishing to proclaim the Word. This intense
desire is so noble and beautiful a thing, that whenever I perceive it
glowing in any young man's bosom, I am always slow to discourage
him, even though I may have my doubts as to his abilities. It may be
needful, for reasons to be given you further on, to repress the flame,
but it should always be reluctantly and wisely done. I have such a
profound respect for this "fire in the bones," that if I did not feel it
myself, I must leave the ministry at once. If you do not feel the
consecrated glow, I beseech you return to your homes and serve God
in your proper spheres; but if assuredly the coals of juniper blaze
within, do not stifle them, unless, indeed, other considerations of
great moment should prove to you that the desire is not a fire of
heavenly origin.
2. In the second place, combined with the earnest desire to become a
pastor, there must be aptness to teach and some measure of the
other qualities needful for the office of a public instructor. A man to
prove his call must make a successful trial of these. I do not claim
that the first time a man rises to speak he must preach as well as
Robert Hall did in his later days. If he preaches no worse than that
great man did at the first, he must not be condemned. You are aware
that Robert Hall broke down altogether three times, and cried, "If
this does not humble me, nothing will." Some of the noblest speakers
were not in their early days the most fluent. Even Cicero at first
suffered from a weak voice and a difficulty of utterance. Still, a man
must not consider that he is called to preach until he has proved that
he can speak. God certainly has not created behemoth to fly and
should leviathan have a strong desire to ascend with the lark, it
would evidently be an unwise aspiration, since he is not furnished
with wings. If a man be called to preach, he will be endowed with a
degree of speaking ability, which he will cultivate and increase. If the
gift of utterance be not there in a measure at the first, it is not likely
that it will ever be developed.

I have heard of a gentleman who had a most intense desire to preach,
and pressed his suit upon his minister, until after a multitude of
rebuffs he obtained leave to preach a trial sermon. That opportunity
was the end of his importunity, for upon announcing his text he
found himself bereft of every idea but one, which he delivered
feelingly, and then descended the rostrum. "My brethren," said he,
"if any of you think it an easy thing to preach, I advise you to come
up here and have all the conceit taken out of you." The trial of your
powers will go far to reveal to you your deficiency, if you have not the
needed ability. I know of nothing better. We must give ourselves a
fair trial in this matter, or we cannot assuredly know whether God
has called us or not; and during the probation we must often ask
ourselves whether, upon the whole, we can hope to edify others with
such discourses.
We must, however, do much more than put it to our own conscience
and judgment, for we are poor judges. A certain class of brethren
have a great facility for discovering that they have been very
wonderfully and divinely helped in their declamations; I should envy
them their glorious liberty and self-complacency if there were any
ground for it; for alas! I very frequently have to bemoan and mourn
over my non-success and shortcomings as a speaker. There is not
much dependence to be placed upon our own opinion, but much may
be learned from judicious, spiritual-minded persons. It is by no
means a law which ought to bind all persons, but still it is a good old
custom in many of our country churches for the young man who
aspires to the ministry to preach before the church. It can hardly ever
be a very pleasant ordeal for the youthful aspirant, and, in many
cases, it will scarcely be a very edifying exercise for the people; but
still it may prove a most salutary piece of discipline, and save the
public exposure of rampant ignorance. The church book at Arnsby
contains the following entry:
A short account of the Call of Robert Hall, Junior, to the work of the
Ministry, by the Church at Arnsby, August 13th, 1780.

"The said Robert Hall was born at Arnsby, May 2nd, 1764; and was,
even from his childhood, not only serious, and given to secret prayer
before he could speak plain, but was always wholly inclined to the
work of the ministry. He began to compose hymns before he was
quite seven years old, and therein discovered marks of piety, deep
thought, and genius. Between eight and nine years he made several
hymns, which were much admired by many, one of which was
printed in the Gospel Magazine about that time. He wrote his
thoughts on various religious subjects, and select portions of
Scripture. He was likewise possessed of an intense inclination for
learning, and made such progress that the country master under
whom he was could not instruct him any further. He was then sent to
Northampton boarding school, under the care of the Rev. John
Ryland, where he continued about a year and a-half, and made great
progress in Latin and Greek. In October, 1778, he went to the
Academy at Bristol, under the care of the Rev. Mr. Evans; and on
August 13th, 1780, was sent out to the ministry by this church, being
sixteen years and three months old, The manner in which the church
obtained satisfaction with his abilities for the great work, was his
speaking in his turn at conference meetings from various portions of
Scripture; in which, and in prayer, he had borne a part for upwards
of four years before; and having when at home, at their request,
frequently preached on Lord's-day mornings, to their great
satisfaction. They therefore earnestly and unanimously requested his
being in a solemn manner set apart to public employ. Accordingly,
on the day aforesaid, he was examined by his father before the
church, respecting his inclination, motives, and end, in reference to
the ministry, and was likewise desired to make a declaration of his
religious sentiments. All which being done, to the entire satisfaction
of the church, they therefore set him apart by lifting up their right
hands, and by solemn prayer. His father then delivered a discourse to
him from 2 Tim, ii. 1, 'Thou therefore, my son, be strong in the grace
that is in Christ Jesus.' Being thus sent forth, he preached in the
afternoon from 2 Thess. i. 7, 8. 'May the Lord bless him, and grant
him great success!'" (Biographical Recollections of the Rev, Robert
Hall, A.M. By J. M. Morris, 1833.)

Considerable weight is to be given to the judgment of men and
women who live near to God, and in most instances their verdict will
not be a mistaken one. Yet this appeal is not final nor infallible, and
is only to be estimated in proportion to the intelligence and piety of
those consulted. I remember well how earnestly I was dissuaded
from preaching by as godly a Christian matron as ever breathed; the
value of her opinion I endeavoured to estimate with candour and
patience-but it was outweighed by the judgment of persons of wider
experience. Young men in doubt will do well to take with them their
wisest friends when next they go out to the country chapel or village
meeting-room and essay to deliver the Word. I have noted-and our
venerable friend, Mr. Rogers, has observed the same--that you,
gentlemen, students, as a body, in your judgment of one another, are
seldom if ever wrong. There has hardly ever been an instance, take
the whole house through, where the general opinion of the entire
college concerning a brother has been erroneous. Men are not quite
so unable to form an opinion of each other as they are sometimes
supposed to be. Meeting as you do in class, in prayer-meeting, in
conversation, and in various religious engagements, you gauge each
other; and a wise man will be slow to set aside the verdict of the
house.
I should not complete this point if I did not add, that mere ability to
edify, and aptness to teach is not enough, there must be other talents
to complete the pastoral character. Sound judgment and solid
experience must instruct you; gentle manners and loving affections
must sway you; firmness and courage must be manifest; and
tenderness and sympathy must not be lacking. Gifts administrative
in ruling well will be as requisite as gifts instructive in teaching well.
You must be fitted to lead, prepared to endure, and able to persevere.
In grace, you should be head and shoulders above the rest of the
people, able to be their father and counsellor. Read carefully the
qualifications of a bishop, given in 1 Tim. iii. 2-7, and in Titus i. 6-9.
If such gifts and graces be not in you and abound, it may be possible
for you to succeed as an evangelist, but as a pastor you will be of no
account.

3. In order further to prove a man's call, after a little exercise of his
gifts, such as I have already spoken of, he must see a measure of
conversion-work going on under his efforts, or he may conclude that
he has made a mistake, and, therefore, may go back by the best way
he can. It is not to be expected that upon the first or even twentieth
effort in public we shall be apprized of success; and a man may even
give himself a life trial of preaching if he feels called to do so, but it
seems to me, that as a man to be set apart to the ministry, his
commission is without seals until souls are won by his
instrumentality to the knowledge of Jesus. As a worker, he is to work
on whether he succeeds or no, but as a minister he cannot be sure of
his vocation till results are apparent. How my heart leaped for joy
when I heard tidings of my first convert! I could never be satisfied
with a full congregation, and the kind expressions of friends; I longed
to hear that hearts had been broken, that tears had been seen
streaming from the eyes of penitents. How did I rejoice, as one that
findeth great spoil, over one poor labourer's wife who confessed that
she felt the guilt of sin, and had found the Saviour under my
discourse on Sunday afternoon: I have the cottage in which she lived
in my eye now; believe me, it always appears picturesque. I
remember well her being received into the church, and her dying,
and her going home to heaven. She was the first seal to my ministry,
and, I can assure you, a very precious one indeed. No mother was
ever more full of happiness at the sight of her first-born son. Then
could I have sung the song of the Virgin Mary , for my soul did
magnify the Lord for remembering my low estate, and giving me the
great honour to do a work for which all generations should call me
blessed, for so I counted the conversion of one soul. There must be
some measure of conversion-work in your irregular labours before
you call believe that preaching is to be your life-work. Remember the
Lord's words by the prophet Jeremiah; they are very much to the
point, and should alarm all fruitless preachers. "I have not sent these
prophets, yet they ran; I have not spoken to them, yet they
prophesied. But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my
people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from
their evil way, and from the evil of their doings." Jer. xxiii. 21, 22. It

is a marvel to me how men continue at ease in preaching year after
year without conversions. Have they no bowels of compassion for
others? no sense of responsibility upon themselves? Dare they, by a
vain misrepresentation of divine sovereignty, cast the blame on their
Master? Or is it their belief that Paul plants and Apollos waters, and
that God gives no increase? Vain are their talents, their philosophy,
their rhetoric, and even their orthodoxy, without the signs following.
How are they sent of God who bring no men to God? Prophets whose
words are powerless, sowers whose seed all withers, fishers who take
no fish, soldiers who give no wounds-are these God's men? Surely it
were better to be a mud-raker, or a chimney-sweep, than to stand in
the ministry as an utterly barren tree. The meanest occupation
confers some benefit upon mankind, but the wretched man who
occupies a pulpit and never glorifies his God by conversions is a
blank, a blot, an eyesore, a mischief. He is not worth the salt he eats,
much less his bread; and if he writes to newspapers to complain of
the smallness of his salary, his conscience, if he has any, might well
reply, "And what you have is undeserved." Times of drought there
may be; ay, and years of leanness may consume the former years of
usefulness, but still there will be fruit in the main, and fruit to the
glory of God; and meanwhile the transient barrenness will fill the
soul with unutterable anguish. Brethren, if the Lord gives you no zeal
for souls, keep to the lapstone or the trowel, but avoid the pulpit as
you value your heart's peace and your future salvation.
4. A step beyond all this is however needful in our enquiry. The will
of the Lord concerning pastors is made known through the prayerful
judgment of his church. It is needful as a proof of your vocation that
your preaching should be acceptable to the people of God. God
usually opens doors of utterance for those whom he calls to speak in
his name. Impatience would push open or break down the door, but
faith waits upon the Lord, and in due season her opportunity is
awarded her. When the opportunity comes then comes our trial.
Standing up to preach, our spirit will be judged of the assembly, and
if it be condemned, or if, as a general rule, the church is not edified,
the conclusion may not be disputed, that we are not sent of God. The

signs and marks of a true bishop are laid down in the Word for the
guidance of the church; and if in following such guidance the
brethren see not in us the qualifications, and do not elect us to office,
it is plain enough that however well we may evangelise, the office of
the pastor is not for us. Churches are not all wise, neither do they all
judge in the power of the Holy Ghost, but many of them judge after
the flesh; yet I had sooner accept the opinion of a company of the
Lord's people than my own upon so personal a subject as my own
gifts and graces. At any rate, whether you value the verdict of the
church or no, one thing is certain, that none of you can be pastors
without the loving consent of the flock; and therefore this will be to
you a practical indicator if not a correct one. If your call from the
Lord be a real one you will not long be silent. As surely as the man
wants his hour, so surely the hour wants its man; The church of God
is always urgently in need of living ministers; to her a man is always
more precious than the gold of Ophir. Formal officials do lack and
suffer hunger, but the anointed of the Lord need never be without a
charge, for there are quick ear's which will know them by their
speech, and ready hearts to welcome them to their appointed place.
Be fit for your work, and you will never be out of it. Do not run about
inviting yourselves to preach here and there; be more concerned
about your ability than your opportunity, and more earnest about
your walk with God than about either. The sheep will know the Godsent shepherd; the porter of the fold will open to you, and the flock
will know your voice.
At the time of my first delivery of this lecture, I had not read John
Newton's admirable letter to a friend on this subject; it so nearly
tallies with my own thoughts, that at the risk of being thought to be a
copyist, which I certainly am not in this instance, I will read you the
letter:
"Your case reminds me of my own; my first desires towards the
ministry were attended with great uncertainties and difficulties, and
the perplexity of my own mind was heightened by the various and
opposite judgments of my friends. The advice I have to offer is the

result of painful experience and exercise, and for this reason,
perhaps, may not be unacceptable to you. I pray our gracious Lord to
make it useful.
"I was long distressed, as you are, about what was or was not a
proper call to the ministry. It now seems to me an easy point to solve;
but, perhaps, it will not be so to you, till the Lord shall make it clear
to yourself in your own case. I have not room to say so much as I
could. In brief, I think it principally includes three things:
"1. A warm and earnest desire to be employed in this service. I
apprehend the man who is once moved by the Spirit of God to this
work, will prefer it, if attainable, to thousands of gold and silver; so
that, though he is at times intimidated by a sense of its importance
and difficulty, compared with his own great insufficiency (for it is to
be presumed a call of this sort, if indeed from God, will be
accompanied with humility and self-abasement), yet he cannot give
it up. I hold it a good rule to enquire in this point, whether the desire
to preach is most fervent in our most lively and spiritual frames, and
when we are most laid in the dust before the Lord? If so, it is a good
sign. But if, as is sometimes the case, a person is very earnest to be a
preacher to others, when he finds but little hungerings and thirstings
after grace in his own soul, it is then to be feared his zeal springs
rather from a selfish principle than from the Spirit of God.
"2. Besides this affectionate desire and readiness to preach, there
must in due season appear some competent sufficiency as to gifts,
knowledge, and utterance. Surely, if the Lord sends a man to teach
others, he will furnish him with the means. I believe many have
intended well in setting up for preachers, who yet went beyond or
before their call in so doing. The main difference between a minister
and a private Christian, seems to consist in those ministerial gifts,
which are imparted to him, not for his own sake, but for the
edification of others. But then I say these are to appear in due
season; they are not to be expected instantaneously, but gradually, in
the use of proper means. They are necessary for the discharge of the

ministry, but not necessary as pre-requisites to warrant our desires
after it. In your case, you are young, and have time before you;
therefore, I think you need not as yet perplex yourself with enquiring
if you have these gifts already. It is sufficient if your desire is fixed,
and you are willing, in the way of prayer and diligence, to wait upon
the Lord for them; as yet you need them not. [We should hesitate to
speak precisely in this manner. The gifts must be somewhat apparent
before the desire should be encouraged. Still in the main we agree
with Mr. Newton.]
"3. That which finally evidences a proper call, is a correspondent
opening in providence, by a gradual train of circumstances pointing
out the means, the time, the place, of actually entering upon the
work. And until this coincidence arrives, you must not expect to be
always clear from hesitation in your own mind. The principal caution
on this head is, not to be too hasty in catching at first appearances. If
it be the Lord's will to bring you into his ministry, he has already
appointed your place and service, and though you know it not at
present, you shall at a proper time. If you had the talents of an angel,
you could do no good with them till his hour is come, and till he leads
you to the people whom he has determined to bless by your means. It
is very difficult to restrain ourselves within the bounds of prudence
here, when our zeal is warm: a sense of the love of Christ upon our
hearts, and a tender compassion for poor sinners, is ready to prompt
us to break out too soon; but he that believeth shall not make haste. I
was about five years under this constraint; sometimes I thought I
must preach, though it was in the streets. I listened to everything
that seemed plausible, and to many things which were not so. But the
Lord graciously, and as it were insensibly, hedged up my way with
thorns; otherwise, if I had been left to my own spirit, I should have
put it quite out of my power to have been brought into such a sphere
of usefulness, as he in his good time has been pleased to lead me to.
And I can now see clearly, that at the time I would first have gone
out, though my intention was, I hope, good in the main, yet I
overrated myself, and had not that spiritual judgment and
experience which are requisite for so great a service."

Thus much may suffice, but the same subject will be before you if I
detail a little of my experience in dealing with aspirants for the
ministry. I have constantly to fufil the duty which fell to the lot of
Cromwell's Triers. I have to form an opinion as to the advisability of
aiding certain men in their attempts to become pastors. This is a
most responsible duty, and one which requires no ordinary care. Of
course, I do not set myself up to judge whether a man shall enter the
ministry or not, but my examination merely aims at answering the
question whether this institution shall help him, or leave him to his
own resources. Certain of our charitable neighbours accuse us of
having "a parson manufactory" here, but the charge is not true at all.
We never tried to make a minister, and should fail if we did; we
receive none into the College but those who profess to be ministers
already. It would be nearer the truth if they called me a parson killer,
for a goodly number of beginners have received their quietus from
me; and I have the fullest ease of conscience in reflecting upon what I
have so done. It has always been a hard task for me to discourage a
hopeful young brother who has applied for admission to the College.
My heart has always leaned to the kindest side, but duty to the
churches has compelled me to judge with severe discrimination.
After hearing what the candidate has had to say, having read his
testimonials and seen his replies to questions, when I have felt
convinced that the Lord had not called him, I have been obliged to
tell him so. Certain of the cases are types of all. Young brethren apply
who earnestly desire to enter the ministry, but it is painfully
apparent that their main motive is an ambitious desire to shine
among men. These men are from a common point of view to be
commended for aspiring, but then the pulpit is never to be the ladder
by which ambition is to climb. Had such men entered the army they
would never have been satisfied till they had reached the front rank,
for they are determined to push their way up—all very laudable and
very proper so far; but they have embraced the idea that if they
entered the ministry they would be greatly distingnished; they have
felt the buddings of genius, and have regarded themselves as greater
than ordinary persons, and, therefore, they have looked upon the
ministry as a platform upon which to display their supposed abilities.

Whenever this has been visible I have felt bound to leave the man "to
gang his ain gate," as the Scotch say; believing that such spirits
always come to nought if they enter the Lord's service. We find that
we have nothing whereof to glory, and if we had, the very worst place
in which to hang it out would be a pulpit; for there we are brought
daily to feel our own insignificance and nothingness.
Men who since conversion have betrayed great feebleness of mind
and are readily led to embrace strange doctrines, or to fall into evil
company and gross sin, I never can find it in my heart to encourage
to enter the ministry, let their professions be what they may. Let
them, if truly penitent, keep in the rear ranks. Unstable as water they
will not excel.
So, too, those who cannot endure hardness, but are of the kid-gloved
order, I refer elsewhere. We want soldiers, not fops, earnest
labourers, not genteel loiterers. Men who have done nothing up to
their time of application to the college, are told to earn their spurs
before they are publicly dubbed as knights. Fervent lovers of souls do
not wait till they are trained, they serve their Lord at once.
Certain good men appeal to me who are distinguished by enormous
vehemence and zeal, and a conspicuous absence of brains; brethren
who would talk for ever and ever upon nothing--who would stamp
and thump the Bible, and get nothing out of it all; earnest, awfully
earnest, mountains in labour of the most painful kind; but nothing
comes of it all, not even the ridiculus mus. There are zealots abroad
who are not capable of conceiving or uttering five consecutive
thoughts, whose capacity is most narrow and their conceit most
broad, and these can hammer, and bawl, and rave, and tear, and
rage, but the noise all arises from the hollowness of the drum. I
conceive that these brethren will do quite as well without education
as with it, and therefore I have usually declined their applications.
Another exceedingly large class of men seek the pulpit they know not
why. They cannot teach and will not learn, and yet must fain be

ministers. Like the man who slept on Parnassus, and ever after
imagined himself a poet, they have had impudence enough once to
thrust a sermon upon an audience, and now nothing will do but
preaching. They are so hasty to leave off sewing garments, that they
will make a rent in the church of which they are members to
accomplish their design. The counter is distasteful, and a pulpit
cushion is coveted; the scales and weights they are weary of, and
must needs try their hands at the balances of the sanctuary. Such
men, like raging waves of the sea usually foam forth their own
shame, and we are happy when we bid them adieu.
Physical infirmities raise a question about the call of some excellent
men. I would not, like Eusthenes, judge men by their features, but
their general physique is no small criterion. That narrow chest does
not indicate a man formed for public speech. You may think it odd,
but still I feel very well assured, that when a man has a contracted
chest, with no distance between his shoulders, the all-wise Creator
did not intend him habitually to preach. If he had meant him to
speak he would have given him in some measure breadth of chest,
sufficient to yield a reasonable amount of lung force. When the Lord
means a creature to run, he gives it nimble legs, and if he means
another creature to preach, he will give it suitable lungs. A brother
who has to pause in the middle of a sentence and work his air-pump,
should ask himself whether there is not some other occupation for
which he is better adapted. A man who can scarcely get through a
sentence without pain, can hardly be called to "Cry aloud and spare
not." There may be exceptions, but is there not weight in the general
rule? Brethren with defective mouths and imperfect articulation are
not usually called to preach the gospel. The same applies to brethren
with no palate, or an imperfect one.
Application was received some short time ago from a young man who
had a sort of rotary action of his jaw of the most painful sort to the
beholder. His pastor commended him as a very holy young man, who
had been the means of bringing some to Christ, and he expressed the
hope that I would receive him, but I could not see the propriety of it.

I could not have looked at him while preaching without laughter if all
the gold of Tarshish had been my reward, and in all probability nine
out of ten of his hearers would have been more sensitive than myself.
A man with a big tongue which filled up his mouth and caused
indistinctness, another without teeth, another who stammered,
another who could not pronounce all the alphabet, I have had the
pain of declining on the ground that God had not given them those
physical appliances, which are as the prayer-book would put it,
"generally necessary."
One brother I have encountered--one did I say? I have met ten,
twenty, a hundred brethren, who have pleaded that they were sure,
quite sure that they were called to the ministry--they were quite
certain of it, because they had failed in everything else. This is a sort
of model story: "Sir, I was put into a lawyer's office, but I never could
bear the confinement, and I could not feel at home in studying law;
Providence clearly stopped up my road, for I lost my situation." "And
what did you do then?" "Why sir, I was induced to open a grocer's
shop." "And did you prosper?" "Well, I do not think, Sir, I was ever
meant for trade, and the Lord seemed quite to shut my way up there,
for I failed and was in great difficulties. Since then I have done a little
in life-assurance agency, and tried to get up a school, besides selling
tea; but my path is hedged up, and something within me makes me
feel that I ought to be a minister." My answer generally is, "Yes, I see;
you have failed in everything else, and therefore you think the Lord
has especially endowed you for his service; but I fear you have
forgotten that the ministry needs the very best of men, and not those
who cannot do anything else." A man who would succeed as a
preacher would probably do right well either as a grocer, or a lawyer,
or anything else. A really valuable minister would have excelled at
anything. There is scarcely anything impossible to a man who can
keep a congregation together for years, and be the means of edifying
them for hundreds of consecutive Sabbaths; he must be possessed of
some abilities, and be by no means a fool or ne'er-do-well. Jesus
Christ deserves the best men to preach his cross, and not the emptyheaded and the shiftless.

One young gentleman with whose presence I was once honoured, has
left on my mind the photograph of his exquisite self. That same face
of his looked like the title-page to a whole volume of conceit and
deceit. He sent word into my vestry one Sabbath morning that he
must see me at once. His audacity admitted him; and when he was
before me he said, "Sir, I want to enter your College, and should like
to enter it at once." "Well, Sir," said I, "I fear we have no room for
you at present, but your case shall be considered." "But mine is a
very remarkable case, Sir; you have probably never received such an
application as mine before." "Very good, we'll see about it; the
secretary will give you one of the application papers, and you can see
me on Monday." He came on the Monday bringing with him the
questions, answered in a most extraordinary manner. As to books, he
claimed to have read all ancient and modern literature, and after
giving an immense list he added, "this is but a selection; I have read
most extensively in all departments." As to his preaching, he could
produce the highest testimonials, but hardly thought they would be
needed, as a personal interview would convince me of his ability at
once. His surprise was great when I said, "Sir, I am obliged to tell you
that I cannot receive you." "Why not, Sir?" "I will tell you plainly. You
are so dreadfully clever that I could not insult you by receiving you
into our College, where we have none but rather ordinary men; the
president, tutors, and students, are all men of moderate attainments,
and you would have to condescend too much in coming among us."
He looked at me very severely, and said with dignity, "Do you mean
to say, that because I have an unusual genius, and have produced in
myself a gigantic mind such as is rarely seen, I am refused
admittance into your College?" "Yes," I replied, as calmly as I could,
considering the overpowering awe which his genius inspired, "for
that very reason." "Then, Sir, you ought to allow me a trial of my
preaching abilities; select me any text you like, or suggest any subject
you please, and here in this very room I will speak upon it, or preach
upon it without deliberation, and you will be surprised." "No, thank
you, I would rather not have the trouble of listening to you."
"Trouble, Sir! I assure you it would be the greatest possible pleasure
you could have." I said it might be, but I felt myself unworthy of the

privilege, and so bade him a long farewell. The gentleman was
unknown to me at the time, but he has since figured in the police
court as too clever by half.
We have occasionally had applications at which, perhaps, you would
be amazed, from men who are evidently fluent enough, and who
answer all our questions very well, except those upon their doctrinal
views, to which repeatedly we have had this answer: "Mr. So-and-so
is prepared to receive the doctrines of the College whatever they may
be!" In all such cases we never deliberate a moment, the
instantaneous negative is given. I mention it, because it illustrates
our conviction that men are not called to the ministry who have no
knowledge and no definite belief. When young fellows say that they
have not made up their minds upon theology, they ought to go back
to the Sunday-school until they have. For a man to come shuffling
into a College, pretending that he holds his mind open to any form of
truth, and that he is eminently receptive, but has not settled in his
mind such things as whether God has an election of grace, or
whether he loves his people to the end, seems to me to be a perfect
monstrosity. "Not a novice," says the apostle; yet a man who has not
made up his mind on such points as these, is confessedly and
egregiously "a novice," and ought to be relegated to the catechismclass till he has learned the first truths of the gospel.
After all, gentlemen, we shall have to prove our call by the practical
proof of our ministry in after life, and it will be a lamentable thing for
us to start in our course without due examination; for if so, we may
have to leave it in disgrace. On the whole, experience is our surest
test, and if God upholds us from year to year, and gives us his
blessing, we need make no other trial of our vocation. Our moral and
spiritual fitnesses will be tried by the labour of our ministry, and this
is the most trustworthy of all tests. From some one or other I heard
in conversation of a plan adopted by Matthew Wilks, for examining a
young man who wanted to be a missionary; the drift, if not the detail
of the test, commends itself to my judgment though not to my taste.
The young man desired to go to India as a missionary in connection

with the London Missionary Society. Mr. Wilks was appointed to
consider his fitness for such a post. He wrote to the young man, and
told him to call upon him at six o'clock the next morning. The
brother lived many miles off, but he was at the house at six o'clock
punctually. Mr. Wilks did not, however, enter the room till hours
after. The brother waited wonderingly, but patiently. At last, Mr.
Wilks arrived, and addressed the candidate thus, in his usual nasal
tones, " Well, young, man, so you want to be a missionary?" "Yes,
Sir." "Do you love the Lord Jesus Christ?" "Yes, Sir, I hope I do."
"And have you had any education?" "Yes, Sir, a little." "Well, now,
we'll try you; can you spell 'cat'? "The young man looked confused,
and hardly knew how to answer so preposterous a question. His
mind evidently halted between indignation and submission, but in a
moment he replied steadily, " C,a,t, cat." "Very good," said Mr. Wilks;
"now, can you spell 'dog' "Our young martyr hesitated, but Mr. Wilks
said in his coolest manner, "Oh, never mind; don't be bashful; you
spelt the other word so well that I should think you will be able to
spell this: high as the attainment is, it is not so elevated but what you
might do it without blushing. "The youthful Job replied, "D,o,g, dog."
"Well, that is right; I see you will do in your spelling, and now for
your arithmetic; how many are twice two?" It is a wonder that Mr
.Wilks did not receive "twice two" after the fashion of muscular
Christianity, but the patient youth gave the right reply and was
dismissed. Matthew Wilks at the committee meeting said, "I
cordially recommend that young man; his testimonials and character
I have duly examined, and besides that, I have given him a rare
personal trial such as few could bear. I tried his self-denial, he was
up in the morning early; I tried his temper, and I tried his humility;
he can spell 'cat' and 'dog,' and can tell that 'twice two make four,'
and he will do for a missionary exceedingly well." Now, what the old
gentleman is thus said to have done with exceedingly bad taste, we
may with much propriety do with ourselves. We must try whether we
can endure brow-beating, weariness, slander, jeering, and hardship;
and whether we can be made the off-scouring of all things, and be
treated as nothing for Christ's sake. If we can endure all these, we
have some of those points which indicate the possession of the rare

qualities which should meet in a true servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ. I gravely question whether some of us will find our vessels,
when far out at sea, to be quite so seaworthy as we think them. O my
brethren, make sure work of it while you are yet in this retreat; and
diligently labour to fit yourselves for your high calling. You will have
trials enough, and woe to you if you do not go forth armed from head
to foot with armour of proof. You will have to run with horsemen, let
not the footmen weary you while in your preliminary studies. The
devil is abroad, and with him are many. Prove your own selves, and
may the Lord prepare you for the crucible and the furnace which
assuredly await you. Your tribulation may not in all respects be so
severe as that of Paul and his companions, but you must be ready for
a like ordeal. Let me read you his memorable words, and let me
entreat you to pray, while you hear them, that the Holy Ghost may
strengthen you for all that lies before you. "Giving no offence in
anything, that the ministry be not blamed: but in all things
approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in
affliction, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments,
in tumults, in labours, in watchings, in fastings; by pureness, by
knowledge, by longsuffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the arm our
of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honour and
dishonour, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true;
as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and, behold, we live; as
chastened, and not killed; as sorrowfnl, yet always rejoicing; as poor,
yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all
things."
