PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 14
The Glory of Christ in His Exaltation


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 7. The Glory of Christ in His Exaltation.

The Glory of Christ in his intimate Conjunction with the Church.
What concerns the glory of Christ in the mission of the Holy Ghost unto the church, with all the divine truths that are branched
from it, I have at large declared in my discourse concerning the whole dispensation of the Holy Spirit. Here, therefore, it must have no
place amongst those many other things which offer themselves unto our contemplation as part of this glory, or intimately belonging
thereunto. I shall insist briefly on three only, which cannot be reduced directly unto the former heads.
And the first of these is, – That intimate conjunction that is between Christ and the church; whence it is just and equal in the sight of
God, according unto the rules of his eternal righteousness, that what he did and suffered in the discharge of his office, should be
esteemed, reckoned, and imputed unto us, as unto all the fruits and benefits of it, as if we had done and suffered the same things
ourselves. For this conjunction of his with us was an act of his own mind and will, wherein he is ineffably glorious.
The enemies of the glory of Christ and of his cross do take this for granted, that there ought to be such a conjunction between the
guilty person and him that suffers for him, as that in him the guilty person may be said, in some sense, to undergo the punishment
himself. But then they affirm, on the other hand, that there was no such conjunction between Christ and sinners, – none at all; but
that he was a man, as they were men; and otherwise, that he was at the greatest distance from them all as it is possible for one man
to be from another, Socin. de Servant. lib. 3 cap. 3. The falseness of this latter assertion, and the gross ignorance of the Scripture,
under a pretence of subtlety, in them that make it, will evidently appear in our ensuing Discourse.
The apostle tells us, 1 Peter 2: 24, that in “his own self he bare our sins in his own body on the tree;” and, chap. 3: 18, that he “suffered
for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.” But this seems somewhat strange unto reason. Where is the justice,
where is the equity, that the just should suffer for the unjust? Where is divine righteousness herein? For it was an act of God: “The
Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all,” Isa. 53: 6. The equity hereof, with the grounds of it, must be here a little inquired into.
First of all, it is certain that all the elect, the whole church of God, fell in Adam under the curse due to the transgression of the law. It
is so also, that in this curse death, both temporal and eternal, was contained. This curse none could undergo and be saved. Nor was it
consistent with the righteousness, or holiness, or truth of God, that sin should go unpunished. Wherefore there was a necessity, upon a
supposition of God’s decree to save his church, of a translator of punishment, – namely, from them who had deserved it, and could
not bear it, unto one who had not deserved it, but could bear it.
A supposition of this translation of punishment by divine dispensation is the foundation of Christian religion, yea, of all supernatural
revelation contained in the Scripture. This was first intimated in the first promise; and afterward explained and confirmed in all the
institutions of the Old Testament. For although in the sacrifices of the law, there was a revival of the greatest and most fundamental
principle of the law of nature, – name]y, that God is to be worshipped with our best, – yet the principal end and use of them was to
represent this translation of punishment from the offender unto another, who was to be a sacrifice in his stead.
The reasons of the equity hereof, and the unspeakable glory of Christ herein, is what we now inquire into. And I shall reduce what

ought to be spoken hereunto to the ensuing heads: – I. It is not contrary unto the nature of divine justice, it does not interfere with
the principles of natural light in man, that in sundry cases some persons should suffer punishment for the sins and, offences of others.
I shall at present give this assertion no other confirmation, but only that God has often done so, who will, who can, do no iniquity.
So he affirms that he will do, Exod. 20: 5, “Visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.”
It is no exception of weight, that they also are sinners, continuing in their fathers’ sins; for the worst of sinners must not be dealt
unjustly withal: but they must be so if they are punished for their fathers’ sins, and it be absolutely unlawful that any one should be
punished for the sin of another.
So the church affirms, “Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their iniquities,” Lam. 5: 7. And so it was; for in the
Babylonish captivity God punished the sins of their forefathers, especially those committed in the days of Manasseh, 2 Kings 23: 26,
27; as afterward, in the final destruction of that church and nation, God punished in them the guilt of all bloody persecutions from the
beginning of the world, Luke 11: 50, 51.
So Canaan was cursed for the sin of his father, Gen. 9: 25. Saul’s seven sons were put to death for their father’s bloody cruelty, 2 Sam.
21:9, 14. For the sin of David, seventy thousand of the people were destroyed by an angel, concerning whom he said, “It is I that have
sinned and done evil; these sheep, what have they done” 2 Sam. 24: 15-17. See also 1 Kings 21: 29. So was it with all the children or
infantry that perished in the flood, or in the conflagration of Sodom and Gomorrah. And other instances of the like nature may be
assigned.
I t is therefore evident that there is no inconsistency with the nature of divine justice, nor the rules of reason among men, that in
sundry cases the sins of some may be punished on others.
II. It is to be observed, that this administration of justice is not promiscuous, – that any whatever may be punished for the sins of any
others. There is always a special cause and reason of it; and this is a peculiar conjunction between them who sin and those who are
punished for their sins. And two things belong unto this conjunction 1. Especial relation; 2. Especial mutual interest.
1. There is an especial relation required unto this translation of punishment; such as that between parents and children, as in most of
the instances before given; or between a king and subjects, as in the case of David. Hereby the persons sinning and those suffering are
constituted one body, wherein if one member offend, another may justly suffer: the back may answer for what the hand takes away.
2. It consists in mutual interest. Those whose sins are punished in others have such an interest in them, as that their being so is a
punishment unto themselves. Therefore are such sinners threatened with the punishment and evils that shall befall their posterity or
children for their sakes; which is highly penal unto themselves, Numb. 14: 33, “Y our children shall wander in the wilderness forty
years, and bear your whoredoms.” The punishment due to their sins is in part transferred unto their children; and therein did the sting
of heir own punishment also consist.
III. There is a greater, a more intimate conjunction, a nearer relation, a higher mutual interest, between Christ and the church, than
ever was or can be between any other persons or relations in the world, whereon it became just and equal in the sight of God that he
should suffer for us, and that what he did and suffered would be imputed unto us; which is farther to be cleared.
There neither is nor can be any more than a threefold conjunction between divers distinct persons. The first is natural; the second is
moral, whereunto I refer that which is spiritual or mystical; and the third federal, by virtue of mutual compact. In all thee ways is
Christ in conjunction with his church, and in every one of them in a way singular and peculiar.
1 . The first conjunction of distinct periods is natural. God has made all mankind “of one blood,” Acts 17: 26, – whereby there is a
cognation and alliance between them all. Hence every man is every man’s brother or neighbour, unto whom loving-kindness is to be
showed, Luke 10: 36. And this conjunction was between Christ and the church, as the apostle declares, Heb. 2: 14, 15, “Forasmuch
then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same; that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the devil; and deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject
to bondage.” Hence “both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one,” verse 11. His infinite condescension, in
coming into this communion and conjunction of nature with us, was before declared; but it is not common, like that between all other
men, partakers of the same nature. There are two things wherein it was peculiar and eminent.
(1.) This conjunction between him and the church did not arise from a necessity of nature, but from a voluntary act of his will. The
conjunction that is between all others is necessary. Every man is every man’s brother, Whether he will or no, by being a man. Natural
generation, communicating to every one his subsistence in the same nature, prevent all acts of their own will and choice. With the
Lord Christ it was otherwise, as the text affirms. For such reasons as are there expressed, he did, by an act of his own will, partake of
flesh and blood, or came into this conjunction with us. He did it of his own choice, because the children did partake of the same. He
would be what the children were. Wherefore the conjunction of Christ in human nature with the church is ineffably distinct from that
common conjunction which is amongst all others in the same nature. And, therefore, although it should not be meet amongst mere
men, that one should act and suffer in the stead of others, because they are all thus related to one another, as it were, whether they
will or no; yet this could not reach the Lord Christ, who, in a strange and wonderful manner, came into this conjunction by a mere
act of his own.
(2.) He came into it on this design, and for this only end, – namely, that in our nature, taken to be his own, he might do and suffer
what was to be done and suffered for the church: so it is added in the text, “That by death he might destroy him who had the power of
death; and deliver them who through fear of death were subject to bondage.” This was the only end of his conjunction in nature with
the church; and this puts the case between him and it at a vast distance from what is or may be between other men.
I t is a foolish thing to argue, that because a mere participation of the same nature among men is not sufficient to warrant the
righteousness of punishing one for another, – therefore the conjunction in the same nature betwixt Christ and the church is not a
sufficient and just foundation of his suffering for us, and in our stead. For, by an act of his own will and choice, he did partake of our
nature, and that for this very end, that therein he might suffer for us; as the Holy Ghost expressly declares. Amongst others, there

neither is nor can be any thing of this nature, and so no objection from what is equal or unequal amongst them can arise against
what is equal between Christ and the church. And herein is he glorious and precious unto them that believe, as we shall see
immediately.
2 . There is a mystical conjunction between Christ and the church, which answers all the most strict, real, or moral unions or
conjunctions between other persons or things. Such is the conjunction between the head of a body and its members, or the tree of the
vine and its branches, which are real; or between a husband and wife, which is moral and real also. That there is such a conjunction
between Christ and his church the Scripture plentifully declares, as also that it is the foundation of the equity of his suffering in its
stead. So speaks the apostle, Eph 5: 25-32, “Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church,” – that is, his wife, the
bride, the Lamb’s wife, – “and gave himself for it,” &c. Being the head and husband of the church, which was to be sanctified and
saved, and could be so no otherwise but by his blood and sufferings, he was both meet so to suffer, and it was righteous also that what
he did and suffered should be imputed unto them for whom he both did it and suffered. Let the adversaries of the glory of Christ
assign any one instance of such a conjunction, union, and relation between any amongst mankind, as is between Christ and the
church, and they may give some countenance unto their cavils against his obedience and sufferings in our stead, with the imputation
of what he did and suffered unto us. But the glory of Christ is singular herein, and as such it appears unto them by whom the mystery
of it is, in any measure, spiritually apprehended.
But yet it will be said, that this mystical conjunction of Christ with his church is consequential unto what he did and suffered for it; for
it ensues on the conversion of men unto him. For it is by faith that we are implanted into him. Until that be actually wrought in us,
we have no mystical conjunction with him. He is not a head or a husband unto unregenerate, unsanctified unbelievers, whilst they
continue so to be; and such was the state of the whole church when Christ suffered for us, Rom. 5: 8; Eph 2: 6. There was, therefore,
no such mystical conjunction between him and the church as to render it meet and equal that he should suffer in its stead. Wherefore
the church is the effect of the work of redemption, – that which rose out of it, which was made and constituted by it; and cannot be so
the object of it as that which was to be redeemed by virtue of an antecedent conjunction with it. I answer, – (1.) although this
mystical conjunction is not actually consummate without an actual participation of the Spirit of Christ, yet the church of the elect was
designed antecedently unto all his sufferings to be his spouse and wife, so as that he might love her and suffer for her; so it is said, Hos.
12: 12, “Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.” Howbeit she was not his married wife until after he had served for her,
and thereby purchased her to be his wife; yet as he served for her she is called his wife, because of his love unto her, and because she
was so designed to be, upon his service. So was the church designed to be the spouse of Christ in the counsel of God; whereon he loved
her and gave himself for her.
Hence, in the work of redemption the church was the object of it, as designed to be the spouse of Christ; and the effect of it, inasmuch
as that thereby it was made meet for the full consummation of that alliance; as the apostle expressly declares, Eph. 5: 25-27.
(2.) Antecedently unto all that the Lord Christ did and suffered for the church, there was a supreme act of the will of God the Father,
giving all the elect unto him, intrusting them with him, to be redeemed, sanctified, and saved; as himself declares, John 17: 6, 9; 10:
14-16. And on these grounds this mystical conjunction between Christ and the church has its virtue and efficacy before it be actually
consummate.
3. There is a federal conjunction between distinct persons: and as this is various, according unto the variety of the interests and ends of
them that enter into it; so that is most eminent, where one, by the common consent of all that are concerned, undertakes to be a
sponsor or surety for others, to do and answer what on their part is required of them for attaining the ends of the covenant. So did the
Lord Christ undertake to be surety of the new covenant in behalf of the church, Heb. 7: 22, and thereon tendered himself unto God, to
do and suffer for them, in their stead, and on their behalf, whatever was required, that they might be sanctified and saved. These
things I have treated of at large elsewhere, as containing a great part of the mystery of the wisdom of God in the salvation of the
church Here, therefore, I do only observe, that this is that whereby the mystical conjunction that was between Christ and the church,
whereon it was meet, just, and equal in the sight of God, that what he did and suffered should be imputed unto us, is completed.
These are some of the foundations of that mystery of transmitting the sins of the church, as to the guilt and punishment of them,
from the sinners themselves unto another, every way innocent, pure, and righteous in himself, – which is the life, soul, and centre of
all Scripture revelations. And herein is he exceedingly glorious and precious unto them that believe. No heart can conceive, no tongue
can express the glory of Christ herein. Now, because his infinite condescension and love herein have been spoken to before, I shall
here only instance its greatness in some of its effects.
1. It shines forth in the exaltation of the righteousness of God in the forgiveness of sins. There is no more adequate conception of the
divine nature, than that of justice in rule and government. Hereunto it belongs to punish sin according unto its desert; and herein
consisted the first actings of God as the governor of the rational creation. They did so in the eternal punishment of the angels that
sinned, and the casting of Adam out of Paradise, – an emblem also of everlasting ruin. Now, all the church, all the elect of God, are
sinners; – they were so in Adam, – they have been and are so in themselves. What does become the justice of God to do thereon?
Shall it dismiss then all unpunished? Where, then, is that justice which spared not the angels who sinned, nor Adam at the first?
Would this procedure have any consonance thereunto, – be reconcilable unto it? Wherefore the establishment of the righteousness of
God on the one hand, and the forgiveness of sin on the other, seem so contradictory, as that many stumble and fall at it eternally. See
Rom. 10: 3, 4.
But in this interposition of Christ, in this translation of punishment from the church unto him, by virtue of his conjunction therewith,
there is a blessed harmony between the righteousness of God and the forgiveness of sins; – the exemplification whereof is his eternal
glory. “O blessed change! 0 sweet permutation!” as Justin Martyr speaks.
By virtue of his union with the church, which of his own accord he entered into, and his undertaking therein to answer for it in the
sight of God, it was a righteous thing with God to lay the punishment of all our sins upon him, so as that he might freely and
graciously pardon them all, to the honour and exaltation of his justice, as well as of his grace and mercy, Rom. 3: 24-26.
Herein is he glorious in the sight of God, angels, and men. In him there is at the same time, in the same divine acting, a glorious
resplendence of justice and mercy; – of the one in punishing, of the other in pardoning. The appearing inconsistency between the

righteousness of God and the salvation of sinners, wherewith the consciences of convinced persons are exercised and terrified, and
which is the rock on which most of them split themselves into eternal ruin, is herein removed and taken away. In his cross were
divine holiness and vindictive justice exercised and manifested; and through his triumph, grace and mercy are exerted to the utmost.
This is that glory which ravisheth the hearts and satiates the souls of them that believe. For what can they desire more, what is farther
needful unto the rest and composure of their souls, than at one view to behold God eternally well pleased in the declaration of his
righteousness and the exercise of his mercy, in order unto their salvation? In due apprehensions hereof let my soul live; – in the faith
hereof let me die, and let present admiration of this glory make way for the eternal enjoyment of it in its beauty and fulness.
2 . He is glorious in that the law of God in its receptive part, or as to the obedience which it required, was perfectly fulfilled and
accomplished. That it should be so, was absolutely necessary, from the wisdom, holiness, and righteousness of him by whom it was
given. For what could be more remote from those divine perfections, than to give a law which never was to be fulfilled in them unto
whom it was given, and who were to have the advantages of it? This could not be done by us; but through the obedience of Christ, by
virtue of this his mystical conjunction with the church, the law was so fulfilled in us by being fulfilled for us, as that the glory of God
in the giving of it, and annexing eternal rewards unto it, is exceedingly exalted. See Rom. 8: 3, 4.
This is that glory of Christ whereof one view by faith will scatter all the fear, answer all the objections, and give relief against all the
despondencies, of poor, tempted, doubting souls; and an anchor it will be unto all believers, which they may cast within the veil, to
hold them firm and steadfast in all trials, storms, and temptations in life and death.

The Glory of Christ in the communication of Himself unto Believers.
Another instance of the glory of Christ, which we are to behold here by faith, and hope that we shall do so by sight hereafter, consists
in the mysterious communication of himself, and all the benefits of his mediation, unto the souls of them that do believe, to their
present happiness and future eternal blessedness.
Hereby he becomes theirs as they are his; which is the life, the glory, and consolation of the church, Cant. 6: 3; 2:16; 7:10, – he and all
that he is being appropriated unto them, by virtue of their mystical union. There is, there must be, some ground, formal reason, and
cause of this relation between Christ and the church, whereby he is theirs, and they are his; – he is in them, and they in him, so as it is
not between him and other men in the world.
The apostle, speaking of this communication of Christ unto the church, and the union between them which does ensue thereon,
affirms that it is “a great mystery;” for “I speak,” saith he, “concerning Christ and the church,” Eph 5: 32.
I shall very briefly inquire into the causes, ways, and means of this mysterious communication, whereby he is made to be ours, to be
in us, to dwell with us, and all the benefits of his mediation to belong unto us. For, as was said, it is evident that he does not thus
communicate himself unto all by natural necessity, as the sun gives light equally unto the whole world, – nor is he present with all by
a ubiquity of his human nature, – nor, as some dream, by a diffusion of his rational soul into all, – nor does he become ours by a
carnal eating of him in the sacrament; but this mystery proceeds from, and depends on, other reasons and causes, as we shall briefly
declare.
But yet, before I proceed to declare the way and manner whereby Christ communicateth himself unto the church, I must premise
something of divine communications in general and their glory. And I shall do this by touching a little on the harmony and
correspondence that is between the old creation and the new.
1. All being, power, goodness, and wisdom, were originally essentially, infinitely in God. And in them, with the other perfections of his
nature, consisted his essential glory.
2. The old creation was a communication of being and goodness by almighty power, directed by infinite wisdom, unto all things that
were created for the manifestation of that glory. This was the first communication of God unto anything without himself; and it was
exceeding glorious. See Ps. 19: 1; Rom. 1: 20. And it was a curious machine, pruned in the subordination and dependency of one thing
on another; without which they could not subsist, nor have a continuance of their beings. All creatures below live on the earth and the
products of it; the earth, for its whole production, depends on the sun and other heavenly bodies; as God declares, Hos. 2: 21, 22, “I
will hear, saith the LORD, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and
the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.” God has given a subordination of things in a concatenation of causes, whereon their subsistence
does depend. Y et, – 3. In this mutual dependency on and supplies unto one another, they all depend on and are influenced from God
himself, – the eternal fountain of being, power, and goodness “He hears the heavens;” and in the continuation of this order, by
constant divine communication of being, goodness, and power, unto all things, God is no less glorified than in the first creation of
them, Acts 14: 15- 17; 17: 24-29.
4 . This glory of God is visible in the matter of it, and is obvious unto the reason of mankind; for from his works of creation and
providence they may learn his eternal power and godhead, wherein he is essentially glorious.
5 . But by this divine communication, God did not intend only to glorify himself in the essential properties of his nature, but his
existence also in three persons, of Father, Son, and Spirit. For although the whole creation in its first framing, and in its perfection,
was, and is, by an emanation of power and goodness from the divine nature, in the person of the Father, as he is the fountain of the
Trinity, whence he is said peculiarly to be the Creator of all things; yet the immediate operation in the creation was from the Son, the
power and wisdom of the Father, John 1: 1-3; Col. 1: 16; Heb. 1: 2. And as upon the first production of the mass of the creation, it was
under the especial care of the Spirit of God, to preserve and cherish it unto the production of all distinct sorts of creatures, Gen. 1: 2, –
so in the continuance of the whole, there is an especial operation of the same Spirit in all things. nothing can subsist one moment by

virtue of the dependence which all things have on one another, without a continual emanation of power from him. See Ps. 104: 29,
30.
By these divine communications, in the production and preservation of the creature, does God manifest his glory, and by them alone
in the way of nature he does so; and without them, although he would have been for ever essentially glorious, yet was it impossible
that his glory should be known unto any but himself. Wherefore, on these divine communications does depend the whole
manifestation of the glory of God. But this is far more eminent, though not in the outward effects of it so visible, in the new creation;
as we shall see.
1. All goodness, grace, life, light, mercy, and power, which are the springs and causes of the new creation, are all originally in God, in
the divine nature, and that infinitely and essentially. In them is God eternally or essentially glorious; and the whole design of the new
creation was to manifest his glory in them, by external communications of them, and from them.
2. The first communication of and from these things is made unto Christ, as the Head of the church. For, in the first place, it pleased
God that in him should all the fulness of these things dwell, so as that the whole new creation might consist in him, Col. 1: 17-19. And
this was the first egress of divine wisdom for the manifestation of the glory of God in these holy properties of his nature. For, – 3. This
communication was made unto him as a repository and treasury of all that goodness, grace, life, light, power, and mercy, which were
necessary for the constitution and preservation of the new creation. They were to be laid up in him, to be hid in him, to dwell in him;
and from him to be communicated unto the whole mystical body designed unto him, – that is, the church. And this is the first
emanation of divine power and wisdom, for the manifestation of his glory in the new creation. This constitution of Christ as the head
of it, and the treasuring up in him all that was necessary for its production and preservation, wherein the church is chosen and
preordained in him unto grace and glory, is the spring and fountain of divine glory, in the communications that ensue thereon.
4. This communication unto Christ is, (1.) Unto his person; and then, (2.) With respect unto his office. It is in the person of Christ that
all fulness does originally dwell. On the assumption of human nature into personal union with the Son of God, all fulness dwells in
him bodily, Col. 2: 9. And thereon receiving the Spirit in all fulness, and not by measure, all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
were hid in him, Col. 2: 3, and he was filled with the unsearchable riches of divine grace, Eph 3: 8-11. And the office of Christ is
nothing but the way appointed in the wisdom of God for the communication of the treasures of grace which were communicated
unto his person. This is the end of the whole office of Christ, in all the parts of it, as he is a priest, a prophet, and a king. They are, I
say, nothing but the ways appointed by infinite wisdom for the communication of the grace laid up in his person unto the church. The
transcendent glory hereof we have in some weak measure inquired into.
5. The decree of election prepared, if I may so say, the mass of the new creation. In the old creation, God first prepared and created
the mass or matter of the whole; which afterward, by the power of the Holy Spirit, was formed into all the distinct beings whereof the
whole creation was to consist, and animates according to their distinct kinds.
And in order unto the production and perfecting of the work of the new creation, God did from eternity, in the holy purpose of his will,
prepare, and in design set apart unto himself, that portion of mankind whereof it was to consist. Hereby they were only the peculiar
matter that was to be wrought upon by the Holy Ghost, and the glorious fabric of the church erected out of it. What was said, it may
be, of the natural body by the Psalmist, is true of the mystical body of Christ, which is principally intended, Ps. 139: 15, 16, “My
substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. Thine eyes did
see my substance yet being imperfect; and in thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as
yet there was none of them.” The substance of the church, whereof it was to be formed, was under the eye of God, as proposed in the
decree of election; yet was it as such imperfect. It was not formed or shaped into members of the mystical body; but they were all
written in the book of life. And in pursuance of the purpose of God, there they are by the Holy Spirit, in the whole course and
continuance of time, in their several generations fashioned into the shape designed for them.
6. This, therefore, is herein the glorious order of divine communications. From the infinite, eternal spring of wisdom, grace, goodness
and love, in the Father, – all the effects whereof unto this end were treasured up in the person and mediation of the Son, the Holy
Spirit, unto whom the actual application of them is committed, communicates life, light, power, grace, and mercy, unto all that are
designed parts of the new creation. Hereon does God glorify both the essential properties of his nature, – his infinite wisdom, power,
goodness, and grace, – as the only eternal spring of all these things, and also his ineffable glorious existence in three persons by the
order of the communication of these things unto the church, which are originally from his nature. And herein is the glorious truth of
the blessed Trinity, – which by some is opposed, by some neglected, by most looked on as that which is so much above them as that it
does not belong unto them, – made precious unto them that believe, and becomes the foundation of their faith and hope. In a view of
the glorious order of those divine communications, we are in a steady contemplation of the ineffable glory of the existence of the
nature of God in the three distinct persons of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
7. According unto this divine order, the elect in all ages are, by the Holy Spirit moving and acting on that mass of the new creation,
formed and animated with spiritual life, light, grace, and power, unto the glory of God. They are not called accidentally, according
unto the external occasions and causes of their convention unto God; but in every age, at his own time and season, the Holy Spirit
communicates these things unto them in the order declared, unto the glory of God.
8. And in the same manner is the whole new creation preserved every day; – every moment there is vital power and strength, mere
and grace, communicated in this divine order to all believers in the world. There is a continual influence from the Fountain, from the
Head, into all the members, whereby they all consist in him, are acted by him, who worketh in us both to will and to do of his own
good pleasure. And the apostle declares that the whole constitution of church order is suited, as an external instrument, to promote
these divine communications unto all the members of the church itself, Eph 4: 13-15.
This in general is the order of divine communications, which is for the substance of it continued in heaven, and shall be so unto
eternity; for God is, and ever will be, all, and in all. But at present it is invisible unto eyes of flesh, yea, the reason of men. Hence it is
by the most despised; – they see no glory in it. But let us consider the prayer of the apostle, that it may be otherwise with us, Eph. 1:
16-23. For the revelation made of the glory of God in the old creation is exceeding inferior to that which he makes of himself in the
new.

Having premised these things in general concerning the glory of divine communications, I shall proceed to declare, in particular, the
grounds and way whereby the Lord Christ communicates himself and wherewithal all the benefits of his mediation, unto them that
do believe, as it was before proposed.
We on our part are said herein to receive him, and that by faith, John 1: 12. Now, where he is received by us, he must be tendered,
given, granted, or communicated unto us. And this he is by some divine acts of the Father, and some of his own.
The foundation of the whole is laid in a sovereign act of the will, the pleasure, the grace of the Father. And this is the order and
method of all divine operations in the way and work of grace. They originally proceed all from him; and having effected their ends, do
return, rest, and centre in him again. See Eph. 1:4-6. Wherefore, that Christ is made ours, that he is communicated unto us, is
originally from the free act, grant, and donation, of the Father, 1 Cor. 1: 30; Rom. 5: 15-17. And hereunto sundry things do concur.
As, – 1. His eternal purpose, which he purposed in himself, to glorify his grace in all his elect, by this communication of Christ and the
benefits of his mediation unto them; which the apostle declares at large, Eph.1.
2. His granting all the elect unto Christ, to be his own, so to do and suffer for them what was antecedaneously necessary unto the
actual communication of himself unto them: “Thine they were, and thou gavest them me,” John 17: 6. 3. The giving of the promise,
or the constitution of the rule and law of the Gospel, whereby a participation of Christ, an interest in him and all that he is, is made
over and assured unto believers, John 1: 12; 1 John 1: 1-4. 4. An act of almighty power, working and creating faith in the souls of the
elect, enabling them to receive Christ so exhibited and communicated unto them by the gospel, Eph 1: 19, 20; 2: 5-8.
These things, which I have but named, have an influence into the glory of Christ herein; for this communication of him unto the
church is an effect of the eternal counsel, wisdom, grace, and power of the Father.
But they are the acts of Christ himself herein, which principally we inquire into, as those which manifest the glory of his wisdom, love,
and condescension.
And, – 1. He gives and communicates unto them his Holy Spirit; – the Holy Spirit as peculiarly his, as granted unto him of the Father,
as inhabiting in him in all fulness. This Spirit – abiding originally as to his person, and immeasurably as unto his effects and
operations, in himself – he gives unto all believers, to inhabit and abide in them also, John 14: 14-20; 1 Cor. 6: 17; Rom. 8: 9. Hence
follows an ineffable union between him and them. For as in his incarnation he took our nature into personal union with his own; so
herein he takes our persons into a mystical union with himself. Hereby he becomes ours, and we are his.
And herein he is unspeakably glorious. For this mystery of the inhabitation of the same Spirit in him as the head, and the church as
his body, animating the whole, is a transcendent effect of divine wisdom. There is nothing of this nature in the whole creation besides,
– no such union, no such mutual communication. The strictest unions and relations in nature are but shadows of it, Eph. 5: 25-32.
Herein also is the Lord Christ precious unto them that do believe, but a stone of stumbling and a rock of offence unto the disobedient.
This glorious, ineffable effect of his wisdom and grace; this rare, peculiar, singular way of the communication of himself unto the
church, is by many despised. They know, it may be, some of them, what it is to be joined unto a harlot so as to become one flesh; but
what it is to be joined unto the Lord so as to become one spirit, they know not. But this principle and spring of the spiritual life of the
church, and of all vital, spiritual motions towards God and things heavenly, wherein and whereby “our life is hid with Christ in God,”
is the glory, the exaltation, the honour, the security of the church, unto the praise of the grace of God. The understanding of it in its
causes, effects, operations, and privileges wherewith it is accompanied, is to be preferred above all the wisdom in and of the world.
2. He thus communicates himself unto us, by the formation of a new nature, his own nature, in us; so as that the very same spiritual
nature is in him and in the church. Only, it is so with this difference, that in him it is in the absolute perfection of all those glorious
graces wherein it does consist; in the church it is in various measures and degrees, according as he is pleased to communicate it. But
the same divine nature it is that is in him and us; for, through the precious promises of the gospel, we are made partakers of his Divine
nature. It is not enough for us that he has taken our nature to be his, unless he gives us also his nature to be ours; – that is, implants
in our souls all those gracious qualifications, as unto the essence and substance of them, wherewith he himself in his human nature is
endued. This is that new man, that new creature, that divine nature, that spirit which is born of the Spirit, that transformation into
the image of Christ, that putting of him on, that worship of God whereunto in him we are created, that the Scripture so fully testifieth
unto, John 3: 6; Rom 6: 3-8; 2 Cor. 3: 18; 5: 17; Eph 4: 20-24; 2 Peter 1:4.
And that new heavenly nature which is thus formed in believers, as the first vital act of that union which is between Christ and them
by the inhabitation of the same Spirit, is peculiarly his nature. For both is it so as it is in him the idea and the exemplar of it in us, –
inasmuch as we are predestinated to be conformed unto his image, – and as it is wrought or produced in our souls by an emanation of
power, virtue, and efficiency from him.
Th is is a most heavenly way of the communication of himself unto us, wherein of God “he is made unto us wisdom and
sanctification.” Hereon he says of his church, “This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh;” – I see myself, my own nature,
in them; whence they are comely and desirable. Hereby he makes way to “present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but holy and without blemish.” On this communication of Christ unto us, by the forming of his own
nature in us, depends all the purity, the beauty, the holiness, the inward glory of the church. Hereby is it really, substantially,
internally separated from the world, and distinguished from all others, who, in the outward form of things, in the profession and
duties of religion, seem to be the same with them. Hereby it becomes the first fruits of the creation unto God, bearing forth the
renovation of his image in the world; – herein the Lord Christ is, and will be, glorious unto all eternity. I only mention these things,
which deserve to be far more largely insisted on.
3. He does the same by that actual insition or implantation into himself which he gives us by faith, which is of his own operation. For
hereon two things do ensue; – one by the grace or power, the other by the law or constitution, of the gospel; which have a great
influence into this mystical communication of Christ unto the church.
And the first of these is, that hereby there is communicated unto us, and we do derive, supplies of spiritual life, sustentation, motion,
strength in grace, and perseverance from him continually. Thine is that which himself so divinely teacheth in the parable of the vine
