PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 25 of 28
Anecdotes from the Pulpit

---

Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 25. Anecdotes from the Pulpit.

CHAPTER XXV
ANECDOTES FROM THE PULPIT
It is pretty generally admitted that sermons may wisely be adorned
with a fair share of illustrations; but anecdotes used to that end are
still regarded by the prudes of the pulpit with a measure of suspicion,
They will come down low enough to quote an emblem, they will
deign to use poetic imagery; but they cannot stoop to tell a simple,
homely story. They would probably say in confidence to their
younger brethren, "Beware how you lower yourselves and your
sacred office by repeating anecdotes, which are best appreciated by
the vulgar and uneducated." We would not retort by exhorting all
men to abound in stories, for there ought to be discrimination. It is
freely admitted that there are useful and admirable styles of oratory
which would be disfigured by a rustic tale; and there are honoured
brethren whose genius would never allow them to relate a story, for
it would not appear suitable to their mode of thought. Upon these we
would not even by implication hint at a censure; but when we are
dealing with others who seem to be somewhat, and are not what they
seem, we feel no tenderness; nay, we are even moved to assail their
stilted greatness. If they sneer at anecdotes, we smile at them and
their sneers, and wish them more sense and less starch. Affectation
of intellectual superiority and love of rhetorical splendour have
prevented many from setting forth gospel truth in the easiest

imaginable manner, namely, by analogies drawn from common
events. Because they could not condescend to men of low estate they
have refrained from repeating incidents which would have accurately
explained their meaning. Fearing to be thought vulgar, they have lost
golden opportunities. As well might David have refused to sling one
of the smooth stones at Goliath's brow because he found it in a
common brook.
From individuals so lofty in their ideas nothing is likely to flow down
to the masses of the people but a glacial eloquence, a river of ice.
Dignity is a most poor and despicable consideration unless it be the
dignity of turning many to righteousness; and yet divines who have
had scarcely enough of real dignity to save themselves from
contempt, have swollen "huge as high Olympus" through the
affectation of it. A young gentleman, after delivering an elaborate
discourse, was told that not more than five or six in the congregation
had been able to understand him. This he accepted as a tribute to his
genius; but I take leave to place him in the same class with another
person who was accustomed to shake his head in the most profound
manner that he might make his prelections the more impressive, and
this had some effect with the groundlings, until a shrewd Christian
woman made the remark that he did shake his head certainly, but
that there was nothing in it. Those who are too refined to be simple
need to be refined again. Luther has well put it in his Table-Talk:
"Cursed are all preachers that in the church aim at high and hard
things; and neglecting the saving health of the poor unlearned
people, seek their own honour and praise, and therefore try to please
one or two great persons. When I preach I sink myself deep down."
It may be superfluous to remind you of the oft-quoted passage from
George Herbert's Country Parson, and yet I cannot omit it, because
it is so much to my mind: "The Parson also serves himself of the
judgments of God, as of those of ancient times, so especially of the
late ones; and those most which are nearest to his parish; for people
are very attentive at such discourses, and think it behoves them to be
so when God is so near them, and even over their heads. Sometimes
he tells them stories and sayings of others, according as his text

invites him; for them also men heed, and remember better than
exhortations; which, though earnest, yet often die with the sermon,
especially with country people, which are thick, and heavy, and hard
to raise to a point of zeal and fervency, and need a mountain of fire to
kindle them, but stories and sayings they will well remember."
It ought never to be forgotten that the great God Himself, when He
would instruct men, employs histories and biographies. Our Bible
contains doctrines, promises, and precepts; but these are not left
alone, the whole book is vivified and illustrated by marvellous
records of things said and done by God and by men. He who is taught
of God values the sacred histories, and knows that in them there is a
special fulness and forcibleness of instruction. Teachers of Scripture
cannot do better than instruct their fellows after the manner of the
Scriptures.
Our Lord Jesus Christ, the great teacher of teachers, did not disdain
the use of anecdotes. To my mind it seems clear that certain of His
parables were facts and, consequently, anecdotes. May not the story
of the Prodigal Son have been a literal truth? Were there not actual
instances of an enemy sowing tares among the wheat? May not the
rich fool who said--"Take thine ease," have been a photograph taken
from the life? Did not Dives and Lazarus actually figure on the stage
of history? Certainly the story of those who were crushed by the fall
of the tower of Siloam, and the sad tragedy of the Galilaeans, "whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices," were matters of
current Jewish gossip, and our Lord turned both of them to good
account. What HE did we need not be ashamed to do. That we may
do it with all wisdom and prudence let us seek the guidance of the
Divine Spirit which rested upon Him so continually.
I shall make up this present address by quoting the examples of great
preachers, beginning with the era of the Reformation, and following
on without any very rigid chronological order down to our own day.
Examples are more powerful than precepts; hence I quote them.

First, let me mention that grand old preacher, Hugh Latimer, the
most English of all our divines; and one whose influence over our
land was undoubtedly most powerful. Southey says, "Latimer more
than any other man promoted the Reformation by his preaching";
and in this he echoes the more important utterance of Ridley, who
wrote from his prison, "I do think that the Lord hath placed old
father Latimer to be his standard-bearer in our age and country
against his mortal foe, Antichrist." If you have read any of his
sermons, you must have been struck with the number of his quaint
stories, seasoned with a homely humour which smacks of that
Leicestershire farmhouse wherein he was brought up by a father who
did yeoman's service, and a mother who milked thirty kine. No doubt
we may attribute to these stories the breaking down of pews by the
overwhelming rush of the people to hear him; and the general
interest which his sermons excited, More of such preaching, and we
should have less fear of the return of Popery. The common people
heard him gladly, and his lively anecdotes accounted for much of
their eager attention. A few of these narratives one could hardly
repeat, for the taste of our age has happily improved in delicacy; but
others are most admirable and instructive. Here are three of them:

THE FRIAR'S MAN AND THE TEN COMMANDMENTS
"I will tell you now a pretty story of a friar, to refresh you withal, A
limiter of the grey friars in the time of his limitation preached many
times, and had but one sermon at all times; which sermon was of the
ten commandments. And because this friar had preached this
sermon so often, one that heard it before told the friar's servant that
his master was called 'Friar John Ten Commandments': wherefore
the servant showed the friar his master thereof, and advised him to
preach of some other matters; for it grieved the servant to hear his
master derided. Now, the friar made answer saying, 'Belike, then,
thou canst say the ten commandments well, seeing thou hast heard
them so many a time.' 'Yea,' said the servant, 'I warrant you.' 'Let me

hear them,' saith the master; then he began, 'Pride, covetousness,
lechery,' and so numbered the deadly sins for the ten
commandments. And so there be many at this time, which be weary
of the old gospel; they would fain hear some new things: they think
themselves so perfect in the old, when they be no more skilful than
this servant was in his ten commandments."

ST. ANTHONY AND THE COBBLER
"We read a pretty story of St. Anthony, which, being in the
wilderness, led there a very hard and straight life, insomuch as none
at that time did the like. To whom came a voice from heaven, saying,
'Anthony, thou art not so perfect as is a cobbler that dwelleth at
Alexandria.' Anthony, hearing this, rose up forthwith, and took his
staff and went till he came to Alexandria, where he found the
cobbler. The cobbler was astonished to see so reverend a father to
come into his house. Then Anthony said unto him, 'Come and tell me
thy whole conversation, and how thou spendest thy time.' 'Sir,' said
the cobbler, 'as for me, good works I have none, for my life is but
simple and slender; I am but a poor cobbler. In the morning, when I
arise, I pray for the whole city wherein I dwell, specially for all such
neighbours and poor friends as I have. After, I set me at my labour,
where I spend the whole day in getting of my living, and keep me
from all falsehood; for I hate nothing so much as I do deceitfulness:
wherefore, when I make to any man a promise, I keep it and do it
truly: and so spend my time poorly with my wife and children, whom
I teach and instruct as far as my wit will serve me, to fear and dread
God. This is the sum of my simple life.'
"In this story you see how God loveth those that follow their
vocation, and live uprightly without any falsehood in their dealing.
This Anthony was a great and holy man, yet this cobbler was as much
esteemed before God as he."

THE DANGER OF PROSPERITY
"I read once a story of a good bishop, which rode by the way and was
weary, being yet far off from any town; therefore seeing a fair house,
he went thither, and was very well and honourably received: there
were great preparations made for him, and a great banquet; all
things were in plenty. Then the man of the house set out his
prosperity, and told the bishop what riches he had, in what honours
and dignities he was, how many fair children he had, what a virtuous
wife God had provided for him, so that he had no lack of any manner
of thing, he had no trouble nor vexations, neither outward nor
inward. Now this holy man, hearing the good estate of that man,
called one of his servants, and commanded him to make ready the
horses: for the bishop thought that God was not in that house
because there was no temptation there: he took his leave and went
his ways. Now when he came a two or three mile off, he remembered
his book which he had left behind him; he sent his man back again to
fetch that book, and when the servant came again the house was
sunken and all that was in it. Here it appeareth that it is a good thing
to have temptation. This man thought himself a jolly fellow, because
all things went well with him. But he knew not St. James's lesson:
Beatus qui suffert tentationem, 'Blessed is he that endureth
temptation.' Let us therefore learn here, not to be irksome when God
layeth his cross upon us."
Let us take a long leap of about a century, and we come to Jeremy
Taylor, another bishop, whom I mention immediately after Latimer
because he is apparently such a contrast to that homely divine, while
yet in very truth he has a measure of likeness to him as to the point
now in hand. They both rejoiced in figure and metaphor, and equally
delighted in incident and narrative. True, the one would talk of John
and William, and the other of Anexagoras and Scipio; but actual
scenes were the delight of each. In this respect Jeremy Taylor may be
said to be Latimer turned into Latin. Jeremy Taylor is as full of

classical allusions as a king's palace is full of rare treasures, and his
language is of the lofty order which more becomes a patrician
audience than a popular assembly; but when you come to the essence
of things, you see that if Latimer is homely, so also Taylor narrates
incidents which are homely to him; but his home is among
philosophers of Greece and senators of Rome. This being
understood, we venture to say that no one used more anecdotes than
this splendid poet-preacher. His biographer truly says,--"It would be
hard to point out a branch of learning or of scientific pursuit to which
he does not occasionally allude; or any author of eminence, either
ancient or modern, with whom he does not evince himself
acquainted. He more than once refers to obscure stories in ancient
writers, as if they were of necessity as familiar to all his readers as to
himself; as for instance, he talks of 'poor Attillius Aviola,' and again
of the Libyan lion that brake loose into his wilderness and killed two
Roman boys." In all this he is eminently select and classical, and
therefore I the more freely introduce him here; for there can be no
reason why our anecdotes should all be rustic; we, too, may rifle the
treasures of antiquity, and make the heathen contribute to the
gospel, even as Hiram of Tyre served under Solomon's direction for
the building of the temple of the Lord.
I am no admirer of Taylor's style in other respects, and his teaching
seems to be at times semi-popish; but in this place I have only to deal
with him upon one particular, and of that matter he is an admirable
example. He lavishes classic stories even as an Asiatic queen bedecks
herself with countless pearls. Out of a single sermon I extract the
following, which may suffice for our purpose:

STUDENTS PROGRESSING BACKWARDS
"Menedemus was wont to say, 'that the young boys that went to
Athens, the first year were wise men, the second year philosophers,
the third orators, and the fourth were but plebeians, and understood

nothing but their own ignorance.' And just so it happens to some in
the progresses of religion; at first they are violent and active, and
then they satiate all the appetites of religion; and that which is left is,
that they were soon weary, and sat down in displeasure, and return
to the world, and dwell in the business of pride or money; and, by
this time, they understand that their religion is declined, and passed
from the heats and follies of youth to the coldness and infirmities of
old age."

THE PROUD MAN WHO BOASTED OF HIS HUMILITY
"He was noted for a vain person, who, being overjoyed for the cure
(as he thought) of his pride, cried out to his wife, 'Cerne, Dionysia,
deposui fastum;' 'Behold, I have laid aside all my pride.'"

DIOGENES AND THE YOUNG MAN
"Diogenes once spied a young man coming out of a tavern or place of
entertainment, who, perceiving himself observed by the philosopher,
with some confusion stepped back again, that he might, if possible,
preserve his fame with that severe person. But Diogenes told him,
Quanto magis intraveris, tanto magis eris in caupona: ' The more
you go back, the longer you are in the place where you are ashamed
to be seen.' He that conceals his sin still retains that which he counts
his shame and burden."
No examples will have greater weight with you than those taken from
among the Puritans, in whose steps it is our desire to walk, though,
alas! we follow with feeble feet. Certain of them abounded in
anecdotes and stories: Thomas Brooks is a signal instance of the wise
and wealthy use of holy fancy. I put him first, because I reckon him
to be the first in the special art which is now under consideration. He
hath dust of gold; for even in the margins of his books there are
sentences of exceeding preciousness, and hints at classic stories. His
style is clear and full; he never so exceeds in illustration as to lose
sight of his doctrine. His floods of metaphor never drown his
meaning, but float it upon their surface. If you have never read his
works I almost envy you the joy of entering for the first time upon his
Unsearchable Riches, trying his Precious Remedies, tasting his
Apples of Gold, communing with his Mute Christian, and enjoying
his other masterly writings. Let me give you a taste of his quality in
the way of anecdotes. Here are a few brief ones which lie almost
upon the same page; but he so abounds with them that you may
readily cull scores of better ones for yourselves.

MR. WELCH WEEPING
"A soul under special manifestations of love weeps that it can love
Christ no more. Mr. Welch, a Suffolk minister, weeping at table, and

being asked the reason of it, answered, it was because he could love
Christ no more. The true lovers of Christ can never rise high enough
in their love to Christ; they count a little love to be no love; great love
to be but little; strong love to be but weak; and the highest love to be
infinitely below the worth of Christ, the beauty and glory of Christ,
the fulness, sweetness, and goodness of Christ. The top of their
misery in this life is, that they love so little, though they are so much
beloved."

SUBMISSIVE SILENCE
"Such was the silence of Philip the Second, king of Spain, that when
his invincible Armada, that had been three years a-fitting, was lost,
he gave command that all over Spain they should give thanks to God
and the saints that it was no more grievous."

FAVOURITES SUBMITTING TO THEIR LORDS
"When Tiribazus, a noble Persian, was arrested, at first he drew his
sword and defended himself; but when they charged him in the
king's name, and informed him that they came from the king, and
were commanded to bring him to the king, he yielded willingly.
Seneca persuaded his friend to bear his affliction quietly, because he
was the emperor's favourite, telling him that it was not lawful for him
to complain whilst Caesar was his friend. So saith the holy Christian,
Oh, my soul! be quiet, be still; all is in love, all is a fruit of Divine
favour."

SIR PHILIP SIDNEY

"A religious commander being shot in battle, when the wound was
searched and the bullet cut out, some standing by, pitying his pain,
he replied, 'Though I groan, yet I bless God I do not grumble. God
allows His people to groan, though not to grumble.'"
Thomas Adams, the Conforming Puritan, whose sermons are full of
rugged force and profound meaning, never hesitated to insert a story
when he felt that it would enforce his teaching. His starting point is
ever some Biblical sentence, or scriptural history; and this he works
out with much elaboration, bringing to it all the treasures of his
mind. As Stowell says, "Fables, anecdotes, classical poetry, gems
from the fathers and other old writers, are scattered over almost
every page." His anecdotes are usually rough-and-ready ones, and
might be compared to those of Latimer, only they are not so genial;
their humour is generally grim and caustic. The following may serve
as fair specimens:

THE HUSBAND AND HIS WITTY WIFE
"The husband told his wife, that he had one ill quality, he was given
to be angry without cause; she wittily replied, that she would keep
him from that fault, for she would give him cause enough. It is the
folly of some that they will be offended without cause, to whom the
world promises that they shall have causes enough. 'In the world ye
shall have tribulation.'"

THE SERVANT AT THE SERMON
"It is ordinary with many to commend the lecture to others' ears, but
few commend it to their own hearts. It is morally true what the
Christian Tell-truth relates: A servant coming from church, praiseth
the sermon to his master. He asks him what was the text. Nay, quoth
the servant, it was begun before I came in. What then was his

conclusion? He answered, I came out before it was done. But what
said he in the midst? Indeed I was asleep in the midst. Many crowd
to get into the church, but make no room for the sermon to get into
them."

THE PICTURE OF A HORSE
"One charged a painter to draw him equum volitantem, a trotting or
prancing horse; and he (mistaking the word) drew him‚ equum
volutantem, a wallowing or tumbling horse, with his heels upward.
Being brought home, and the bespeaker blaming his error; I would
have him prancing, and you have made him tumbling. If that be all,
quoth the painter, it is but turning the picture wrong side uppermost,
and you have your desire. Thus in their quodlibetical discourses they
can but turn the lineaments, and the matter is as they would have it.
I speak not this to disgrace all their learning, but their fruitless,
needless disputes and arguments, who find themselves a tongue,
where the Scripture allows them none."

THE PIRATE
"As when the desperate pirate, ransacking and rifling a bottom, was
told by the master, that though no law could touch him for the
present, he should answer it at the day of judgment; replied, Nay, if I
may stay so long ere I come to it, I will take thee and thy vessel too. A
conceit wherewith too many land-thieves, oppressors, flatter
themselves in their hearts, though they dare not utter it with their
lips."
William Gurnall, the author of The Christian in Complete Armour,
must surely have been a relater of pertinent stories in his sermons,
since even in his set and solid writings they occur. Perhaps I need not
have made the distinction between his writings and his preaching,

for it appears from the preface that his Christian in Complete
Armour was preached before it was printed. In vivid imagery every
page of his famous book abounds, and whenever this is the case we
are sure to light upon short narratives and striking incidents. He is as
profuse in illustration as either Brooks, Watson, or Swinnock. Happy
Lavenham to have been served by such a pastor! By the way, this
Complete Armour is beyond all others a preacher's book: I should
think that more discourses have been suggested by it than by any
other uninspired volume. I have often resorted to it when my own
fire has been burning low, and I have seldom failed to find a glowing
coal upon Gurnall's hearth. John Newton said that if he might read
only one book beside the Bible, he would choose The Christian in
Complete Armour, and Cecil was of much the same opinion. J.C.
Ryle has said of it, "You will often find in a line and a half some great
truth, put so concisely, and yet so fully, that you really marvel how so
much thought could be got into so few words." One or two stories
from the early part of his great work must suffice for our purpose.

BIRD SAFE IN A MAN'S BOSOM
"A heathen could say, when a bird (feared by a hawk) flew into his
bosom, 'I will not betray thee unto thine enemy, seeing thou comest
for sanctuary unto me.' How much less will God yield up a soul unto
its enemy, when it takes sanctuary in His Name, saying, 'Lord, I am
hunted with such temptation, dogged with such a lust; either thou
must pardon it, or I am damned; mortify it, or I shall be a slave to it;
take me into the bosom of thy love for Christ's sake; castle me in the
arms of thy ever lasting strength; it is in thy power to save me from,
or give me up into the hands of my enemy: I have no confidence in
myself or any other; into thy hands I commit my cause, my life, and
rely on thee.' This dependence of a soul undoubtedly will awaken the
almighty power of God for such a one's defence: He hath sworn the
greatest oath that can come out of His blessed lips, even by Himself,

that such as 'flee for refuge' to hope in Him shall 'have strong
consolation': Hebrews vi. 17, 18."

THE PRINCE WITH HIS FAMILY IN DANGER
"Suppose a king's son should get out of a beseiged city, where he hath
left his wife and children (whom he loves as his own soul), and these
all ready to die by sword or famine, if supply come not the sooner;
could this prince, when arrived at his father's house, please himself
with the delights of the court, and forget the distress of his family? or
rather would he not come post to his father (having their cries and
groans always in his ears), and, before he ate or drank, do his errand
to his father, and entreat him if ever he loved him, that he would
send all the force of his kingdom to raise the siege, rather than any of
his dear relations should perish? Surely, sirs, though Christ be in the
top of His preferment, and out of the storm in regard of His own
person, yet His children, left behind in the midst of sin's, Satan's, and
the world's batteries, are in His heart, and shall not be forgotten a
moment by Him. The care He takes in our business appeared in the
speedy despatch He made of His Spirit to His apostles' supply,
which, as soon as He was warm in His seat at His Father's right
hand, He sent, to the incomparable comfort of His apostles and us
that to this day, yea, to the end of the world, do or shall believe on
Him."

JOHN CARELESS
"When God honours a person to suffer for His truth, this is a great
privilege: 'Unto you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer for
His sake.' God doth not use to give worthless gifts to His saints, there
is some preciousness in it which a carnal eye cannot see. Faith, you
will say, is a great gift; but perseverance greater, without which faith
would be little worth, and perseverance in suffering is above both

honourable. This made John Careless, an English martyr (who
though he died not at the stake, yet in prison for Christ), say, 'Such
an honour 'tis as angels are not permitted to have; therefore, God
forgive me mine unthankfulness.'"

MR. BENBRIDGE
"Oh, how many die at the gallows as martyrs in the devil's cause for
felonies, rapes, and murders! He might withdraw His grace, and
leave thee to thy own cowardice and unbelief, and then thou wouldst
soon show thyself in thy colours. The stoutest champions for Christ
have been taught how weak they are if Christ steps aside. Some that
have given great testimony of their faith and resolution in Christ's
cause, even to come so near dying for His name as to give themselves
to be bound to the stake, and fire to be kindled upon them, yet their
hearts have failed; as that holy man, Mr. Benbridge, in our English
martyrology, who thrust the faggots from him, and cried out, 'I
recant, I recant!' Yet this man, when reinforced in his faith, and
indued with power from above, was able within the space of a week
after that sad foil, to die at the stake cheerfully. He that once
overcame death for us, 'tis He that always overcame death in us."
John Flavel is a name which I shall have to quote in another lecture,
for he is greatest in metaphor and allegory; but in the matter of
anecdote his preaching is a fine example. It was said of his ministry
that he who was unaffected by it must either have had a very soft
head or a very hard heart. He had a fund of striking incidents, and a
faculty of happy illustration, and as he was a man in whose manner
cheerfulness was blended with solemnity, he was popular in the
highest degree both at home and abroad. He sought out words which
might suit the sailors of Dartmouth and farmers of Devon, and
therefore he has left behind him his Navigation Spiritualized, and
his Husbandry Spiritualized, a legacy for each of the two orders of
men who plough the sea and the land. He was a man worth making a

pilgrimage to hear. What a crime it was to silence his heaventouched lips by the abominable Act of Uniformity! Instead of quoting
several passages from his sermons, each one containing an anecdote,
I have thought it as well to give a mass of stories as we find them in
his prelections upon:

PROVIDENCE IN CONVERSION
"A scrap of paper accidentally coming to view hath been used as an
occasion of conversion. This was the case of a minister of Wales, who
had two livings, but took little care of either. He being at a fair,
bought something at a pedlar's standing, and rent off a leaf of Mr.
Perkin's catechism to wrap it in; and reading a line or two of it, God
sent it home so as it did the work."
"The marriage of a godly man into a carnal family hath been ordered
by Providence for the conversion and salvation of many therein.
Thus we read, in the life of that renowned English worthy, Mr. John
Bruen, that, in his second match, it was agreed that he should have
one year's diet in his mother-in-law's house. During his abode there
that year (saith Mr. Clark) the Lord was pleased by his means
graciously to work upon her soul, as also upon his wife's sister, and
half-sister, their brothers, Mr William and Mr. Thomas Fox, with one
or two of the servants in that family."
"Not only the reading of a book, or hearing of a minister, but (which
is most remarkable) the very mistake of forgetfulness of a minister
hath been improved by Providence for this end and purpose.
Augustine, once preaching to his congregation, forgot the argument
which he first proposed, and fell upon the errors of the Manichees,
beside his first intention; by which discourse he converted one
Firmus, his auditor, who fell down at his feet weeping, and
confessing he had lived a Manichee many years Another I knew, who,
going to preach, took up another Bible than that he had designed, in

which, not only missing his notes, but the chapter also in which his
text lay, was put to some loss thereby; but after a short pause he
resolved to speak to any other Scripture that might be presented to
him, and accordingly read the text, 'The Lord is not slack concerning
his promise' (2 Pet. iii. 9); and though he had nothing prepared, yet
the Lord helped him to speak both methodically and pertinently
from it; by which discourse a gracious change was wrought upon one
in the congregation, who hath since given good evidence of a sound
conversion, and acknowledged this sermon to be the first and only
means thereof."
"Going to hear a sermon in jest hath proved some men's conversion
in earnest. Mr. Firmin, in his Real Christian, tells us of a notorious
drunkard, whom the drunkards called 'Father,' that one day would
needs go to hear what Wilson said, out of no other design, it seems,
but to scoff at the holy man; but in the prayer before sermon, his
heart began to thaw, and when he read his text, which was, 'Sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee' (John v. 14), he could not
contain; and in that sermon the Lord changed his heart, though
formerly so bitter an enemy that the minister on lecture-days was
afraid to go to church before his shop door. Lo, these are parts of his
ways; but how little a portion is heard of him?"
George Swinnock, for some years chaplain to Hampden, had the gift
of illustration largely developed, as his works prove. Some of his
similes are far-fetched, and the growth of knowledge has rendered
certain of them obsolete; but they served his purpose, and made his
teaching attractive. After deducting all his fancies, which in the
present age would be judged to be strained, there remains "a rare
amount of sanctified wit and wisdom"; and sparkling here and there
we spy out a few telling, stories, mostly of classic origin:

THE PRAYER OF PAULINUS

"It was the speech of Paulinus, when his city was taken by the
barbarians, Domine, ne excrucier ob aurem et argentum: 'Lord, let
me not be troubled for my silver and gold which I have lost, for thou
art all things.' As Noah, when the whole world was overwhelmed
with water, had a fair epitome of it in the ark, having all sorts of
beasts and fowls there; so he that in a deluge hath God to be his God,
hath the original of all mercies. He who enjoyeth the ocean may
rejoice, though some drops are taken from him."

QUEEN ELIZABETH AND THE MILKMAID
"Queen Elizabeth envied the milkmaid when she was in prison; but
had she known the glorious reign which she was to have for fortyfour years, she would not have repined at the poor happiness of so
mean a person. Christians are too prone to envy the husks which
wandering sinners fill themselves with here below; but would they
set before them their glorious hopes of a heaven, how they must
reign with Christ for ever and ever, they would see little reason for
their repining."

THE BELIEVING CHILD
"I have read a story of a little child about eight or nine years old, that
being extremely pinched with hunger, looked one day pitifully
necessitous on her mother, and said, 'Mother, do you think that God
will starve us?' The mother answered, 'No, child, He will not.' The
child replied, 'But if He do, yet we must love Him and serve Him.'
Here was language that spake a well-grown Christian. For indeed
God brings us to want and misery, to try us whether we love Him for
His own sake, or for our own sakes; for those excellencies that are in
Him, or for those mercies we have from Him; to see whether we will
say with the cynic to Antisthenes, Nullus tam darus erit baculus, etc.
There should be no cudgel so crabbed as to beat me from thee."

FASHIONABLE RELIGION
"I have read of a popish lady in Paris, that when she saw a glorious
procession to one of their saints, cried out, 'Oh, how fine is our
religion beyond that of the Hugenots! they have a mean and beggarly
religion, but ours is full of bravery and solemnity.' But as heralds say
of a coat of arms, if it be full of gays and devices, it speaks a mean
descent; so truly that manner of worship which is mingled with
men's inventions speaks its descent to be mean namely, from man."

THE BUSY DUKE
"The French Duc d'Alva could say, when he was asked by Henry the
Fourth whether he had seen the eclipse of the sun, that he had so
much business to do upon earth, that he had no time to look up to
heaven. Sure I am, the Christian may say with more truth and
conscience, that he hath so much business to do for heaven, that he
hath no time to mind vain or earthly things."
Thomas Watson was one of the many Puritan preachers who won the
popular ear by their frequent illustrations. In the clear flowing
stream of his teaching we find pearls of anecdote very frequently. No
one ever grew weary under such pleasant yet weighty discourse as
that which we find in his Beatitudes. Let two quotations serve to
show his skill.

THE VESTAL AND THE BRACELETS
"Most men think because God hath blessed them with an estate,
therefore they are blessed. Alas! God often gives these things in
anger. He loads His enemies with gold and silver; as Plutarch reports

of Tarpeia, a Vestal nun, who bargained with the enemy to betray the
Capitol of Rome to them, in case she might have the golden bracelets
on their left hands, which they promised; and being entered into the
Capitol, they threw not only their bracelets, but their bucklers, too,
upon her, through the weight thereof she was pressed to death. God
often lets men have the golden bracelets of worldly substance, the
weight whereof sinks them into hell. Oh, let us superna anhelare, get
our eyes 'fixed' and our hearts 'united' to God the supreme good; this
is to pursue blessedness as in a chase."

HEDGEHOG AND CONIES
"The Fabulist tells a story of the hedgehog that came to the cony
burrows in stormy weather, and desired harbour, promising that he
would be a quiet guest; but when once he had gotten entertainment,
he did set up his prickles, and did never leave till he had thrust the
poor conies out of their burrows: so covetousness, though it hath
many fair pleas to insinuate and wind itself into the heart, yet as
soon as you have let it in, this thorn will never cease pricking till it
hath choked all good beginnings, and thrust all religion out of your
hearts."
I think this must suffice to represent the men of the Puritanic period,
who added to their profound theology and varied learning a zeal to
be understood, and a skill in setting forth truth by the help of
everyday occurrences. The age which followed them was barren of
spiritual life, and was afflicted by a race of rhetorical divines, whose
words had little connection with the Word of life. The scanty thought
of the Queen Anne dignitaries needed no aid of metaphor or parable:
there was nothing to explain to the people; the utmost endeavour of
these divines was to hide the nakedness of their discourses with the
fig-leaves of Latinized verbiage. Living preaching was gone, spiritual
life was gone, and consequently a pulpit was set up which had no
voice for the common people; no voice, indeed, for anybody except

the mere formalist, who is content if decorum be observed and
respectability maintained. Of course, our notion of making truth
clear by stories did not suit the dignified death of the period, and it
was only when the dry bones began to be stirred that the popular
method was again brought to the front.
The illustrious George Whitefield stands, with Wesley, at the head of
that noble army who led the Revival of the last century. It is not at
this present any part of my plan to speak of his matchless eloquence,
unquenchable earnestness, and incessant labour; but it is quite
according to the run of my lecture to remind you of his own saying, "I
use market language." He employed pure, good, flowing English; but
he was as simple as if he spoke to children. Although by no means
abounding in illustration, yet he always employed it when needed,
and he narrated incidents with great power of action and emphasis.
His stories were so told that they thrilled the people: they saw as well
as heard, for each word had its proper gesture. One reason why he
could be understood at so great a distance was the fact that the eye
helped the ear. As specimens of his anecdotes I have selected these
which follow:

THE TWO CHAPLAINS
"You cannot do without the grace of God when you come to die.
There was a nobleman that kept a deistical chaplain, and his lady a
Christian one; when he was dying, he says to his chaplain, 'I liked
you very well when I was in health; but it is my lady's chaplain I must
have when I am sick.'"

NEVER SATISFIED
"My dear hearers, there is not a single soul of you all that are
satisfied in your stations: is not the language of your hearts when

apprentices, We think we shall do very well when journeymen; when
journeymen, that we should do very well when masters; when single,
that we shall do well when married; and to be sure you think you
shall do well when you keep a carriage. I have heard of one who
began low: he first wanted a house; then, says he, 'I want two, then
four, then six'; and when he had them, he said, 'I think I want
nothing else.' 'Yes,' says his friend, 'you will soon want another thing,
that is, a hearse-and-six to carry you to your grave'; and that made
him tremble."

DR. MANTON'S HEART
"A good woman, who was charmed with Dr. Manton, said, 'Oh, sir,
you have made an excellent sermon to-day; I wish I had your heart.'
'Do you so?' said he, 'good woman; you had better not wish for it; for
if you had it, you would wish for your own again.' The best of men
see themselves in the worst light."
Fearing that the quotation of any more examples might prove
tedious, I would only remind you that such men as Berridge,
Rowland Hill, Matthew Wilks, Christmas Evans, William Jay, and
others who have but lately departed from us, owed much of their
attractiveness to the way in which they aroused their audiences, and
flashed truth into their faces by well-chosen anecdotes. Time calls
upon me to have done, and how can I come to a better close than by
mentioning one living man, who, above all others, has in two
continents stirred the masses of the people?--I refer to D. L. Moody.
This admirable brother has a great aversion to the printing of his
sermons; and well be may have, for he is incessantly preaching, and
has no time allowed him for preparation of fresh discourses; and
therefore it would be great unwisdom on his part to print at once
those addresses with which he is working through a campaign. We
hope, however, that when he has done with a sermon he will never
suffer it to die out, but give it to the church and to the world through

the press. Our esteemed brother has a lively, telling style, and he
thinks it wise frequently to fasten a nail with the hammer of
anecdote. Here are four or five extracts from the little book entitled
Arrows and Anecdotes by D. L. Moody, by John Lobb:

THE IDIOT'S MOTHER
"I know a mother who has an idiot child. For it she gave up all
society, almost everything, and devoted her whole life to it. 'And
now,' said she, 'for fourteen years I have tended it and loved it, and it
does not even know me. Oh! it is breaking my heart!' Oh! how the
Lord must say this of hundreds here! Jesus comes here, and goes
from seat to seat, asking if there is a place for Him. Oh! will not some
of you take Him into your hearts?"

SURGEON AND PATIENT
"When I was in Belfast I knew a doctor who had a friend, a leading
surgeon there, and he told me that the surgeon's custom was, before
performing any operation, to say to the patient: 'Take a good look at
the wound, and then fix your eyes on me, and don't take them off till
I get through the operation.' I thought at the time that was a good
illustration. Sinner, take a good look at the wound to-night, and then
fix your eyes on Christ, and don't take them off. It is better to look at
the remedy than at the wound."

THE ORPHAN'S PRAYER
"A little child, whose father and mother had died, was taken into
another family. The first night she asked if she could pray as she used
to do. They said, 'Oh, yes.' So she knelt down, and prayed as her

mother had taught her; and, when that was ended, she added a little
prayer of her own: 'Oh, God, make these people as kind to me as
father and mother were.' Then she paused, and looked up, as if
expecting the answer, and added: 'Of course He will.' How sweetly
simple was that little one's faith! She expected God to 'do,' and, of
course, she got her request."

THE ROLL-CALL
"A soldier lay on his dying couch during our last war, and they heard
him say, 'Here!' They asked him what he wanted, and he put up his
hand and said: 'Hush! they are calling the roll of heaven, and I am
answering to my name'; and presently he whispered: 'Here!' and he
was gone."

NO HOME BEYOND THE GRAVE
"I have been told of a wealthy man who died recently. Death came
unexpectedly to him, as it almost always does; and he sent out for his
lawyer to draw his will. And he went on willing away his property;
and when he came to his wife and child, he said he wanted them to
have the home. But the little child didn't understand what death was.
She was standing near, and she said, 'Papa, have you got a home in
that land you are going to?' The arrow reached that heart; but it was
too late. He saw his mistake. He had got no home beyond the grave."
I will weary you no longer. You may safely do what the most useful of
men have done before you. Copy them not only in their use of
illustration, but in their wisely keeping it in subservience to their
design. They were not story-tellers, but preachers of the gospel; they
did not aim at the entertainment of the people, but at their
conversion. Never did they go out of their way to drag in a telling bit

which they had been saving up for display, and never could anyone
say of their illustrations that they were
"Windows that exclude the light,
And passages that lead to nothing."
Keep you the due proportion of things lest I do worse than lose my
labour, by becoming the cause of your presenting to the people
strings of anecdotes instead of sound doctrines, for that would be as
evil a thing as if you offered to hungry men flowers instead of bread,
and gave to the naked gauze of gossamer instead of woollen cloth.