PURITAN GOLD -- The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 13
Preservation of the Saints

---

The Mystery of Providence. By John Flavel.

Chapter 6. Preservation of the Saints.

Chapter 6: Preservation of the Saints
from Evil
A further great advantage and mercy the saints receive from the hand
of Providence is in their preservation from the snares and
temptations of sin, by its preventing care over them. That Providence
wards off many a deadly stroke of temptation and many a mortal
thrust which Satan makes at our souls is a truth as manifest as the
light that shines. This is included in that promise: God ‘will with the

temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it’
(1 Cor. 10. 13). Providence gives an outlet for the soul’s escape when
it is shut up in the dangerous straits of temptation. There are two
eminent ways by which the force and efficacy of temptation is broken
in believers. One is by the operation of internal grace. ‘The flesh
lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; so that ye
cannot do the things that ye would’ (Gal. 5. 17), i.e., sanctification
gives sin a miscarrying womb after it has conceived in the soul. The
other way is by the external working of Providence; and of this I
intend to speak here.
The Providence of God is the great barrier and hindrance to a world
of sin, which otherwise would break forth like an overflowing flood
from our corrupt natures. It prevents abundance of sin, which
otherwise wicked men would commit (Gen. 19. 11). The Sodomites
were greedily pursuing their lusts; God providentially hinders it by
smiting them blind. Jeroboam intends to smite the prophet;
Providence interposed and withered his arm (1 Kings 13. 4). Thus
you see, when wicked men have contrived and are ready to execute
their wickedness, Providence claps on its manacles ‘so that their
hands cannot perform their enterprise’ (Job 5. 12).
And so much corruption there remains in good men that they would
certainly plunge themselves under much more guilt than they do if
Providence did not take greater care of them than they do of
themselves. For though they make conscience of keeping themselves,
and daily watch their hearts and ways, yet such is the deceitfulness of
sin that if Providence did not lay blocks in their way, it would, more
frequently than it does, entangle and defile them. And this it does in
several ways.

Sometimes by stirring up others to interpose with seasonable
counsels, which effectually dissuade them from prosecuting an evil
design. Thus Abigail meets David in the nick of time, and dissuades
him from his evil purpose (1 Sam. 25. 34).
And I find it recorded, as on another account was noted before, of
that holy man Mr Dod, that being late at night in his study, he was
strongly moved, though at an unseasonable hour, to visit a
gentleman of his acquaintance. Not knowing what might be the
design of Providence in this, he obeyed and went. When he came to
the house, after a few knocks on the door, the gentleman himself
came to him and asked him whether he had any business with him.
Mr Dod answered, No; but that he could not be quiet till he had seen
him. O, Sir, replied the gentleman, you are sent of God at this hour,
for just now (and with that takes the halter out of his pocket) I was
going to destroy myself. And thus was the mischief prevented.
Sometimes by hindering the means and instruments, whereby the
evil itself is prevented. Thus, when good Jehoshaphat had joined
himself with that wicked King Ahaziah to build ships at Ezion-gaber
to go to Tarshish, God prevents the design by breaking the ships with
a storm (2 Chron. 20. 35-37).
We find also in the life of Mr Bolton, written by Mr Bagshaw, that
while he was in Oxford he had familiar acquaintance with Mr
Anderton, a good scholar, but a strong papist, who knowing Mr
Bolton’s natural gifts, and perceiving that he was in some outward
need, took this advantage and used many arguments to persuade
him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and to go over with him
to the English seminary, assuring him he should be furnished with
all necessities and have gold enough. Mr Bolton being at that time
poor in mind and purse, accepted the invitation, and a day and place

was appointed in Lancashire, where they should meet and take
shipping and be gone. But Mr Anderton did not come, and so he
escaped the snare.
Sometimes by laying some strong affliction upon the body, to
prevent a worse evil. And this is the meaning of: ‘I will hedge up thy
way with thorns’ (Hos. 2. 6). Thus Basil was a long time exercised
with a violent headache which he observed was used by Providence
to prevent lust. Paul had a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan
sent to buffet him; and this affliction, whatever it was, was ordained
to prevent pride in him (2 Cor. 12. 7).
Sometimes sin is prevented in the saints by the better information of
their minds at the sacred oracles of God. Thus, when sinful motions
began to rise in Asaph’s mind, from the prosperity of the wicked and
his own afflicted state, and grew to such a height that he began to
think all he had done in the way of religion was little better than lost
labour, he is set right again, and the temptation dissolved, by going
into the sanctuary, where God showed him how to take new
measures of persons and things, to judge them by their ends and
issues, not their present appearances (Ps. 73. 12, 13, 17).
And sometimes the Providence of God prevents the sins of His
people by removing them out of the way of temptations by death. In
this sense we may understand that text: ‘The righteous is taken away
from the evil to come’ (Isa. 57. 1), the evil of sin as well as sufferings.
When the Lord sees His people low-spirited and not able to grapple
with strong trials and temptations which are drawing on, it is for
them a merciful Providence to be released by death and set out of
harm’s way.
Now consider and admire the Providence of God, O ye saints, who
has had more care of your souls than ever you had of them. Had not

the Providence of God thus wrought for you in a way of prevention, it
may be you had this day been so many Magor Missabibs.6 How was
the heart of David melted under that preventing providence
aforementioned (1 Sam. 25. 32-34). He blesses the Lord, the
instrument and that counsel by which his soul was preserved from
sin. Do but seriously think of a few particulars about this case.
Think how your corrupt natures have often impetuously hurried you
on towards sin, so that all the inherent grace you had could not
withstand its force, if Providence had not prevented it in some such
way as you have heard. ‘But every man is tempted when he is drawn
away of his own lust, and enticed’ (James 1. 14). You found
yourselves but feathers in the wind of temptation.
How near you have been brought to the brink of sin, and yet saved by
a merciful hand of Providence. May you not say with one: ‘I was
almost in all evil’ (Prov. 5. 14), and ‘My feet were almost gone; my
steps had well nigh slipped’ (Ps. 73. 2). O merciful Providence that
stepped in so opportunely to your relief!
How many have been allowed to fall by the hand of temptations, to
the reproach of religion and wounding of their own consciences, so
far that they have never recovered their former peace again, but lived
in the world devoid of comfort to their dying day!
How woeful your case had been if the Lord had not mercifully saved
you from many thousand temptations that have assaulted you! I tell
you, you cannot estimate the mercies you possess by means of such
providences. Are your names sweet, and your consciences peaceful,
two mercies as dear to you as your two eyes? Why surely you owe
them, if not wholly yet in great measure, to the aids and assistances
Providence has given you all along the way you have passed through
the dangerous tempting world to this day.

Walk therefore suitably to this obligation of Providence also. And see
that you thankfully own it. Do not impute your escapes from sin to
accidents, or to your own watchfulness or wisdom.
See also that you do not tempt Providence on the other hand, by an
irregular reliance upon its care over you, without taking all due care
of yourselves. ‘Keep yourselves in the love of God’ (Jude 21); ‘Keep
thy heart with all diligence’ (Prov. 4. 23). Though Providence keep
you, yet it is in the way of your duty.
Thus you see what care Providence has had over your souls in
preventing the spiritual dangers and miseries that otherwise would
have befallen you in the way of temptations.
In the next place I will show you that it has been no less concerned
about your bodies, and with great tenderness it has carried them in
its arms through innumerable hazards and dangers also. ‘He that
keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep’ (Ps. 121. 4); ‘He is the
preserver of men’ (Job 7. 20). To display the glory of this Providence
before you, let us take into consideration the perils into which the
best of men sometimes fall, and the ways and means by which
Providence preserves them in those dangers.
There are many hazards into which we are often cast in this world.
The Apostle Paul gives us a general account of his dangers (2 Cor. 11.
26), and how great a wonder is it that our life has not been
extinguished in some of those dangers we have been in!
Have not some of us fallen, and that often, into very dangerous
sicknesses and diseases, in which we have approached to the very
brink of the grave (Job 33. 18, 21, 28), and have or might have said
with Hezekiah: ‘I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the
gates of the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my hears’ (Isa. 38.

10)? Have we not often had the sentence of death in ourselves? and
our bodies at that time been like a leaky ship in a storm, as one7
aptly resembles it, that has taken in water on every side, till it was
ready to sink? Yet has God preserved, repaired and launched us out
again as well as ever. O what a wonder is it that such a crazy body
should be preserved so many years, and survive so many dangers!
Surely it is not more wonderful to see a Venice-glass8 pass from
hand to hand in continual use for forty or fifty years, and still to
remain whole, notwithstanding the many knocks and falls it has had.
If you enjoy health, or recover from sicknesses, it is because he puts
‘none of these diseases upon thee,’ or because he is ‘the Lord that
healeth thee’ (Exod. 15. 16).
How many deadly dangers has His hand resued some of you from in
those years of confusion and public calamity when the sword was
bathed in blood and made horrid slaughter, when, it may be, your
lives were often given you for a prey! This David put a special remark
upon: ‘O God the Lord, the strength of my salvation: thou hast
covered my head in the day of battle’ (Ps. 140. 7).
Beza, being in France in the first Civil War and there tossed up and
down for two and twenty months, recorded six hundred deliverances
from danger in that space, for which he solemnly gave God thanks in
his last testament. If the sword did not destroy you, it was because
God did not give it a commission to do so.
Many of you have seen wonders of salvation upon the deeps, where
the hand of God has been signally stretched forth for your rescue and
deliverance. This is elegantly expressed in Psalm 107. 23-27 (which I
have elsewhere9 expounded at large), concerning which you may say
in a proper sense what the Psalmist says metaphorically: ‘If it had
not been the Lord who was on our side, then the waters had

overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul’ (Ps. 124. 1, 4).
To see men that have spent so many years upon the seas,10 where
your lives have continually hung in suspense before you, attain to
your hears, when you could neither be reckoned among the living or
the dead, as seamen are not, O what cause have you to adore your
great Preserver! Many thousands of your companions are gone
down, and you are yet here to praise the Lord among the living. You
have bordered nearer to eternity all your days than others, and often
been in eminent perils upon the seas. Surely these and so many
salvations call aloud to you for most thankful acknowledgments.
What innumerable hazards and accidents, the least of which have cut
off others, has God carried us all through! I think I may safely say
your privative and positive mercies of this kind are more in number
than the hairs of your heads. Many thousands of these dangers we
never saw, nor were made particularly aware of, but though we did
not see them, our God did, and brought us out of danger before He
brought us into fear. Some have been evident to us, and those so
remarkable that we cannot think or speak of them to this day, but
our souls are freshly affected with those mercies.
It is recorded of our famous Jewel,11 that about the beginning of
Queen Mary’s reign, the inquisition taking hold of him in Oxford, he
fled to London by night; but providentially losing the road, he
escaped the inquisitors who pursued him. However, he fell that night
into another imminent hazard of life, for wandering up and down in
the snow, he fainted and lay starving in the way, panting and
labouring for life, at which time Latimer’s servant found and saved
him.
It would be easy to multiply examples of this kind; histories about
with them. But I think there are few of us but are furnished out of

our own experience abundantly; so that I shall rather choose to press
home the sense of these providences upon you, in order that you may
make a suitable return to the God of your mercies for them, than add
more instances of this kind. To this purpose I desire you seriously to
weigh the following particulars.
Consider what you owe to Providence for your protection, by which
your life has been protracted unto this day, with the usefulness and
comfort thereof. Look around in the world, and you may daily see
some in every place who are objects of pity, bereaved by sad
accidents of all the comforts of life, while in the meantime
Providence has tenderly preserved you. ‘He keepeth all his bones, not
one of them is broken’ (Ps. 34. 20). Is the elegant and comely
structure of your body unspoiled, your members not deformed, or
made so many seats of torment, neither the usefulness of any part
deprived? Why, this is because Providence never left its hold of you
since you came out of the womb, but with a watchful eye and tender
hand has guarded you in every place, and kept you as its charge.
Consider how every member which has been so tenderly kept, has
nevertheless been an instrument of sin against the Lord; and that
not only in the days of your unregeneracy, when you yielded ‘your
members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin’ (Rom. 6. 13),
but even since you gave them up in covenant unto the Lord as
dedicated instruments to His service; and yet how tender has
Providence been over them! You have often provoked Him to afflict
you in every part, and lay penal evil upon every member that has
been instrumental in moral evil. But O, how great have His
compassions been towards you, and His patience how wonderful!
Consider what is the aim of Providence in all the tender care it has
manifested for you. Why does it protect you so assiduously, and

suffer no evil to befall you? Is it not that you should employ your
bodies for God, and cheerfully apply yourselves to that service He
has called you to? Doubtless this is the end and goal of these mercies;
or else to what purpose are they afforded you? Your bodies are a part
of Christ’s purchase, as well as your souls (1 Cor. 6. 19). They are
committed to the charge and tutelage of angels (Heb. 1. 14), who
have performed many services for them. They are dedicated by
yourselves to the Lord, and that upon the highest account (Rom. 12.
1). They have already been the subjects of many mercies in this world
(Ps. 35. 10), and shall partake of singular glory and happiness in the
world to come (Phil. 3. 21). And shall they not then be employed, yea,
cheerfully worn out, in His service? How reasonable it is they should
be so! Why are they so tenderly preserved by God, if they must not be
used for God?
Footnotes
6See Jer. 20. 3-4.
7T. Goodwin in his Aggravation of Sin against Mercy.
8A glass cup or goblet or rare purity and extreme sensitiveness.
9See The Seaman's Companion.
10A large proportion of Flavel's congregation at Dartmouth would
consist of seafaring people.
11John Jewel (1522-71), Bishop of Salisbury and author of the
famous Apology of the Church of England.