PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 10 of 10
Chapters 48 through 51

---

We come now to the final reading of the Book of Sirach. In these concluding chapters, Ben Sira continues his praise of the famous men of Israel — the prophets Elijah and Elisha, the faithful kings, and the high priest Simon — and then closes with his own personal prayer and a hymn of thanksgiving to God.

CHAPTER 48

Verse 1. Then stood up Elijah the prophet as fire, and his word burned like a lamp.

Verse 2. He brought a sore famine upon them, and by his zeal he diminished their number.

Verse 3. By the word of the Lord he shut up the heavens, and also three times brought down fire.

Verse 4. O Elijah, how wast thou honored in thy wondrous deeds! And who may glory like unto thee!

Verse 5. Who didst raise up a dead man from death, and his soul from the place of the dead, by the word of the Most High;

Verse 6. Who broughtest kings to destruction, and honorable men from their sick beds;

Verse 7. Who heardest the rebuke of the Lord in Sinai, and in Horeb the judgment of vengeance;

Verse 8. Who anointedst kings to take revenge, and prophets to succeed after him;

Verse 9. Who wast taken up in a whirlwind of fire, and in a chariot of fiery horses;

Verse 10. Who wast ordained for reproofs in their times, to pacify the wrath of the Lord's judgment, before it brake forth into fury, and to turn the heart of the father unto the son, and to restore the tribes of Jacob.

Verse 11. Blessed are they that saw thee, and slept in love; for we shall surely live.

Verse 12. Elijah it was who was covered with a whirlwind; and Elisha was filled with his spirit. Whilst he lived he was not moved with the presence of any prince, neither could any bring him into subjection.

Verse 13. No word could overcome him, and after his death his body prophesied.

Verse 14. He did wonders in his life, and at his death were his works marvelous.

Verse 15. For all this the people repented not, neither departed they from their sins, till they were spoiled and carried out of their land, and were scattered through all the earth.

Verse 16. Yet there remained a small people, and a ruler in the house of David.

Verse 17. Of whom some did that which was pleasing to God, and some multiplied sins.

Verse 18. Hezekiah fortified his city, and brought in water into the midst thereof; he digged the hard rock with iron, and made wells for waters.

Verse 19. In his time Sennacherib came up, and sent Rabshakeh, and lifted up his hand against Zion, and boasted proudly.

Verse 20. Then trembled their hearts and hands, and they were in pain, as women in travail.

Verse 21. But they called upon the Lord which is merciful, and stretched out their hands toward Him; and immediately the Holy One heard them out of heaven, and delivered them by the ministry of Isaiah.

Verse 22. He smote the host of the Assyrians, and His angel destroyed them.

Verse 23. For Hezekiah had done the thing that pleased the Lord, and was strong in the ways of David his father, as Isaiah the prophet, who was great and faithful in his vision, had commanded him.

Verse 24. In his time the sun went backward, and he lengthened the king's life.

Verse 25. He saw by an excellent spirit what should come to pass at the last, and he comforted them that mourned in Zion.

Verse 26. He showed what should come to pass forever, and secret things or ever they came.

CHAPTER 49

Verse 1. The remembrance of Josiah is like the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the apothecary; it is sweet as honey in all mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine.

Verse 2. He behaved himself uprightly in the conversion of the people, and took away the abominations of iniquity.

Verse 3. He directed his heart unto the Lord, and in the time of the ungodly he established the worship of God.

Verse 4. All, except David and Hezekiah and Josiah, were defective; for they forsook the law of the Most High, even the kings of Judah failed.

Verse 5. Therefore He gave their power unto others, and their glory to a strange nation.

Verse 6. They burnt the chosen city of the sanctuary, and made the streets desolate, according to the prophecy of Jeremiah.

Verse 7. For they entreated him evil, who nevertheless was a prophet, sanctified in his mother's womb, that he might root out and afflict and destroy, and that he might build up also and plant.

Verse 8. It was Ezekiel who saw the glorious vision, which was shown him upon the chariot of the cherubim.

Verse 9. For he made mention of the enemies under the figure of the rain, and directed them that went right.

Verse 10. And of the twelve prophets let the memorial be blessed, and let their bones flourish again out of their place; for they comforted Jacob, and delivered them by assured hope.

Verse 11. How shall we magnify Zerubbabel? Even he was as a signet on the right hand.

Verse 12. So was Joshua the son of Josedech; who in their time builded the house, and set up a holy temple to the Lord, which was prepared for everlasting glory.

Verse 13. And among the elect was Nehemiah, whose renown is great, who raised up for us the walls that were fallen, and set up the gates and the bars, and raised up our ruins again.

Verse 14. But upon the earth was no man created like Enoch, for he was taken from the earth.

Verse 15. Neither was there a man born like unto Joseph, a governor of his brethren, a stay of the people, whose bones were regarded of the Lord.

Verse 16. Shem and Seth were in great honor among men, and so was Adam above every living thing in the creation.

CHAPTER 50

Verse 1. Simon the high priest, the son of Onias, who in his life repaired the house again, and in his days fortified the temple;

Verse 2. And by him was built from the foundation the double height, the high fortress of the wall about the temple;

Verse 3. In his days the cistern to receive water, being in compass as the sea, was covered with plates of brass;

Verse 4. He took care of the temple that it should not fall, and fortified the city against besieging;

Verse 5. How was he honored in the midst of the people in his coming out of the sanctuary!

Verse 6. He was as the morning star in the midst of a cloud, and as the moon at the full;

Verse 7. As the sun shining upon the temple of the Most High, and as the rainbow giving light in the bright clouds;

Verse 8. And as the flower of roses in the spring of the year, as lilies by the rivers of waters, and as the branches of the frankincense tree in the time of summer;

Verse 9. As fire and incense in the censer, and as a vessel of beaten gold set with all manner of precious stones;

Verse 10. And as a fair olive tree budding forth fruit, and as a cypress tree which groweth up to the clouds.

Verse 11. When he put on the robe of honor, and was clothed with the perfection of glory, when he went up to the holy altar, he made the garment of holiness honorable.

Verse 12. When he took the portions out of the priests' hands, he himself stood by the hearth of the altar, compassed with his brethren round about, as a young cedar in Lebanon; and as palm trees compassed they him round about.

Verse 13. So were all the sons of Aaron in their glory, and the oblations of the Lord in their hands, before all the congregation of Israel.

Verse 14. And finishing the service at the altar, that he might adorn the offering of the Most High Almighty,

Verse 15. He stretched out his hand to the cup, and poured of the blood of the grape; he poured out at the foot of the altar a sweet-smelling savor unto the Most High King of all.

Verse 16. Then shouted the sons of Aaron, and sounded the silver trumpets, and made a great noise to be heard, for a remembrance before the Most High.

Verse 17. Then all the people together hasted, and fell down to the earth upon their faces to worship their Lord God Almighty, the Most High.

Verse 18. The singers also sang praises with their voices, with great variety of sounds was there made sweet melody.

Verse 19. And the people besought the Lord, the Most High, by prayer before Him that is merciful, till the solemnity of the Lord was ended, and they had finished His service.

Verse 20. Then he went down, and lifted up his hands over the whole congregation of the children of Israel, to give the blessing of the Lord with his lips, and to rejoice in His name.

Verse 21. And they bowed themselves down to worship the second time, that they might receive a blessing from the Most High.

Verse 22. Now therefore bless ye the God of all, which only doeth wondrous things everywhere, which exalteth our days from the womb, and dealeth with us according to His mercy.

Verse 23. He grant us joyfulness of heart, and that peace may be in our days in Israel forever;

Verse 24. That He would confirm His mercy with us, and deliver us at His time!

Verse 25. There be two manner of nations which my heart abhorreth, and the third is no nation:

Verse 26. They that sit upon the mountain of Samaria, and they that dwell among the Philistines, and that foolish people that dwell in Shechem.

Verse 27. Jesus the son of Sirach of Jerusalem hath written in this book the instruction of understanding and knowledge, who out of his heart poured forth wisdom.

Verse 28. Blessed is he that shall be exercised in these things, and he that layeth them up in his heart shall become wise.

Verse 29. For if he do them, he shall be strong to all things; for the light of the Lord leadeth him, who giveth wisdom to the godly. Blessed be the name of the Lord forever. Amen and amen.

CHAPTER 51

Verse 1. I will thank Thee, O Lord and King, and praise Thee, O God my Savior; I do give praise unto Thy name.

Verse 2. For Thou art my defender and helper, and hast preserved my body from destruction, and from the snare of the slanderous tongue, and from the lips that forge lies, and hast been mine helper against mine adversaries;

Verse 3. And hast delivered me, according to the multitude of Thy mercies and greatness of Thy name, from the teeth of them that were ready to devour me, and out of the hands of such as sought after my life, and from the manifold afflictions which I had;

Verse 4. From the choking of fire on every side, and from the midst of the fire which I kindled not;

Verse 5. From the depth of the belly of hell, and from an unclean tongue, and from lying words.

Verse 6. By an accusation to the king from an unrighteous tongue my soul drew near even unto death, my life was near to the hell beneath.

Verse 7. They compassed me on every side, and there was no man to help me; I looked for the succor of men, but there was none.

Verse 8. Then thought I upon Thy mercy, O Lord, and upon Thy acts of old, how Thou deliverest such as wait for Thee, and savest them out of the hands of the enemies.

Verse 9. Then lifted I up my supplication from the earth, and prayed for deliverance from death.

Verse 10. I called upon the Lord, the Father of my Lord, that He would not leave me in the days of my trouble, and in the time of the proud, when there was no help.

Verse 11. I will praise Thy name continually, and will sing praise with thanksgiving; and so my prayer was heard.

Verse 12. For Thou savedst me from destruction, and deliveredst me from the evil time; therefore will I give thanks, and praise Thee, and bless Thy name, O Lord.

Verse 13. When I was yet young, or ever I went abroad, I desired wisdom openly in my prayer.

Verse 14. I prayed for her before the temple, and will seek her out even to the end.

Verse 15. Even from the flower till the grape was ripe hath my heart delighted in her; my foot went the right way; from my youth up sought I after her.

Verse 16. I bowed down mine ear a little, and received her, and gat much learning.

Verse 17. I profited therein, and unto Him that gave me wisdom will I give glory.

Verse 18. For I purposed to do after her, and earnestly I followed that which is good; so shall I not be confounded.

Verse 19. My soul hath wrestled with her, and in my doings I was exact; I stretched forth my hands to the heaven above, and bewailed mine ignorances of her.

Verse 20. I directed my soul unto her, and I found her in pureness; I have had my heart joined with her from the beginning; therefore shall I not be forsaken.

Verse 21. My heart was troubled in seeking her; therefore have I gotten a good possession.

Verse 22. The Lord hath given me a tongue for my reward, and I will praise Him therewith.

Verse 23. Draw near unto me, ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of learning.

Verse 24. Wherefore are ye slow, and what say ye to these things, seeing your souls are very thirsty?

Verse 25. I opened my mouth and said, Buy her for yourselves without money.

Verse 26. Put your neck under the yoke, and let your soul receive instruction; she is hard at hand to find.

Verse 27. Behold with your eyes, how that I have had but little labor and have gotten unto me much rest.

Verse 28. Get learning with a great sum of money, and get much gold by her.

Verse 29. Let your soul rejoice in His mercy, and be not ashamed of His praise.

Verse 30. Work your work betimes, and in His time He will give you your reward.

This concludes Part 10 and our complete reading of the Book of Sirach, also known as Ecclesiasticus. From the fear of the Lord as the beginning of wisdom to this final hymn of thanksgiving, Ben Sira has given us a treasury of practical wisdom for the godly life. May the instruction of understanding and knowledge found in this book be a lamp unto our feet. Blessed be the name of the Lord forever. Amen.