PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 4 of 10
Chapters 16 through 20

In these chapters, Ben Sira meditates on the certainty of divine reward and punishment, the majesty of God's justice revealed through His creation, the Lord's mercy toward human frailty and weakness, the discipline of the tongue, and the contrast between wise and foolish speech.

CHAPTER 16

Verse 1. Desire not a multitude of unprofitable children, neither delight in ungodly sons.

Verse 2. Though they multiply, rejoice not in them, except the fear of the Lord be with them.

Verse 3. Trust not thou in their life, neither respect their multitude; for one that is just is better than a thousand, and better it is to die without children than to have them that are ungodly.

Verse 4. For by one that hath understanding shall the city be replenished, but the kindred of the wicked shall speedily become desolate.

Verse 5. Many such things have I seen with mine eyes, and mine ear hath heard greater things than these.

Verse 6. In the congregation of the ungodly shall a fire be kindled, and in a rebellious nation wrath is set on fire.

Verse 7. He was not pacified toward the old giants, who fell away in the strength of their foolishness.

Verse 8. Neither spared He the place where Lot sojourned, but abhorred them for their pride.

Verse 9. He pitied not the people of perdition, who were taken away in their sins.

Verse 10. Or the six hundred thousand footmen who were gathered together in the hardness of their hearts.

Verse 11. And if there be one stiffnecked among the people, it is marvel if he escape unpunished; for mercy and wrath are with Him; He is mighty to forgive, and to pour out displeasure.

Verse 12. As His mercy is great, so is His correction also; He judgeth a man according to his works.

Verse 13. The sinner shall not escape with his spoils, and the patience of the godly shall not be frustrated.

Verse 14. Make way for every work of mercy, for every man shall find according to his works.

Verse 15. The Lord hardened Pharaoh, that he should not know Him, that His powerful works might be known to the world.

Verse 16. His mercy is manifest to every creature, and He hath separated His light from the darkness with an adamant.

Verse 17. Say not thou, I will hide myself from the Lord; shall any remember me from above? I shall not be remembered among so many people; for what is my soul among such an infinite number of creatures?

Verse 18. Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, the deep, and the earth, and all that therein is, shall be moved when He shall visit.

Verse 19. The mountains also and foundations of the earth shall be shaken with trembling, when the Lord looketh upon them.

Verse 20. No heart can think upon these things worthily, and who is able to conceive His ways?

Verse 21. It is a tempest which no man can see; for the most part of His works are hid.

Verse 22. Who can declare the works of His justice? Or who can endure them? For His covenant is afar off, and the trial of all things is in the end.

Verse 23. He that wanteth understanding will think upon vain things, and a foolish man erring imagineth follies.

Verse 24. My son, hearken unto me, and learn knowledge, and mark my words with thy heart.

Verse 25. I will show forth doctrine in weight, and declare His knowledge exactly.

Verse 26. The works of the Lord are done in judgment from the beginning, and from the time He made them He disposed the parts thereof.

Verse 27. He garnished His works forever, and in His hand are the chief of them unto all generations. They neither labor, nor are weary, nor cease from their works.

Verse 28. None of them hindereth another, and they shall never disobey His word.

Verse 29. After this the Lord looked upon the earth, and filled it with His blessings.

Verse 30. With all manner of living things hath He covered the face thereof, and they shall return into it again.

CHAPTER 17

Verse 1. The Lord created man of the earth, and turned him into it again.

Verse 2. He gave them few days, and a short time, and power also over the things therein.

Verse 3. He endued them with strength by themselves, and made them according to His image.

Verse 4. And put the fear of man upon all flesh, and gave him dominion over beasts and fowls.

Verse 5. They received the use of the five operations of the Lord, and in the sixth place He imparted them understanding, and in the seventh, speech, an interpreter of the cogitations thereof.

Verse 6. Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, ears, and a heart, gave He them to understand.

Verse 7. Withal He filled them with the knowledge of understanding, and showed them good and evil.

Verse 8. He set His eye upon their hearts, that He might show them the greatness of His works.

Verse 9. He gave them to glory in His marvelous acts forever, that they might declare His works with understanding.

Verse 10. And the elect shall praise His holy name.

Verse 11. Beside this He gave them knowledge, and the law of life for an heritage.

Verse 12. He made an everlasting covenant with them, and showed them His judgments.

Verse 13. Their eyes saw the majesty of His glory, and their ears heard His glorious voice.

Verse 14. And He said unto them, Beware of all unrighteousness; and He gave every man commandment concerning his neighbor.

Verse 15. Their ways are ever before Him, and shall not be hid from His eyes.

Verse 16. Every man from his youth is given to evil, neither could they make to themselves fleshy hearts for stony.

Verse 17. For in the division of the nations of the whole earth He set a ruler over every people; but Israel is the Lord's portion.

Verse 18. Whom, being His firstborn, He nourisheth with discipline, and giving him the light of His love doth not forsake him.

Verse 19. Therefore all their works are as the sun before Him, and His eyes are continually upon their ways.

Verse 20. None of their unrighteous deeds are hid from Him, but all their sins are before the Lord.

Verse 21. But the Lord being gracious, and knowing His workmanship, neither left nor forsook them, but spared them.

Verse 22. The alms of a man is as a signet with Him, and He will keep the good deeds of man as the apple of the eye, and give repentance to His sons and daughters.

Verse 23. Afterward He will rise up and reward them, and render their recompense upon their heads.

Verse 24. But unto them that repent, He granted them return, and comforted those that fail in patience.

Verse 25. Return unto the Lord, and forsake thy sins; make thy prayer before His face, and offend less.

Verse 26. Turn again to the Most High, and turn away from iniquity; for He will lead thee out of darkness into the light of health, and hate thou abomination vehemently.

Verse 27. Who shall praise the Most High in the grave, instead of them which live and give thanks?

Verse 28. Thanksgiving perisheth from the dead, as from one that is not; the living and sound in heart shall praise the Lord.

Verse 29. How great is the lovingkindness of the Lord our God, and His compassion unto such as turn unto Him in holiness!

Verse 30. For all things cannot be in men, because the son of man is not immortal.

Verse 31. What is brighter than the sun? Yet the light thereof faileth. And flesh and blood will imagine evil.

Verse 32. He vieweth the power of the height of heaven, and all men are but earth and ashes.

CHAPTER 18

Verse 1. He that liveth forever created all things in general.

Verse 2. The Lord only is righteous, and there is none other but He.

Verse 3. Who governeth the world with the palm of His hand, and all things obey His will; for He is the King of all, by His power dividing holy things among them from profane.

Verse 4. To whom hath He given power to declare His works? And who shall find out His noble acts?

Verse 5. Who shall number the strength of His majesty? And who shall also tell out His mercies?

Verse 6. As for the wondrous works of the Lord, there may nothing be taken from them, neither may anything be put unto them, neither can the ground of them be found out.

Verse 7. When a man hath done, then he beginneth; and when he leaveth off, then he shall be doubtful.

Verse 8. What is man, and whereto serveth he? What is his good, and what is his evil?

Verse 9. The number of a man's days at the most are an hundred years.

Verse 10. As a drop of water unto the sea, and a gravel stone in comparison of the sand, so are a thousand years to the days of eternity.

Verse 11. Therefore is God patient with them, and poureth forth His mercy upon them.

Verse 12. He saw and perceived their end to be evil; therefore He multiplied His compassion.

Verse 13. The mercy of man is toward his neighbor; but the mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh. He reproveth, and nurtureth, and teacheth, and bringeth again, as a shepherd his flock.

Verse 14. He hath mercy on them that receive discipline, and that diligently seek after His judgments.

Verse 15. My son, blemish not thy good deeds, neither use uncomfortable words when thou givest anything.

Verse 16. Shall not the dew assuage the heat? So is a word better than a gift.

Verse 17. Lo, is not a word better than a gift? But both are with a gracious man.

Verse 18. A fool will upbraid churlishly, and a gift of the envious consumeth the eyes.

Verse 19. Learn before thou speak, and use physic or ever thou be sick.

Verse 20. Before judgment examine thyself, and in the day of visitation thou shalt find mercy.

Verse 21. Humble thyself before thou be sick, and in the time of sins show repentance.

Verse 22. Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy vow in due time, and defer not until death to be justified.

Verse 23. Before thou prayest, prepare thyself, and be not as one that tempteth the Lord.

Verse 24. Think upon the wrath that shall be at the end, and the time of vengeance, when He shall turn away His face.

Verse 25. When thou hast enough, remember the time of hunger; and when thou art rich, think upon poverty and need.

Verse 26. From the morning until the evening the time is changed, and all things are soon done before the Lord.

Verse 27. A wise man will fear in everything, and in the day of sinning he will beware of offence; but a fool will not observe time.

Verse 28. Every man of understanding knoweth wisdom, and will give praise unto him that found her.

Verse 29. They that were of understanding in sayings became also wise themselves, and poured forth exquisite parables.

Verse 30. Go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine appetites.

Verse 31. If thou givest thy soul the desires that please her, she will make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies that malign thee.

Verse 32. Take not pleasure in much good cheer, neither be tied to the expense thereof.

Verse 33. Make not thyself a beggar by banqueting upon borrowing, when thou hast nothing in thy purse; for thou shalt lie in wait for thine own life, and be talked on.

CHAPTER 19

Verse 1. A laboring man that is given to drunkenness shall not be rich, and he that contemneth small things shall fall by little and little.

Verse 2. Wine and women will make men of understanding to fall away, and he that cleaveth to harlots will become impudent.

Verse 3. Moths and worms shall have him to heritage, and a bold man shall be taken away.

Verse 4. He that is hasty to give credit is lightminded, and he that sinneth shall offend against his own soul.

Verse 5. Whoso taketh pleasure in wickedness shall be condemned, but he that resisteth pleasures crowneth his life.

Verse 6. He that can rule his tongue shall live without strife, and he that hateth babbling shall have less evil.

Verse 7. Rehearse not unto another that which is told unto thee, and thou shalt fare never the worse.

Verse 8. Whether it be to friend or foe, talk not of other men's lives; and if thou canst without offence, reveal them not.

Verse 9. For he heard and observed thee, and when time cometh he will hate thee.

Verse 10. If thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee; and be bold, it will not burst thee.

Verse 11. A fool travaileth with a word, as a woman in labor of a child.

Verse 12. As an arrow that sticketh in a man's thigh, so is a word within a fool's belly.

Verse 13. Admonish a friend; it may be he hath not done it; and if he have, that he do it no more.

Verse 14. Admonish thy friend; it may be he hath not said it; and if he have, that he speak it not again.

Verse 15. Admonish a friend, for many times it is a slander, and believe not every tale.

Verse 16. There is one that slippeth in his speech, but not from his heart; and who is he that hath not offended with his tongue?

Verse 17. Admonish thy neighbor before thou threaten him, and not being angry, give place to the law of the Most High.

Verse 18. The fear of the Lord is the first step to be accepted of Him, and wisdom obtaineth His love.

Verse 19. The knowledge of the commandments of the Lord is the doctrine of life, and they that do things that please Him shall receive the fruit of the tree of immortality.

Verse 20. The fear of the Lord is all wisdom, and in all wisdom is the performance of the law, and the knowledge of His omnipotency.

Verse 21. If a servant say to his master, I will not do as it pleaseth thee, though afterward he do it, he angereth him that nourisheth him.

Verse 22. The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom, neither at any time the counsel of sinners prudence.

Verse 23. There is a wickedness, and the same an abomination; and there is a fool wanting in wisdom.

Verse 24. He that hath small understanding, and feareth God, is better than one that hath much wisdom, and transgresseth the law of the Most High.

Verse 25. There is an exquisite subtlety, and the same is unjust; and there is one that turneth aside to make judgment appear; and there is a wise man that justifieth in judgment.

Verse 26. There is a wicked man that hangeth down his head sadly, but inwardly he is full of deceit.

Verse 27. Casting down his countenance, and making as if he heard not; where he is not known, he will do thee mischief before thou be aware.

Verse 28. And if for want of power he be hindered from sinning, yet when he findeth opportunity he will do evil.

Verse 29. A man may be known by his look, and one that hath understanding by his countenance, when thou meetest him.

Verse 30. A man's attire, and excessive laughter, and gait, show what he is.

CHAPTER 20

Verse 1. There is a reproof that is not comely; again, some man holdeth his tongue, and he is wise.

Verse 2. It is much better to reprove than to be angry secretly, and he that confesseth his fault shall be preserved from hurt.

Verse 3. How good is it, when thou art reproved, to show repentance! For so shalt thou escape wilful sin.

Verse 4. As is the lust of an eunuch to deflower a virgin, so is he that executeth judgment with violence.

Verse 5. There is one that keepeth silence, and is found wise; and another by much babbling becometh hateful.

Verse 6. Some man holdeth his tongue, because he hath not to answer; and some keepeth silence, knowing his time.

Verse 7. A wise man will hold his tongue till he see opportunity; but a babbler and a fool will regard no time.

Verse 8. He that useth many words shall be abhorred, and he that taketh to himself authority therein shall be hated.

Verse 9. There is a sinner that hath good success in evil things, and there is a gain that turneth to loss.

Verse 10. There is a gift that shall not profit thee, and there is a gift whose recompense is double.

Verse 11. There is an abasement because of glory, and there is that lifteth up his head from a low estate.

Verse 12. There is that buyeth much for a little, and repayeth it sevenfold.

Verse 13. A wise man by his words maketh himself beloved, but the graces of fools shall be poured out.

Verse 14. The gift of a fool shall do thee no good when thou hast it, neither yet of the envious for his necessity; for he looketh to receive many things for one.

Verse 15. He giveth little, and upbraideth much; he openeth his mouth like a crier. Today he lendeth, and tomorrow will he ask it again; such an one is to be hated of God and man.

Verse 16. The fool saith, I have no friends; I have no thanks for all my good deeds, and they that eat my bread speak evil of me.

Verse 17. How oft, and of how many, shall he be laughed to scorn! For he knoweth not aright what it is to have; and it is all one unto him as if he had it not.

Verse 18. To slip upon a pavement is better than to slip with the tongue; so the fall of the wicked shall come speedily.

Verse 19. An unseasonable tale will always be in the mouth of the unwise.

Verse 20. A wise sentence shall be rejected when it cometh out of a fool's mouth, for he will not speak it in due season.

Verse 21. There is that is hindered from sinning through want, and when he taketh rest he shall not be troubled.

Verse 22. There is that destroyeth his own soul through bashfulness, and by accepting of persons overthroweth himself.

Verse 23. There is that for bashfulness promiseth to his friend, and maketh him his enemy for nothing.

Verse 24. A lie is a foul blot in a man, yet it is continually in the mouth of the untaught.

Verse 25. A thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie; but they both shall have destruction to heritage.

Verse 26. The disposition of a liar is dishonorable, and his shame is ever with him.

Verse 27. A wise man shall promote himself to honor with his words, and he that hath understanding will please great men.

Verse 28. He that tilleth his land shall increase his heap, and he that pleaseth great men shall get pardon for iniquity.

Verse 29. Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and stop up his mouth that he cannot reprove.

Verse 30. Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is hoarded up, what profit is in them both?

Verse 31. Better is he that hideth his folly than a man that hideth his wisdom.

This concludes Part 4 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 21 through Chapter 25, covering the avoidance of sin, prudent speech, the contrast between the fool and the wise, and warnings against wickedness.
