PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 5 of 10
Chapters 21 through 25

In these chapters, Ben Sira teaches on fleeing from sin as from a serpent, the marks of prudent and foolish speech, the sharp contrast between the wise man and the fool in daily conduct, counsel on good and bad wives and household order, and grave warnings against the wickedness that corrupts the heart.

CHAPTER 21

Verse 1. My son, hast thou sinned? Do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former sins.

Verse 2. Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent; for if thou comest too near it, it will bite thee. The teeth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, slaying the souls of men.

Verse 3. All iniquity is as a two-edged sword; the wounds thereof cannot be healed.

Verse 4. To terrify and do wrong will waste riches; thus the house of proud men shall be made desolate.

Verse 5. A prayer out of a poor man's mouth reacheth to the ears of God, and His judgment cometh speedily.

Verse 6. He that hateth to be reproved is in the way of sinners, but he that feareth the Lord will repent from his heart.

Verse 7. An eloquent man is known far and near, but a man of understanding knoweth when he slippeth.

Verse 8. He that buildeth his house with other men's money is like one that gathereth himself stones for the tomb of his burial.

Verse 9. The congregation of the wicked is like tow wrapped together, and the end of them is a flame of fire to destroy them.

Verse 10. The way of sinners is made plain with stones, but at the end thereof is the pit of hell.

Verse 11. He that keepeth the law of the Lord getteth the understanding thereof, and the perfection of the fear of the Lord is wisdom.

Verse 12. He that is not wise will not be taught, but there is a wisdom which multiplieth bitterness.

Verse 13. The knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a flood, and his counsel is like a pure fountain of life.

Verse 14. The inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth.

Verse 15. If a skillful man hear a wise word, he will commend it and add unto it; but as soon as one of no understanding heareth it, it displeaseth him, and he casteth it behind his back.

Verse 16. The talking of a fool is like a burden in the way, but grace shall be found in the lips of the wise.

Verse 17. They enquire at the mouth of the wise man in the congregation, and they shall ponder his words in their heart.

Verse 18. As is a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool; and the knowledge of the unwise is as talk without sense.

Verse 19. Doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles on the right hand.

Verse 20. A fool lifteth up his voice with laughter, but a wise man doth scarce smile a little.

Verse 21. Learning is unto a wise man as an ornament of gold, and like a bracelet upon his right arm.

Verse 22. A foolish man's foot is soon in his neighbor's house, but a man of experience is ashamed of him.

Verse 23. A fool will peep in at the door into the house, but he that is well nurtured will stand without.

Verse 24. It is the rudeness of a man to hearken at the door, but a wise man will be grieved with the disgrace.

Verse 25. The lips of talkers will be telling such things as pertain not unto them, but the words of such as have understanding are weighed in the balance.

Verse 26. The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart.

Verse 27. When the ungodly curseth Satan, he curseth his own soul.

Verse 28. A whisperer defileth his own soul, and is hated wheresoever he dwelleth.

CHAPTER 22

Verse 1. The slothful man is compared to a filthy stone, and every one will hiss him out to his disgrace.

Verse 2. The slothful man is compared to the filth of a dunghill; every man that taketh it up will shake his hand.

Verse 3. An evil-nurtured son is the dishonor of his father that begat him, and a foolish daughter is born to his loss.

Verse 4. A wise daughter shall bring an inheritance to her husband, but she that liveth dishonestly is her father's heaviness.

Verse 5. She that is bold dishonoreth both her father and her husband, but they both shall despise her.

Verse 6. A tale out of season is as music in mourning, but stripes and correction of wisdom are never out of time.

Verse 7. Whoso teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potsherd together, and as he that waketh one from a sound sleep.

Verse 8. He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one in a slumber; when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the matter?

Verse 9. If children live honestly and have wherewithal, they shall cover the baseness of their parents.

Verse 10. But children, being haughty, through disdain and want of nurture do stain the nobility of their kindred.

Verse 11. Weep for the dead, for he hath lost the light; and weep for the fool, for he wanteth understanding. Make little weeping for the dead, for he is at rest; but the life of the fool is worse than death.

Verse 12. Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead, but for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of his life.

Verse 13. Talk not much with a fool, and go not to him that hath no understanding. Beware of him, lest thou have trouble, and thou shalt never be defiled with his fooleries. Depart from him, and thou shalt find rest, and never be disquieted with madness.

Verse 14. What is heavier than lead? And what is the name thereof, but a fool?

Verse 15. Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is easier to bear than a man without understanding.

Verse 16. As timber girt and bound together in a building cannot be loosed with shaking, so the heart that is stablished by advised counsel shall fear at no time.

Verse 17. A heart settled upon a thought of understanding is as a fair plastering on the wall of a gallery.

Verse 18. Pales set on a high place will never stand against the wind, so a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool cannot stand against any fear.

Verse 19. He that pricketh the eye will make tears to fall, and he that pricketh the heart maketh it to show her knowledge.

Verse 20. Whoso casteth a stone at the birds frayeth them away, and he that upbraideth his friend breaketh friendship.

Verse 21. Though thou drewest a sword at thy friend, yet despair not, for there may be a returning to favor.

Verse 22. If thou hast opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear not, for there may be a reconciliation; except for upbraiding, or pride, or disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound, for these things every friend will depart.

Verse 23. Be faithful to thy neighbor in his poverty, that thou mayest rejoice in his prosperity; abide steadfast unto him in the time of his trouble, that thou mayest be heir with him in his heritage.

Verse 24. As the vapor and smoke of a furnace goeth before the fire, so reviling before blood.

Verse 25. I will not be ashamed to defend a friend, neither will I hide myself from him.

Verse 26. And if any evil happen unto me by him, every one that heareth it will beware of him.

Verse 27. Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not?

CHAPTER 23

Verse 1. O Lord, Father and Governor of all my whole life, leave me not to their counsels, and let me not fall by them.

Verse 2. Who will set scourges over my thoughts, and the discipline of wisdom over mine heart, that they spare me not for mine ignorances, and it pass not by my sins?

Verse 3. Lest mine ignorances increase, and my sins abound to my destruction, and I fall before mine adversaries, and mine enemy rejoice over me, whose hope is far from Thy mercy.

Verse 4. O Lord, Father and God of my life, give me not a proud look, but turn away from Thy servants always a haughty mind.

Verse 5. Turn away from me vain hopes and concupiscence, and Thou shalt hold him up that is desirous always to serve Thee.

Verse 6. Let not the greediness of the belly nor lust of the flesh take hold of me, and give not over me Thy servant into an impudent mind.

Verse 7. Hear, O ye children, the discipline of the mouth; he that keepeth it shall never be taken in his lips.

Verse 8. The sinner shall be left in his foolishness; both the evil speaker and the proud shall fall thereby.

Verse 9. Accustom not thy mouth to swearing, neither use thyself to the naming of the Holy One.

Verse 10. For as a servant that is continually beaten shall not be without a blue mark, so he that sweareth and nameth God continually shall not be faultless.

Verse 11. A man that useth much swearing shall be filled with iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his house. If he shall offend, his sin shall be upon him; and if he acknowledge not his sin, he maketh a double offence; and if he swear in vain, he shall not be innocent, but his house shall be full of calamities.

Verse 12. There is a word that is clothed about with death; God grant that it be not found in the heritage of Jacob. For all such things shall be far from the godly, and they shall not wallow in their sins.

Verse 13. Use not thy mouth to intemperate swearing, for therein is the word of sin.

Verse 14. Remember thy father and thy mother when thou sittest among great men. Be not forgetful before them, and so thou by thy custom become a fool, and wish that thou hadst not been born, and curse the day of thy nativity.

Verse 15. The man that is accustomed to opprobrious words will never be reformed all the days of his life.

Verse 16. Two sorts of men multiply sin, and the third will bring wrath: a hot mind is as a burning fire, it will never be quenched till it be consumed; a fornicator in the body of his flesh will never cease till he hath kindled a fire.

Verse 17. All bread is sweet to a whoremonger; he will not leave off till he die.

Verse 18. A man that breaketh wedlock, saying thus in his heart, Who seeth me? I am compassed about with darkness, the walls cover me, and nobody seeth me; what need I to fear? The Most High will not remember my sins.

Verse 19. Such a man only feareth the eyes of men, and knoweth not that the eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the sun, beholding all the ways of men, and considering the most secret parts.

Verse 20. He knew all things ere ever they were created; so also after they were perfected He looked upon them all.

Verse 21. This man shall be punished in the streets of the city, and where he suspecteth not he shall be taken.

Verse 22. Thus shall it go also with the wife that leaveth her husband, and bringeth in an heir by another.

Verse 23. For first, she hath disobeyed the law of the Most High; and secondly, she hath trespassed against her own husband; and thirdly, she hath played the whore in adultery, and brought children by another man.

Verse 24. She shall be brought out into the congregation, and inquisition shall be made of her children.

Verse 25. Her children shall not take root, and her branches shall bring forth no fruit.

Verse 26. She shall leave her memory to be cursed, and her reproach shall not be blotted out.

Verse 27. And they that remain shall know that there is nothing better than the fear of the Lord, and that there is nothing sweeter than to take heed unto the commandments of the Lord.

CHAPTER 24

Verse 1. Wisdom shall praise herself, and shall glory in the midst of her people.

Verse 2. In the congregation of the Most High shall she open her mouth, and triumph before His power.

Verse 3. I came out of the mouth of the Most High, and covered the earth as a cloud.

Verse 4. I dwelt in high places, and my throne is in a cloudy pillar.

Verse 5. I alone compassed the circuit of heaven, and walked in the bottom of the deep.

Verse 6. In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, and in every people and nation, I got a possession.

Verse 7. With all these I sought rest, and in whose inheritance shall I abide?

Verse 8. So the Creator of all things gave me a commandment, and He that made me caused my tabernacle to rest, and said, Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel.

Verse 9. He created me from the beginning before the world, and I shall never fail.

Verse 10. In the holy tabernacle I served before Him, and so was I established in Sion.

Verse 11. Likewise in the beloved city He gave me rest, and in Jerusalem was my power.

Verse 12. And I took root in an honorable people, even in the portion of the Lord's inheritance.

Verse 13. I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree upon the mountains of Hermon.

Verse 14. I was exalted like a palm tree in Engaddi, and as a rose plant in Jericho, as a fair olive tree in a pleasant field, and grew up as a plane tree by the water.

Verse 15. I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and aspalathus, and I yielded a pleasant odor like the best myrrh, as galbanum, and onyx, and sweet storax, and as the fume of frankincense in the tabernacle.

Verse 16. As the turpentine tree I stretched out my branches, and my branches are the branches of honor and grace.

Verse 17. As the vine brought I forth pleasant savor, and my flowers are the fruit of honor and riches.

Verse 18. I am the mother of fair love, and fear, and knowledge, and holy hope. I therefore, being eternal, am given to all my children which are named of Him.

Verse 19. Come unto me, all ye that be desirous of me, and fill yourselves with my fruits.

Verse 20. For my memorial is sweeter than honey, and mine inheritance than the honeycomb.

Verse 21. They that eat me shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me shall yet be thirsty.

Verse 22. He that obeyeth me shall never be confounded, and they that work by me shall not do amiss.

Verse 23. All these things are the book of the covenant of the Most High God, even the law which Moses commanded for an heritage unto the congregations of Jacob.

Verse 24. Faint not to be strong in the Lord, that He may confirm you; cleave unto Him. For the Lord Almighty is God alone, and beside Him there is no other Savior.

Verse 25. He filleth all things with His wisdom, as Phison and as Tigris in the time of the new fruits.

Verse 26. He maketh the understanding to abound like Euphrates, and as Jordan in the time of the harvest.

Verse 27. He maketh the doctrine of knowledge appear as the light, and as Geon in the time of vintage.

Verse 28. The first man knew her not perfectly; no more shall the last find her out.

Verse 29. For her thoughts are more than the sea, and her counsels profounder than the great deep.

Verse 30. I also came out as a brook from a river, and as a conduit into a garden.

Verse 31. I said, I will water my best garden, and will water abundantly my garden bed; and lo, my brook became a river, and my river became a sea.

Verse 32. I will yet make doctrine to shine as the morning, and will send forth her light afar off.

Verse 33. I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy, and leave it to all ages forever.

Verse 34. Behold that I have not labored for myself only, but for all them that seek wisdom.

CHAPTER 25

Verse 1. In three things I was beautified, and stood up beautiful both before God and men: the unity of brethren, the love of neighbors, a man and a wife that agree together.

Verse 2. Three sorts of men my soul hateth, and I am greatly offended at their life: a poor man that is proud, a rich man that is a liar, and an old adulterer that doteth.

Verse 3. If thou hast gathered nothing in thy youth, how canst thou find anything in thine old age?

Verse 4. O how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs, and for ancient men to know counsel!

Verse 5. O how comely is the wisdom of old men, and understanding and counsel to men of honor!

Verse 6. Much experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is their glory.

Verse 7. There be nine things which I have judged in mine heart to be happy, and the tenth I will utter with my tongue: a man that hath joy of his children; and he that liveth to see the fall of his enemy.

Verse 8. Well is him that dwelleth with a wife of understanding, and that hath not slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served a man more unworthy than himself.

Verse 9. Well is him that hath found prudence, and he that speaketh in the ears of them that will hear.

Verse 10. O how great is he that findeth wisdom! Yet is there none above him that feareth the Lord.

Verse 11. But the love of the Lord passeth all things for illumination; he that holdeth it, whereto shall he be likened?

Verse 12. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of His love, and faith is the beginning of cleaving unto Him.

Verse 13. Give me any plague, but the plague of the heart; and any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman.

Verse 14. And any affliction, but the affliction from them that hate me; and any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.

Verse 15. There is no head above the head of a serpent, and there is no wrath above the wrath of an enemy.

Verse 16. I had rather dwell with a lion and a dragon than to keep house with a wicked woman.

Verse 17. The wickedness of a woman changeth her face, and darkeneth her countenance like sackcloth.

Verse 18. Her husband shall sit among his neighbors, and when he heareth it shall sigh bitterly.

Verse 19. All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman; let the portion of a sinner fall upon her.

Verse 20. As the climbing up a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is a wife full of words to a quiet man.

Verse 21. Stumble not at the beauty of a woman, and desire her not for pleasure.

Verse 22. A woman, if she maintain her husband, is full of anger, impudence, and much reproach.

Verse 23. A wicked woman abateth the courage, maketh a heavy countenance, and a wounded heart. A woman that will not comfort her husband in distress maketh weak hands and feeble knees.

Verse 24. Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all die.

Verse 25. Give the water no passage, neither a wicked woman liberty to gad abroad.

Verse 26. If she go not as thou wouldest have her, cut her off from thy flesh, and give her a bill of divorce, and let her go.

This concludes Part 5 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 26 through Chapter 30, covering the blessings of a virtuous wife, the perils of commerce, the discipline of children, and the value of health above all riches.
