PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 14
Alas! I Can Do Nothing!


ALAS! I CAN DO NOTHING!

A

FTER THE ANXIOUS HEART has accepted the doctrine of
atonement, and learned the great truth that salvation is by faith in
the Lord Jesus, it is often sore troubled with a sense of inability
toward that which is good. Many are groaning, “I can do nothing.” They
are not making this into an excuse, but they feel it as a daily burden. They
would if they could. They can each one honestly say, “To will is present
with me, but how to perform that which I would I find not.”
This feeling seems to make all the gospel null and void; for what is the use
of food to a hungry man if he cannot get at it? Of what avail is the river of
the water of life if one cannot drink? We recall the story of the doctor and
the poor woman’s child. The sage practitioner told the mother that her
little one would soon be better under proper treatment, but it was
absolutely needful that her boy should regularly drink the best wine, and
that he should spend a season at one of the German spas. This, to a widow
who could hardly get bread to eat! Now, it sometimes seems to the
troubled heart that the simple gospel of “Believe and live,” is not, after all,
so very simple; for it asks the poor sinner to do what he cannot do. To the
really awakened, but half instructed, there appears to be a missing link;
yonder is the salvation of Jesus, but how is it to be reached? The soul is
without strength, and knows not what to do. It lies within sight of the city
of refuge, and cannot enter its gate.
Is this want of strength provided for in the plan of salvation? It is. The
work of the Lord is perfect. It begins where we are, and asks nothing of us
in order to its completion. When the good Samaritan saw the traveler lying
wounded and half dead, he did not bid him rise and come to him, and
mount the ass and ride off to the inn. No, “he came where he was,” and
ministered to him, and lifted him upon the beast and bore him to the inn.
Thus doth the Lord Jesus deal with us in our low and wretched estate.
We have seen that God justifieth, that He justifieth the ungodly and that
He justifies them through faith in the precious blood of Jesus; we have
now to see the condition these ungodly ones are in when Jesus works out
their salvation. Many awakened persons are not only troubled about their

46

sin, but about their moral weakness. They have no strength with which to
escape from the mire into which they have fallen, nor to keep out of it in
after days. They not only lament over what they have done, but over what
they cannot do. They feel themselves to be powerless, helpless, and
spiritually lifeless. It may sound odd to say that they feel dead, and yet it
is even so. They are, in their own esteem, to all good incapable. They
cannot travel the road to Heaven, for their bones are broken. “None of the
men of strength have found their hands;” in fact, they are “without
strength.” Happily, it is written, as the commendation of God’s love to us:
When we were yet without strength, in due time
Christ died for the ungodly
(Romans 5:6).

Here we see conscious helplessness succored — succored by the
interposition of the Lord Jesus. Our helplessness is extreme. It is not
written, “When we were comparatively weak Christ died for us”; or,
“When we had only a little strength”; but the description is absolute and
unrestricted; “When we were yet without strength.” We had no strength
whatever which could aid in our salvation; our Lord’s words were
emphatically true, “Without me ye can do nothing.” I may go further than
the text, and remind you of the great love wherewith the Lord loved us,
“even when we were dead in trespasses and sins.” To be dead is even more
than to be without strength.
The one thing that the poor strengthless sinner has to fix his mind upon,
and firmly retain, as his one ground of hope, is the divine assurance that
“in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” Believe this, and all inability will
disappear. As it is fabled of Midas that he turned everything into gold by
his touch, so it is true of faith that it turns everything it touches into good.
Our very needs and weaknesses become blessings when faith deals with
them.
Let us dwell upon certain forms of this want of strength. To begin with,
one man will say, “Sir, I do not seem to have strength to collect my
thoughts, and keep them fixed upon those solemn topics which concern
my salvation; a short prayer is almost too much for me. It is so partly,
perhaps, through natural weakness, partly because I have injured myself
through dissipation, and partly also because I worry myself with worldly

47

cares, so that I am not capable of those high thoughts which are necessary
ere a soul can be saved.” This is a very common form of sinful weakness.
Note this! You are without strength on this point; and there are many like
you. They could not carry out a train of consecutive thought to save their
lives. Many poor men and women are illiterate and untrained, and these
would find deep thought to be very heavy work. Others are so light and
trifling by nature, that they could no more follow out a long process of
argument and reasoning, than they could fly. They could never attain to
the knowledge of any profound mystery if they expended their whole life
in the effort. You need not, therefore, despair: that which is necessary to
salvation is not continuous thought, but a simple reliance upon Jesus. Hold
you on to this one fact — “In due time Christ died for the ungodly.” This
truth will not require from you any deep research or profound reasoning,
or convincing argument. There it stands: “In due time Christ died for the
ungodly.” Fix your mind on that, and rest there.
Let this one great, gracious, glorious fact lie in your spirit till it perfumes
all your thoughts, and makes you rejoice even though you are without
strength, seeing the Lord Jesus has become your strength and your song,
yea, He has become your salvation. According to the Scriptures it is a
revealed fact, that in due time Christ died for the ungodly when they were
yet without strength. You have heard these words hundreds of times,
maybe, and yet you have never before perceived their meaning. There is a
cheering savor about them, is there not? Jesus did not die for our
righteousness, but He died for our sins. He did not come to save us
because we were worth the saving, but because we were utterly worthless,
ruined, and undone. He came not to earth out of any reason that was in us,
but solely and only out of reasons which He fetched from the depths of
His own divine love. In due time He died for those whom He describes,
not as godly, but as ungodly, applying to them as hopeless an adjective as
He could well have selected. If you have but little mind, yet fasten it to
this truth, which is fitted to the smallest capacity, and is able to cheer the
heaviest heart. Let this text lie under your tongue like a sweet morsel, till it
dissolves into your heart and flavors all your thoughts; and then it will
little matter though those thoughts should be as scattered as autumn
leaves. Persons who have never shone in science, nor displayed the least

48

originality of mind, have nevertheless been fully able to accept the doctrine
of the cross, and have been saved thereby. Why should not you?
I hear another man cry, “Oh, sir my want of strength lies mainly in this,
that I cannot repent sufficiently!” A curious idea men have of what
repentance is! Many fancy that so many tears are to be shed, and so many
groans are to be heaved, and so much despair is to be endured. Whence
comes this unreasonable notion? Unbelief and despair are sins, and
therefore I do not see how they can be constituent elements of acceptable
repentance; yet there are many who regard them as necessary parts of true
Christian experience. They are in great error. Still, I know what they mean,
for in the days of my darkness I used to feel in the same way. I desired to
repent, but I thought that I could not do it, and yet all the while I was
repenting. Odd as it may sound, I felt that I could not feel. I used to get
into a corner and weep, because I could not weep; and I fell into bitter
sorrow because I could not sorrow for sin. What a jumble it all is when in
our unbelieving state we begin to judge our own condition! It is like a blind
man looking at his own eyes. My heart was melted within me for fear,
because I thought that my heart was as hard as an adamant stone. My
heart was broken to think that it would not break. Now I can see that I was
exhibiting the very thing which I thought I did not possess; but then I
knew not where I was.
Oh that I could help others into the light which I now enjoy! Fain would I
say a word which might shorten the time of their bewilderment. I would
say a few plain words, and pray “the Comforter” to apply them to the
heart.
Remember that the man who truly repents is never satisfied with his own
repentance. We can no more repent perfectly than we can live perfectly.
However pure our tears, there will always be some dirt in them: there will
be something to be repented of even in our best repentance. But listen! To
repent is to change your mind about sin, and Christ, and all the great things
of God. There is sorrow implied in this; but the main point is the turning
of the heart from sin to Christ. If there be this turning, you have the
essence of true repentance, even though no alarm and no despair should
ever have cast their shadow upon your mind.

49

If you cannot repent as you would, it will greatly aid you to do so if you
will firmly believe that “in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” Think of
this again and again. How can you continue to be hard-hearted when you
know that out of supreme love “Christ died for the ungodly”? Let me
persuade you to reason with yourself thus: Ungodly as I am, though this
heart of steel will not relent, though I smite in vain upon my breast, yet He
died for such as I am, since He died for the ungodly. Oh that I may believe
this and feel the power of it upon my flinty heart!
Blot out every other reflection from your soul, and sit down by the hour
together, and meditate deeply on this one resplendent display of
unmerited, unexpected, unexampled love, “Christ died for the ungodly.”
Read over carefully the narrative of the Lord’s death, as you find it in the
four evangelists. If anything can melt your stubborn heart, it will be a sight
of the sufferings of Jesus, and the consideration that he suffered all this for
His enemies.
O Jesus! sweet the tears I shed,
While at Thy feet I kneel,
Gaze on Thy wounded, fainting head,
And all Thy sorrows feel.
My heart dissolves to see Thee bleed,
This heart so hard before;
I hear Thee for the guilty plead,
And grief o’erflows the more.
‘Twas for the sinful Thou didst die,
And I a sinner stand:
Convinc’d by Thine expiring eye,
Slain by Thy piercèd hand.

Surely the cross is that wonder-working rod which can bring water out of a
rock. If you understand the full meaning of the divine sacrifice of Jesus,
you must repent of ever having been opposed to One who is so full of
love. It is written, “They shall look upon him whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth for his only son, and shall
be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.”
Repentance will not make you see Christ; but to see Christ will give you
repentance. You may not make a Christ out of your repentance, but you
must look for repentance to Christ. The Holy Ghost, by turning us to
Christ, turns us from sin. Look away, then, from the effect to the cause,

50

from your own repenting to the Lord Jesus, who is exalted on high to give
repentance.
I have heard another say, “I am tormented with horrible thoughts.
Wherever I go, blasphemies steal in upon me. Frequently at my work a
dreadful suggestion forces itself upon me, and even on my bed I am startled
from my sleep by whispers of the evil one. I cannot get away from this
horrible temptation.” Friend, I know what you mean, for I have myself
been hunted by this wolf. A man might as well hope to fight a swarm of
flies with a sword as to master his own thoughts when they are set on by
the devil. A poor tempted soul, assailed by satanic suggestions, is like a
traveler I have read of, about whose head and ears and whole body there
came a swarm of angry bees. He could not keep them off nor escape from
them. They stung him everywhere and threatened to be the death of him. I
do not wonder you feel that you are without strength to stop these
hideous and abominable thoughts which Satan pours into your soul; but
yet I would remind you of the Scripture before us — “When we were yet
without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly.” Jesus knew
where we were and where we should be; He saw that we could not
overcome the prince of the power of the air; He knew that we should be
greatly worried by him; but even then, when He saw us in that condition,
Christ died for the ungodly. Cast the anchor of your faith upon this. The
devil himself cannot tell you that you are not ungodly; believe, then, that
Jesus died even for such as you are. Remember Martin Luther’s way of
cutting the devil’s head off with his own sword. “Oh,” said the devil to
Martin Luther, “you are a sinner.” “Yes,” said he, “Christ died to save
sinners.” Thus he smote him with his own sword. Hide you in this refuge,
and keep there: “In due time Christ died for the ungodly.” If you stand to
that truth, your blasphemous thoughts which you have not the strength to
drive away will go away of themselves; for Satan will see that he is
answering no purpose by plaguing you with them.
These thoughts, if you hate them, are none of yours, but are injections of
the Devil, for which he is responsible, and not you. If you strive against
them, they are no more yours than are the cursings and falsehoods of
rioters in the street. It is by means of these thoughts that the Devil would
drive you to despair, or at least keep you from trusting Jesus. The poor
diseased woman could not come to Jesus for the press, and you are in

51

much the same condition, because of the rush and throng of these dreadful
thoughts. Still, she put forth her finger, and touched the fringe of the
Lord’s garment, and she was healed. Do you the same.
Jesus died for those who are guilty of “all manner of sin and blasphemy,”
and therefore I am sure He will not refuse those who are unwillingly the
captives of evil thoughts. Cast yourself upon Him, thoughts and all, and
see if He be not mighty to
save. He can still those horrible whisperings of the fiend, or He can enable
you to see them in their true light, so that you may not be worried by
them. In His own way He can and will save you, and at length give you
perfect peace. Only trust Him for this and everything else.
Sadly perplexing is that form of inability which lies in a supposed want of
power to believe. We are not strangers to the cry:
Oh that I could believe,
Then all would easy be;
I would, but cannot; Lord, relieve,
My help must come from thee.

Many remain in the dark for years because they have no power, as they
say, to do that which is the giving up of all power and reposing in the
power of another, even the Lord Jesus. Indeed, it is a very curious thing,
this whole matter of believing; for people do not get much help by trying
to believe. Believing does not come by trying. If a person were to make a
statement of something that happened this day, I should not tell him that I
would try to believe him. If I believed in the truthfulness of the man who
told the incident to me and said that he saw it, I should accept the
statement at once. If I did not think him a true man, I should, of course,
disbelieve him; but there would be no trying in the matter. Now, when God
declares that there is salvation in Christ Jesus, I must either believe Him at
once, or make Him a liar. Surely you will not hesitate as to which is the
right path in this case, The witness of God must be true, and we are bound
at once to believe in Jesus.
But possibly you have been trying to believe too much. Now do not aim at
great things. Be satisfied to have a faith that can hold in its hand this one
truth, “While we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly.” He laid down His life for men while as yet they were not

52

believing in Him, nor were able to believe in Him. He died for men, not as
believers, but as sinners. He came to make these sinners into believers and
saints; but when He died for them He viewed them as utterly without
strength. If you hold to the truth that Christ died for the ungodly, and
believe it, your faith will save you, and you may go in peace. If you will
trust your soul with Jesus, who died for the ungodly, even though you
cannot believe all things, nor move mountains, nor do any other wonderful
works, yet you are saved. It is not great faith, but true faith, that saves;
and the salvation lies not in the faith, but in the Christ in whom faith
trusts. Faith as a grain of mustard seed will bring salvation. It is not the
measure of faith, but the sincerity of faith, which is the point to be
considered. Surely a man can believe what he knows to be true; and as you
know Jesus to be true, you, my friend, can believe in Him.
The cross which is the object of faith, is also, by the power of the Holy
Spirit, the cause of it. Sit down and watch the dying Savior till faith
springs up spontaneously in your heart. There is no place like Calvary for
creating confidence. The air of that sacred hill brings health to trembling
faith. Many a watcher there has said:
While I view Thee, wounded, grieving,
Breathless on the cursed tree,
Lord, I feel my heart believing
That Thou suffer’dst thus for me.

“Alas!” cries another, “my want of strength lies in this direction, that I
cannot quit my sin, and I know that I cannot go to Heaven and carry my
sin with me.” I am glad that you know that, for it is quite true. You must
be divorced from your sin, or you cannot be married to Christ. Recollect
the question which flashed into the mind of young Bunyan when at his
sports on the green on Sunday: “Wilt thou have thy sins and go to hell, or
wilt thou quit thy sins and go to heaven?” That brought him to a dead
stand. That is a question which every man will have to answer: for there is
no going on in sin and going to heaven. That cannot be. You must quit sin
or quit hope. Do you reply, “Yes, I am willing enough. To will is present
with me, but how to perform that which l would I find not. Sin masters
me, and I have no strength.” Come, then, if you have no strength, this text
is still true, “When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly.” Can you still believe that? However other things may

53

seem to contradict it, will you believe it? God has said it, and it is a fact;
therefore, hold on to it like grim death, for your only hope lies there.
Believe this and trust Jesus, and you shall soon find power with which to
slay your sin; but apart from Him, the strong man armed will hold you for
ever his bond slave. Personally, I could never have overcome my own
sinfulness. I tried and failed. My evil propensities were too many for me,
till, in the belief that Christ died for me, I cast my guilty soul on Him, and
then I received a conquering principle by which I overcame my sinful self.
The doctrine of the cross can be used to slay sin, even as the old warriors
used their huge two-handed swords, and mowed down their foes at every
stroke. There is nothing like faith in the sinner’s Friend: it overcomes all
evil. If Christ has died for me, ungodly as I am, without strength as I am,
then I cannot live in sin any longer, but must arouse myself to love and
serve Him who hath redeemed me. I cannot trifle with the evil which slew
my best Friend. I must be holy for His sake. How can I live in sin when
He has died to save me from it?
See what a splendid help this is to you that are without strength, to know
and believe that in due time Christ died for such ungodly ones as you are.
Have you caught the idea yet? It is, somehow, so difficult for our
darkened, prejudiced, and unbelieving minds to see the essence of the
gospel. At times I have thought, when I have done preaching, that I have
laid down the gospel so clearly, that the nose on one’s face could not be
more plain; and yet I perceive that even intelligent hearers have failed to
understand what was meant by “Look unto me and be ye saved.” Converts
usually say that they did not know the gospel till such and such a day; and
yet they had heard it for years. The gospel is unknown, not from want of
explanation, but from absence of personal revelation. This the Holy Ghost
is ready to give, and will give to those who ask Him. Yet when given, the
sum total of the truth revealed all lies within these words: “Christ died for
the ungodly.”
I hear another bewailing himself thus: “Oh, sir, my weakness lies in this,
that I do not seem to keep long in one mind! I hear the word on a Sunday,
and I am impressed; but in the week I meet with an evil companion, and my
good feelings are all gone. My fellow workmen do not believe in anything,
and they say such terrible things, and I do not know how to answer them,
and so I find myself knocked over.” I know this Plastic Pliable very well,

54

and I tremble for him; but at the same time, if he is really sincere, his
weakness can be met by divine grace. The Holy Spirit can cast out the evil
spirit of the fear of man. He can make the coward brave. Remember, my
poor vacillating friend, you must not remain in this state. It will never do
to be mean and beggarly to yourself. Stand upright, and look at yourself,
and see if you were ever meant to be like a toad under a harrow, afraid for
your life either to move or to stand still. Do have a mind of your own.
This is not a spiritual matter only, but one which concerns ordinary
manliness. I would do many things to please my friends; but to go to hell
to please them is more than I would venture. It may be very well to do this
and that for good fellowship; but it will never do to lose the friendship of
God in order to keep on good terms with men. “I know that,” says the
man, “but still, though I know it, I cannot pluck up courage. I cannot show
my colors. I cannot stand fast.” Well, to you also I have the same text to
bring: “When we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the
ungodly.” If Peter were here, he would say, “The Lord Jesus died for me
even when I was such a poor weak creature that the maid who kept the fire
drove me to lie, and to swear that I knew not the Lord.” Yes, Jesus died for
those who forsook him and fled. Take a firm grip on this truth — “Christ
died for the ungodly while they were yet without strength.” This is your
way out of your cowardice. Get this wrought into your soul, “Christ died
for me,” and you will soon be ready to die for Him. Believe it, that He
suffered in your place and stead, and offered for you a full, true, and
satisfactory expiation. If you believe that fact, you will be forced to feel,
“I cannot be ashamed of Him who died for me.” A full conviction that this
is true will nerve you with a dauntless courage. Look at the saints in the
martyr age. In the early days of Christianity, when this great thought of
Christ’s exceeding love was sparkling in all its freshness in the church, men
were not only ready to die, but they grew ambitious to suffer, and even
presented themselves by hundreds at the judgment seats of the rulers,
confessing the Christ. I do not say that they were wise to court a cruel
death; but it proves my point, that a sense of the love of Jesus lifts the
mind above all fear of what man can do to us. Why should it not produce
the same effect in you? Oh that it might now inspire you with a brave
resolve to come out upon the Lord’s side, and be His follower to the end!

55

May the Holy Spirit help us to come thus far by faith in the Lord Jesus,
and it will be well!

56
