PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 14
Help for the Weak

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 7. Help for the Weak.

7. Help for the Weak
By meditation on these rules and signs, much comfort may be brought to
the souls of the weakest. That it may be in greater abundance, let me add
something to help them over some few ordinary objections and secret
thoughts against themselves which, getting within the heart, oftentimes
keep them low.
TEMPTATIONS WHICH HINDER COMFORT
1. Some think they have no faith at all because they have no full
assurance, whereas the fairest fire that can be will have some smoke. The
best actions will smell of the smoke. The mortar wherein garlic has been
stamped will always smell of it; so all our actions will savor something of
the old man.
2. In weakness of body some think grace dies, because their performances
are feeble, their spirits, which are the instruments of their souls' actions,
being weakened. But they do not consider that God regards the hidden
sighs of those that lack abilities to express them outwardly. He that
pronounces those blessed that consider the poor will have a merciful
consideration of such himself.
3. Some again are haunted with hideous representations to their
imaginations, and with vile and unworthy thoughts of God, of Christ, of
the Word, which, as busy flies, disquiet and molest their peace. These are
cast in like wildfire by Satan, as may be discerned by the strangeness, the
strength and violence, and the horribleness of them even to corrupt
nature. A pious soul is no more guilty of them than Benjamin was when
Joseph's cup was put into his sack. Among other helps recommended by
godly writers, such as detestation of them and diversion from them to
other things, let this be one, to complain to Christ against them, and to fly
under the wings of his protection, and to desire him to take our part
against his and our enemy. Shall every sin and blasphemy of man be
forgiven, and not these blasphemous thoughts, which have the devil for
their father, when Christ himself was molested in this way so that he

might succor all poor souls in this condition?
But there is a difference between Christ and us in this case. Because Satan
had nothing of his own in Christ his suggestions left no impression at all
in his holy nature, but, as sparks falling into the sea, were presently
quenched. Satan's temptations of Christ were only suggestions on Satan's
part, and apprehensions of the vileness of them on Christ's part. To
apprehend ill suggested by another is not ill. It was Christ's grievance, but
Satan's sin. But thus he yielded himself to be tempted, that he might both
pity us in our conflicts, and train us up to manage our spiritual weapons
as he did. Christ could have overcome him by power, but he did it by
argument. But when Satan comes to us, he finds something of his own in
us, which holds correspondence and has intelligence with him. There is
the same enmity in our nature to God and goodness, in some degree, that
is in Satan himself. Therefore his temptations fasten, for the most part,
some taint upon us. And if there were no devil to suggest, yet sinful
thoughts would arise from within us, though none were cast in from
without. We have a mint of them within. These thoughts, if the soul dwell
on them so long as to suck or draw from and by them any sinful delight,
then they leave a more heavy guilt upon the soul, hinder our sweet
communion with God, interrupt our peace, and put a contrary relish into
the soul, disposing it to greater sins. All scandalous actions are only
thoughts at the first. Ill thoughts are as little thieves, which, creeping in at
the window, open the door to greater. Thoughts are seeds of actions.
These, especially when they are helped forward by Satan, make the life of
many good Christians almost a martyrdom. In this case it is an unsound
comfort that some minister, that ill thoughts arise from nature, and what
is natural is excusable. We must know that nature, as it came out of God's
hands in the beginning, had no such risings out of it. The soul, as inspired
of God, had no such unsavory breathings. But since it betrayed itself by
sin it is, in some sort, natural to it to forge sinful imaginations, and to be
a furnace of such sparks. And this is an aggravation of the sinfulness of
natural corruption, that it is so deeply rooted and so generally spread in
our nature.
It promotes humiliation to know the whole breadth and depth of sin. But
the fact that our nature now, so far as it is unrenewed, is so unhappily

fruitful in ill thoughts, ministers this comfort, that it is not our case alone,
as if our condition in this were different from others, as some have been
tempted to think, even almost to despair. None, say they, have such a
loathsome nature as I have. This springs from ignorance of the spreading
of original sin, for what can come from an unclean thing but that which is
unclean? `As in water face answereth to face, so the [polluted] heart of
man to man' (Prov. 27:19), where grace has not made some difference. As
in annoyances from Satan, so here, the best way is to lay open our
complaints to Christ, and cry with Paul, `O wretched man that I am! who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?' (Rom. 7:24). On giving vent
to his distress, he presently found comfort, for he breaks into
thanksgiving, `I thank God.' And it is good to profit from this, to hate this
offensive body of death more, and to draw nearer to God, as that holy
man did after his `foolish' and `beastly' thoughts (Psa. 73:22 and 28),
and so to keep our hearts closer to God, seasoning them with heavenly
meditations in the morning, storing up good matter, so that our heart
may be a good treasury, while we beg of Christ his Holy Spirit to stop that
cursed issue and to be a living spring of better thoughts in us. Nothing
more abases the spirits of holy men that desire to delight in God after
they have escaped the common defilements of the world than these
unclean issues of spirit, as being most contrary to God, who is a pure
Spirit. But the very irksomeness of them yields matter of comfort against
them. They force the soul to all spiritual exercises, to watchfulness and a
more near walking with God, and to raise itself to thoughts of a higher
nature, such as those which the truth of God, the works of God, the
communion of saints, the mystery of godliness, the terror of the Lord,
and the excellency of the state of a Christian and a conversation suitable
to it, do abundantly minister. They discover to us a necessity of daily
purging and pardoning grace, and of seeking to be found in Christ, and so
bring the best often upon their knees.
Our chief comfort is that our blessed Saviour, as he bade Satan depart
from him, after he had given way awhile to his insolence (Matt. 4:10), so
he will command him to be gone from us, when it shall be good for us. He
must be gone at a word. And Christ can and will likewise, in his own time,
rebuke the rebellious and extravagant stirrings of our hearts and bring all
the thoughts of the inner man into subjection to himself.

4. Some think, when they become more troubled with the smoke of
corruption than they were before, therefore they are worse than they
were. It is true that corruptions appear now more than before, but they
are less.
For, first, the more sin is seen, the more it is hated, and therefore it is
less. Dust particles are in a room before the sun shines, but they only
appear then.
Secondly, the nearer contraries are one to another, the sharper is the
conflict between them. Now, of all enemies the spirit and the flesh are
nearest one to another, being both in the soul of a regenerate man, in the
faculties of the soul, and in every action that springs from those faculties,
and therefore it is no marvel that the soul, the seat of this battle, thus
divided within itself, is as smoking flax.
Thirdly, the more grace, the more spiritual life, and the more spiritual
life, the more antipathy to the contrary. Therefore none are so aware of
corruption as those whose souls are most alive.
Fourthly, when men give themselves up to self-indulgence, their
corruptions do not trouble them, as not being bound and tied up; but
when once grace suppresses their extravagant and licentious excesses,
then the flesh boils, as disdaining to be confined. Yet they are better now
than they were before. That matter which yields smoke was in the torch
before it was lighted, but it is not offensive till the torch begins to burn.
Let such know that if the smoke be once offensive to them, it is a sign that
there is light. It is better to enjoy the benefit of light, though with smoke,
than to be altogether in the dark.
Nor is smoke so offensive to us as light is pleasant to us, since it yields an
evidence of the truth of grace in the heart. Therefore, though it is
cumbersome in the conflict, yet it is comfortable as evidence. It is better
that corruption should offend us now than, by giving way to it to gain a
little peace, to lose comfort afterwards. Let such therefore as are at
variance and odds with their corruptions look on this text as their portion
of comfort.

WEAKNESS SHOULD NOT KEEP US FROM DUTY
It should encourage us to duty that Christ will not quench the smoking
flax, but blow on it till it flames. Some are loath to do good because they
feel their hearts rebelling, and duties turn out badly. We should not avoid
good actions because of the infirmities attending them. Christ looks more
at the good in them which he means to cherish than the ill in them which
he means to abolish. Though eating increases a disease, a sick man will
still eat, so that nature may gain strength against the disease. So, though
sin cleaves to what we do, yet let us do it, since we have to deal with so
good a Lord, and the more strife we meet with, the more acceptance we
shall have. Christ loves to taste of the good fruits that come from us, even
though they will always savor of our old nature.
A Christian complains he cannot pray. `Oh, I am troubled with so many
distracting thoughts, and never more than now!' But has he put into your
heart a desire to pray? Then he will hear the desires of his own Spirit in
you. `We know not what we should pray for as we ought' (nor how to do
anything else as we ought), but the Spirit helps our infirmities with
`groanings which cannot be uttered' (Rom. 8:26), which are not hid from
God. `My groaning is not hid from thee' (Psa. 38:9). God can pick sense
out of a confused prayer. These desires cry louder in his ears than your
sins. Sometimes a Christian has such confused thoughts that he can say
nothing but, as a child, cries, `O Father', not able to express what he
needs, like Moses at the Red Sea. These stirrings of spirit touch the heart
of God and melt him into compassion towards us, when they come from
the Spirit of adoption, and from a striving to be better.
`Oh, but is it possible', thinks the misgiving heart, `that so holy a God
should accept such a prayer?' Yes, he will accept that which is his own,
and pardon that which is ours. Jonah prayed in the fish's belly (Jon. 2:1),
being burdened with the guilt of sin, yet God heard him. Let not,
therefore, infirmities discourage us. James takes away this objection
(James 5:17). Some might object, `If I were as holy as Elijah, then my
prayers might be regarded.' `But,' says he, 'Elijah was a man subject to
like passions as we are.' He had his passions as well as we, or do we think
that God heard him because he was without fault? Surely not. But look at
the promises: `Call upon me in the day of trouble: I will deliver thee'

(Psa. 50:15). `Ask, and it shall be given you' (Matt. 7:7) and others like
these. God accepts our prayers, though weak, because we are his own
children, and they come from his own Spirit; because they are according
to his own will; and because they are offered in Christ's mediation, and he
takes them, and mingles them with his own incense (Rev. 8:3).
There is never a holy sigh, never a tear we shed, which is lost. And as
every grace increases by exercise of itself, so does the grace of prayer. By
prayer we learn to pray. So, likewise, we should take heed of a spirit of
discouragement in all other holy duties, since we have so gracious a
Saviour. Pray as we are able, hear as we are able, strive as we are able, do
as we are able, according to the measure of grace received. God in Christ
will cast a gracious eye upon that which is his own.
Would Paul do nothing because he could not do the good that he would?
No, he `pressed toward the mark'.
Let us not be cruel to ourselves when Christ is thus gracious. There is a
certain meekness of spirit whereby we yield thanks to God for any ability
at all, and rest quiet with the measure of grace received, seeing it is God's
good pleasure it should be so, who gives the will and the deed, yet not so
as to rest from further endeavors. But when, with faithful endeavor, we
come short of what we would be, and short of what others are, then know
for our comfort, Christ will not quench the smoking flax, and that
sincerity and truth, as we said before, with endeavor of growth, is our
perfection.
What God says of Jeroboam's son is comforting, `He only shall come to
the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward the
LORD God of Israel' (1 Kings 14:13), though only `some good thing'.
`Lord, I believe' (Mark 9:24), with a weak faith, yet with faith; love thee
with a faint love, yet with love; endeavor in a feeble manner, yet
endeavor. A little fire is fire, though it smokes. Since thou hast taken me
into thy covenant to be thine from being an enemy, wilt thou cast me off
for these infirmities, which, as they displease thee, so are they the grief of
my own heart?