PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 14
How Repentance Is Given


HOW REPENTANCE IS GIVEN

T

O RETURN to the grand text:
“Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a Prince and a
Savior, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins.”

Our Lord Jesus Christ has gone up that grace may come down. His glory is
employed to give greater currency to His grace. The Lord has not taken a
step upward except with the design of bearing believing sinners upward
with Him. He is exalted to give repentance; and this we shall see if we
remember a few great truths.
The work which our Lord Jesus has done has made repentance possible,
available, and acceptable. The law makes no mention of repentance, but
says plainly, “The soul that sinneth, it shall die.” If the Lord Jesus had not
died and risen again and gone unto the Father, what would your repenting
or mine be worth? We might feel remorse with its horrors, but never
repentance with its hopes. Repentance, as a natural feeling, is a common
duty deserving no great praise: indeed, it is so generally mingled with a
selfish fear of punishment, that the kindliest estimate makes but little of it.
Had not Jesus interposed and wrought out a wealth of merit, our tears of
repentance would have been so much water spilled upon the ground. Jesus
is exalted on high, that through the virtue of His intercession repentance
may have a place before God. In this respect He gives us repentance,
because He puts repentance into a position of acceptance, which otherwise
it could never have occupied.
When Jesus was exalted on high, the Spirit of God was poured out to work
in us all needful graces. The Holy Ghost creates repentance in us by
supernaturally renewing our nature, and taking away the heart of stone out
of our flesh. Oh, sit not down straining those eyes of yours to fetch out
impossible tears! Repentance comes not from unwilling nature, but from
free and sovereign grace. Get not to your chamber to smite your breast in
order to fetch from a heart of stone feelings which are not there. But go to
Calvary and see how Jesus died. Look upward to the hills whence comes
your help. The Holy Ghost has come on purpose that He may

72

overshadow men’s spirits and breed repentance within them, even as once
He brooded over chaos and brought forth order. Breathe your prayer to
Him, “Blessed Spirit, dwell with me. Make me tender and lowly of heart,
that I may hate sin and unfeignedly repent of it.” He will hear your cry and
answer you.
Remember, too, that when our Lord Jesus was exalted, He not only gave
us repentance by sending forth the Holy Spirit, but by consecrating all the
works of nature and of providence to the great ends of our salvation, so
that any one of them may call us to repentance, whether it crow like
Peter’s cock, or shake the prison like the jailer’s earthquake. From the right
hand of God our Lord Jesus rules all things here below, and makes them
work together for the salvation of His redeemed. He uses both bitters and
sweets, trials a holy frame of mind to steal over you when you least look
for it. Be sure of this, that He who is gone into His glory, raised into all the
splendor and majesty of God, has abundant ways of working repentance in
those to whom He grants forgiveness. He is even now waiting to give
repentance to you. Ask Him for it at once.
Observe with much comfort that the Lord Jesus Christ gives this
repentance to the most unlikely people in the world. He is exalted to give
repentance to Israel. To Israel! In the days when the apostles thus spoke,
Israel was the nation which had most grossly sinned against light and love,
by daring to say, “His blood be on us and on our children.” Yet Jesus is
exalted to give them repentance! What a marvel of grace! If you have been
brought up in the brightest of Christian light, and yet have rejected it, there
is still hope. If you have sinned against Israel of old, softening may yet
come to you, since Jesus is exalted, and clothed with boundless power. For
those who went the furthest in iniquity, and sinned with special
aggravation, the Lord Jesus is exalted to give to them repentance and
forgiveness of sins. Happy am I to have so full a gospel to proclaim!
Happy are you to be allowed to read it!
The hearts of the children of Israel had grown hard as an adamant stone.
Luther used to think it impossible to convert a Jew. We are far from
agreeing with him, and yet we must admit that the seed of Israel have been
exceedingly obstinate in their rejection of the Savior during these many
centuries. Truly did the Lord say, “Israel would none of me.” “He came to

73

his own and his own received him not.” Yet on behalf of Israel our Lord
Jesus is exalted for the giving of repentance and remission. Probably my
reader is a Gentile; but yet he may have a very stubborn heart, which has
stood out against the Lord Jesus for many years; and yet in him our Lord
can work repentance. It may be that you will yet feel compelled to write
as William Hone did when he yielded to divine love. He was the author of
those most entertaining volumes called the “Everyday Book,” but he was
once a stout-hearted infidel. When subdued by sovereign grace, he wrote:
The proudest heart that ever beat
Hath been subdued in me;
The wildest will that ever rose
To scorn Thy cause and aid Thy foes
Is quell’d my Lord, by Thee.
Thy will, and not my will be done,
My heart be ever Thine;
Confessing Thee the mighty Word,
My Savior Christ, my God, my Lord,
Thy cross shall be my sign.

The Lord can give repentance to the most unlikely, turning lions into
lambs, and ravens into doves. Let us look to Him that this great change
may be wrought in us. Assuredly the contemplation of the death of Christ
is one of the surest and speediest methods of gaining repentance. Do not
sit down and try to pump up repentance from the dry well of corrupt
nature. It is contrary to the laws of mind to suppose that you can force
your soul into that gracious state. Take your heart in prayer to Him who
understands it, and say, “Lord, cleanse it. Lord, renew it. Lord, work
repentance in it.” The more you try to produce penitent emotions in
yourself, the more you will be disappointed; but if you believingly think
of Jesus dying for you, repentance will burst forth. Meditate on the Lord’s
shedding His heart’s blood out of love to you. Set before your mind’s eye
the agony and bloody sweat, the cross and passion; and, as you do this,
He who was the bearer of all this grief will look at you, and with that look
He will do for you what He did for Peter, so that you also will go out and
weep bitterly. He who died for you can, by His gracious Spirit, make you
die to sin; and He who has gone into glory on your behalf can draw your
soul after Him, away from evil, and toward holiness.

74

I shall be content if I leave this one thought with you; look not beneath the
ice to find fire, neither hope in your own natural heart to find repentance.
Look to the Living One for life. Look to Jesus for all you need between
Hell Gate and Heaven Gate. Never seek elsewhere for any part of that
which Jesus loves to bestow; but remember,

CHRIST IS ALL.

75
