PURITAN GOLD -- The Reformed Pastor by Richard Baxter: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 10
The Oversight of the Flock: Motives to the Oversight

---

Having considered the manner in which we are to take heed to the flock, I
shall now proceed to lay before you some motives to this oversight; and
here I shall confine myself to those contained in my text.

1. The first consideration which the text suggesteth to us, is drawn from our
relation to the flock: We are overseers of it.
(1) The nature of our office requireth us to ‘take heed to the flock.’ What
else are we overseers for “Bishop” is a title which intimates more of’ labor
than of honor,’ says Polydore Virgil.’ To be a bishop, or pastor, is not to be
set up as an idol for the people to bow to, or as idle ‘slow bellies,’ to live to
our fleshly delight and ease; but it is to be the guide of sinners to heaven. It
is a sad case that men should be of a calling of which they know not the
nature, and undertake they know not what. Do these men consider what
they have undertaken, that live in ease and pleasure, and have time to take
their superfluous recreations and to spend an hour and more at once, in
loitering, or in vain discourse, when so much work doth lie upon their
hands? Brethren, do you consider what you have taken upon you? Why, you
have undertaken the conduct, under Christ, of a band of his soldiers ‘against
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places.’ You
must lead them on to the sharpest conflicts; you must acquaint them with
the enemies’ stratagems and assaults; you must watch yourselves, and keep
them watching. If you miscarry, they and you may perish. You have a subtle
enemy, and therefore you must be wise. You have a vigilant enemy, and
therefore you must be vigilant. You have a malicious and violent and
unwearied enemy, and therefore you must be resolute, courageous and
indefatigable. You are in a crowd of enemies, encompassed by them on
every side, and if you heed one and not all, you will quickly fall. And oh,
what a world of work have you to do! Had you but one ignorant old man or
woman to teach, what a hard task would it be, even though they should be
willing to learn! But if they be as unwilling as they are ignorant, how much
more difficult will it prove! But to have such a multitude of ignorant
persons, as most of us have, what work will it find us! What a pitiful life is
it to have to reason with men that have almost lost the use of reason, and to
argue with them that neither understand themselves nor you! O brethren,
what a world of wickedness have we to contend against in one soul; and
what a number of these worlds! And when you think you have done
something, you leave the seed among the fowls of the air; wicked men are
at their elbows to rise up and contradict all you have said. You speak but
once to a sinner, for ten or twenty times that the emissaries of Satan speak
to them.

Moreover, how easily do the business and cares of the world choke the seed
which you have sown. And if the truth had no enemy but what is in
themselves, how easily will a frozen carnal heart extinguish those sparks
which you have been long in kindling! yea, for want of fuel, and further
help, they will go out of themselves. And when you think your work doth
happily succeed, and have seen men confessing their sins, and promising
reformation, and living as new creatures and zealous converts, alas! they
may, after all this, prove unsound and false at the heart, and such as were
but superficially changed and took up new opinions and new company,
without a new heart. O how many, after some considerable change, are
deceived by the profits and honors of the world, and are again entangled by
their former lusts! How many do but change a disgraceful way of fleshpleasing, for a way that is less dishonorable, and maketh not so great a noise
in their consciences! How many grow proud before they acquire a thorough
knowledge of religion; and, confident in the strength of their unfurnished
intellects, greedily snatch at every error that is presented to them under the
name of truth; and, like chickens that straggle from the hen, are carried
away by that infernal kite, while they proudly despise the guidance and
advice of those that Christ hath set over them for their safety! O brethren,
what a field of work is there before us! Not a person that you see but may
find you work. In the saints themselves, how soon do the Christian graces
languish if you neglect them; and how easily are they drawn into sinful
ways, to the dishonor of the gospel, and to their own loss and sorrow! If this
be the work of a minister, you may see what a life he hath to lead. Let us,
then, be up and doing, with all our might; difficulties must quicken, not
discourage us in so necessary a work. If we cannot do all, let us do what we
can; for, if we neglect it, woe to us, and to the souls committed to our care!
Should we pass over all these other duties, and, by a plausible sermon only,
think to prove ourselves faithful ministers, and to put off God and man with
such a shell and vizor, our reward will prove as superficial as our work.
(2) Consider that it is by your own voluntary undertaking and engagement
that all this work is laid upon you. No man forced you to be overseers of the
Church. And doth not common honesty bind you to be true to your trust?
(3) Consider that you have the honor to encourage you to the labor. And a
great honor it is to be the ambassadors of God, and the instruments of men’s

conversion, to ‘save their souls from death, and to cover a multitude of
sins.’ The honor, indeed, is but the attendant of the work. To do, therefore,
as the prelates of the Church in all ages have done, to strive for precedency,
and fill the world with contentions about the dignity and superiority of their
seats, doth show that we much forget the nature of that office which we
have undertaken. I seldom see ministers strive so furiously, who shall go
first to a poor man’s cottage to teach him and his family the way to heaven;
or who shall first endeavor the conversion of a sinner, or first become the
servant of all. Strange, that notwithstanding all the plain expressions of
Christ, men will not understand the nature of their office! If they did, would
they strive who would be the pastor of a whole county and more, when
there are so many thousand poor sinners in it that cry for help, and they are
neither able nor willing to engage for their relief? Nay, when they can
patiently live in the house with profane persons, and not follow them
seriously and incessantly for their conversion? And that they would have
the name and honor of the work of a county, who are unable to do all the
work of a parish, when the honor is but the appendage of the work Is it
names and honor, or the work and end, that they desire? Oh! if they would
faithfully, humbly, and self-denyingly lay out themselves for Christ and his
Church, and never think of titles and reputation, they should then have
honor whether they would or not; but by gaping after it, they lose it: for, this
is the case of virtue’s shadow, ‘What follows I fly; what flies, the same I
follow.’
(4) Consider that you have many other excellent privileges of the
ministerial office to encourage you to the work. If therefore you will not do
the work, you have nothing to do with the privileges. It is something that
you are maintained by other men’s labors. This is for your work, that you
may not be taken off from it, but, as Paul requireth, may ‘give yourselves
wholly to these things,’ and not be forced to neglect men’s souls, whilst you
are providing for your own bodies. Either do the work, then, or take not the
maintenance. But you have far greater privileges than this. Is it nothing to
be brought up to learning, when others are brought up to the cart and
plough? and to be furnished with so much delightful knowledge, when the
world lieth in ignorance? Is it nothing to converse with learned men, and to
talk of high and glorious things, when others must converse with almost
none but the most vulgar and illiterate But especially, what an excellent

privilege is it, to live in studying and preaching Christ! to be continually
searching into his mysteries, or feeding on them! to be daily employed in
the consideration of he blessed nature, works, and ways of God! Others are
glad of the leisure of the Lord’s day, and now and then of an hour besides,
when they can lay hold upon it. But we may keep a continual Sabbath. We
may do almost nothing else, but study and talk of God and glory, and
engage in acts of prayer and praise, and drink in his sacred, saving truths.
Our employment is all high and spiritual. Whether we be alone, or in
company, our business is for another world. O that our hearts were but more
tuned to this work! What a blessed, joyful life should we then live! How
sweet would our study be to us! How pleasant the pulpit! And what delight
would our conference about spiritual and eternal things afford us! To live
among such excellent helps as our libraries afford, to have so many silent
wise companions whenever we please – all these, and many other similar
privileges of the ministry, bespeak our unwearied diligence in the work.
(5) By your work you are related to Christ, as well as to the flock. You are
the stewards of his mysteries, and rulers of his household; and he that
entrusted you, will maintain you in his work. But then, ‘it is required of a
steward that a man be found faithful.’ Be true to him, and never doubt but
he will be true to you. Do you feed his flock, and he will sooner feed you as
he did Elijah, than leave you to want. If you be in prison, he will open the
doors; but then you must relieve imprisoned souls. He will give you “a
tongue and wisdom that no enemy shall be able to resist,” but then you must
use it faithfully for him. If you will put forth your hand to relieve the
distressed, he will wither the hand that is stretched out against you. The
ministers of England, I am sure, may know this by large experience. Many a
time hath God rescued them from the jaws of the devourer. Oh, the
admirable preservations and deliverances that they have had from cruel
Papists, from tyrannical persecutors, and from misguided, passionate men!
Consider, brethren, why it is that God hath done all this. Is it for your
persons, or for his Church? What are you to him more than other men, but
for his work and people’s sakes? Are you angels? Is your flesh formed of
better clay than your neighbors? Are you not of the same generation of
sinners, that need his grace as much as they? Up then, and work as the
redeemed of the Lord, as those that are purposely rescued from ruin for his

service. If you believe that God hath rescued you for himself, live to him, as
being unreservedly his who hath delivered you.
2. The second motive in the text is drawn from the efficient cause of this
relation. It is the Holy Ghost that hath made us overseers of his Church,
and, therefore, it behoveth us to take heed to it. The Holy Ghost makes men
bishops or overseers of the Church in three several respects: By qualifying
them for the office; by directing the ordainers to discern their qualifications,
and know the fittest men; and by directing them, the people and themselves,
for the affixing them to a particular charge. All these things were then done
in an extraordinary way, by inspiration, or at least very often. The same are
done now by the ordinary way of the Spirit’s assistance. But it is the same
Spirit still; and men are made overseers of the Church (when they are
rightly called) by the Holy Ghost, now as well as then. It is a strange
conceit, therefore, of the Papists, that ordination by the hands of man is of
more absolute necessity in the ministerial office, than the calling of the
Holy Ghost. God hath determined in his Word, that there shall be such an
office, and what the work and power of that office shall be, and what sort of
men, as to their qualifications, shall receive it. None of these can be undone
by man, or made unnecessary. God also giveth men the qualifications which
he requireth; so that, all that the Church hath to do, whether pastors or
people, ordainers or electors, is but to discern and determine which are the
men that God hath thus qualified, and to accept of them that are so
provided, and, upon consent, to install them solemnly in this office. What
an obligation, then, is laid upon us, by our call to the work! If our
commission be sent from heaven, it is not to be disobeyed. When the
apostles were called by Christ from their secular employments, they
immediately left friends, and house, and trade, and all, and followed him.
When Paul was called by the voice of Christ, he ‘was not disobedient to the
heavenly vision.’ Though our call is not so immediate or extraordinary, yet
it is from the same Spirit. It is no safe course to imitate Jonah, in turning our
back upon the commands of God. If we neglect our work, he hath a spur to
quicken us; if we run away from it, he hath messengers enough to overtake
us, and bring us back, and make us do it; and it is better to do it at first than
at last.

3. The third motive in the text is drawn from the dignity of the object which
is committed to our charge. It is the Church of God which we must oversee
– that Church for which the world is chiefly upheld, which is sanctified by
the Holy Ghost, which is the mystical body of Christ, that Church with
which angels are present, and on which they attend as ministering spirits,
whose little ones have their angels beholding the face of God in heaven. Oh
what a charge is it that we have undertaken! And shall we be unfaithful to
it? Have we the stewardship of God’s own family, and shall we neglect it?
Have we the conduct of those saints that shall live for ever with God in
glory, and shall we neglect them? God forbid! I beseech you, brethren, let
this thought awaken the negligent. You that draw back from painful,
displeasing, suffering duties, and put off men’s souls with ineffectual
formalities, do you think this is honorable treatment of Christ’s spouse? Are
the souls of men thought meet by God to see his face, and live for ever in
heaven, and are they not worthy of your utmost cost and labor on earth? Do
you think so basely of the Church of God, as if it deserved not the best of
your care and help? Were you the keepers of sheep or swine, you would
scarcely let them go, and say, They are not worth the looking after;
especially if they were your own. And dare you say so of the souls of men,
of the Church of God? Christ walketh among them: remember his presence,
and see that you are diligent in your work. They are ‘a chosen generation, a
royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, to show forth the praises
of him that hath called them.’ And yet will you neglect them? What a high
honor is it to be but one of them, yea, but a door-keeper in the house of
God’! But to be the priest of these priests, and the ruler of these kings – this
is such an honor as multiplieth your obligations to diligence and fidelity in
so noble an employment.
4. The last motive that is mentioned in my text, is drawn from the price that
was paid for the Church which we oversee: ‘Which God,’ says the apostle,
‘hath purchased with his own blood.’ Oh what an argument is this to
quicken the negligent, and to condemn those who will not be quickened to
their duty by it! ‘Oh,’ saith one of the ancient doctors, ‘If Christ had but
committed to my keeping one spoonful of his blood in a fragile glass, how
curiously would I preserve it, and how tender would I be of that glass! If
then he have committed to me the purchase of his blood, should I not as
carefully look to my charge ‘ What! sirs, shall we despise the blood of

Christ? Shall we think it was shed for them who are not worthy of our
utmost care? You may see here, it is not a little fault that negligent pastors
are guilty of. As much as in them lieth, the blood of Christ would be shed in
vain. They would lose him those souls which he hath so dearly purchased.
Oh, then, let us hear these arguments of Christ, whenever we feel ourselves
grow dull and careless: ‘Did I die for these souls, and wilt not thou look
after them? Were they worth my blood, and are they not worth thy labor?
Did I come down from heaven to earth, “to seek and to save that which was
lost;” and wilt thou not go to the next door, or street, or village, to seek
them? How small is thy condescension and labor compared to mine! I
debased myself to this, but it is thy honor to be so employed. Have I done
and suffered so much for their salvation, and was I willing to make thee a
fellow-worker with me, and wilt thou refuse to do that little which lieth
upon thy hands?’ Every time we look upon our congregations, let us
believingly remember that they are the purchase of Christ’s blood, and
therefore should be regarded by us with the deepest interest and the most
tender affection. Oh, think what a confusion it will be to a negligent
minister, at the last day, to have this blood of the Son of God pleaded
against him; and for Christ to say, ‘It was the purchase of my blood of
which thou didst make so light, and dost thou think to be saved by it
thyself?’ O brethren, seeing Christ will bring his blood to plead with us, let
it plead us to our duty, lest it plead us to damnation.
I have now done with the motives which I find in the text itself. There are
many more that might be gathered from the rest of this exhortation of the
apostle, but we must not stay to take in all. If the Lord set home but these
few upon our hearts, I doubt not we shall see reason to mend our pace; and
the change will be such on our hearts and in our ministry, that ourselves and
our congregations will have cause to bless God for it. I know myself to be
unworthy to be your monitor; but a monitor you must have; and it is better
for us to hear of our sin and duty from anybody than from nobody.
87 Receive the admonition, and you will see no cause in the monitor’s
unworthiness to repent of it. But if you reject it, the unworthiest messenger
may bear that witness against you another day which will then confound
you.

CHAPTER 3
APPLICATION
SECTION 1 — THE USE OF HUMILIATION