PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 14 of 14
Directions for the Actual Mortification of Sin

---

Chapter 14

HOW TO MORTIFY SIN
Now, the considerations which I have hitherto insisted on are more about things preparatory to the mortification of sin (chapters 9 through 13), than such as will actually accomplish it.
It is the heart’s due preparation for the work itself, without which it will not be accomplished,
that hitherto I have aimed at.
There are very few directions that are peculiar to the actual mortifying of sin itself. They are
these that follow.

1. Set Faith at Work on Christ
Set faith at work on Christ for the killing of your sin. His blood is the great sovereign remedy for sin-sick souls. Live in this, and you will die a conqueror. Yes, you will, through the good
providence of God, live to see your lust dead at your feet.

a. How faith acts upon Christ
But you will say, “How shall faith act itself on Christ for this end and purpose?” I say, in various ways.
1). Fill your soul with Christ’s provisions
By faith fill your soul with a due consideration of the provision that is laid up in Jesus
Christ for this end and purpose, so that all your lusts, this very lust wherewith you are entangled, may be mortified. By faith ponder on this: that though you are in no way able in or by
yourself to get the conquest over your distemper, though you are even weary of contending
and are utterly ready to faint, yet that there is enough in Jesus Christ to yield relief to you (Phi
4:13). It sustained the prodigal when he was ready to faint that yet there was bread enough in
his father’s house (Luk 15:17); though he was at a distance from it, yet it relieved and
strengthened him that bread was there. In your greatest distress and anguish, consider that
fullness of grace (Joh 1:16; Col 1:19), those riches, those treasures of strength (Isa 40:28),
might, and help that are laid up in Him for our support. Let them come into and abide in your
mind. Consider that He is “exalted…to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel” (Act 5:31)—and if to give repentance, to give mortification, without which there is no
repentance, nor can there be.
Christ tells us that we obtain purging grace by abiding in Him (Joh 15:4). To act faith upon
the fullness that is in Christ for our supply is an eminent way of abiding in Christ, for both our
engrafting and abode is by faith (Rom 11:19-20). Let, then, your soul by faith be exercised with
such thoughts and apprehensions as these:

14. How to Mortify Sin

75

I am a poor, weak creature; unstable as water, I cannot excel. This corruption is too hard for
me, and is at the very door of ruining my soul—and what to do I know not. My soul is become as parched ground, and an habitation of dragons. I have made promises and broken
them; vows and engagements have been as nothing to me. Many persuasions have I had that
I had got the victory and should be delivered, but I am deceived. I plainly see that, without
some eminent help and assistance, I am lost and shall be prevailed on to utterly forsake
God. But yet, though this be my state and condition, let the hands that hang down be lifted
up, and the feeble knees be strengthened (Heb 12:12). Behold, the Lord Christ, Who has all
fullness of grace in His heart, all fullness of power in His hand, He is able to slay all these
His enemies (Joh 1:16; Mat 28:18). There is sufficient provision in Him for my relief and assistance. He can take my drooping, dying soul and make me more than a conqueror (Rom
8:37).
Why sayest thou, O my soul, “My way is hid from the LORD, and my judgment is passed
over from my God? Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary? there is no searching of his understanding. He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount up
with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint”
(Isa 40:27-31).
He can make the dry, parched ground of my soul to become a “pool,” and my thirsty, barren
heart as “springs of water.” Yes, He can make this “habitation of dragons”—this heart, so
full of abominable lusts and fiery temptations—to be a place for “grass” and fruit to Himself
(Isa 35:7).

In this way, God strengthened Paul under his temptation with the consideration of the sufficiency of His grace: “My grace is sufficient for thee” (2Co 12:9). Though he were not immediately so far made partaker of it as to be freed from his temptation, yet the sufficiency of it in
God, for that end and purpose, was enough to stay his spirit.
I say, then, by faith, be much in the consideration of that supply and the fullness of it that is
in Jesus Christ, and how He can at any time give you strength and deliverance. If hereby you
do not find success to a conquest, yet you will be supported in the chariot so that you shall not
retreat out of the field until the battle be ended. You will be kept from an utter despondency
and a lying down under your unbelief, or a turning aside to false means and remedies, that in
the end will not relieve you. The efficacy of this consideration will be found only in its practice.
2). Expect relief from Christ
Raise up your heart by faith to an expectation of relief from Christ. Relief from Christ in
this case is like the prophet’s vision; it “is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall
speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not tarry”
(Hab 2:3). Though it may seem somewhat long to you while you are under your trouble and
perplexity, yet it shall surely come in the appointed time of the Lord Jesus, which is the best
season.
If, then, you can raise up your heart to a settled expectation of relief from Jesus Christ—if
your eyes are towards Him “as the eyes of servants look unto the hands of their masters” (Psa
123:2) when they expect to receive somewhat from them—your soul shall be satisfied. He will

76

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

assuredly deliver you. He will slay the lust, and your latter end shall be peace. Only look for it
at His hand; expect when and how He will do it. “If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established” (Isa 7:9).

b. Jesus Christ: The ground of faith
But will you say, “What ground have I to build such an expectation upon, so that I may expect not to be deceived?”
As you have necessity to put yourself on this course, you must be relieved and saved this
way or not at all. To whom will you go (Joh 6:68)? So there are in the Lord Jesus innumerable
things to encourage and engage you to this expectation.
For the necessity of it, I have in part discovered it before, when I showed that this is the
work of faith and of believers only. “Without me,” says Christ, “ye can do nothing” (Joh 15:5),
speaking with special relation to the purging of the heart from sin (15:2). Mortification of any
sin must be by a supply of grace; of ourselves we cannot do it! Now, “it pleased the Father that
in him should all fulness dwell” (Col 1:19), that of His fullness we might receive grace for
grace (Joh 1:16). He is the head from whence the new man must have influences of life and
strength, or it will decay every day. If we are “strengthened with all might” “in the inner man,”
it is by Christ’s dwelling “in your hearts by faith” (Col 1:11; Eph 3:16-17).
I have also showed before that this work is not to be done without the Spirit. Whence, then,
do we expect the Spirit? From Whom do we look for Him? Who has promised Him to us, having procured Him for us? Ought not all our expectations to this purpose to be on Christ alone?
Let this, then, be fixed upon your heart, that if you have not relief from Him, you shall never
have any relief at all! All ways, endeavors, and contendings that are not animated by this expectation of relief from Christ, and Him only, are to no purpose and will do you no good. If they
are anything but supports of your heart in this expectation, or means appointed by Himself for
the receiving help from Him, they are in vain.
Now, further to engage you to this expectation, consider the following.
1). Christ our High Priest
Consider His mercifulness, tenderness, and kindness, as He is our great High Priest at the
right hand of God. Assuredly He pities you in your distress. He says, “As one whom his mother
comforteth, so will I comfort you” (Isa 66:13). He has the tenderness of a mother to a nursing
child.
“Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be
a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able to suc96
cour them that are tempted” (Heb 2:17-18).
How is the ability of Christ upon the account of His suffering proposed to us? “In that he himself hath suffered being tempted, he is able.” Did the sufferings and temptations of Christ add
to His ability and power? Not, doubtless, considered absolutely and in itself. But the ability
here mentioned is such as is accompanied by readiness, inclination, and willingness to put itself forth; it is an ability of will against all dissuasions.97 He is able, having suffered and having
96
97

succour – help.
dissuasions – persuasions not to do or believe something.

14. How to Mortify Sin

77

been tempted, to break through all dissuasions to the contrary in order to relieve poor tempted souls: “He is able to help.”
It is a metonymy of the effect; for He can now be moved to help, having been so tempted. So
it is in Hebrews 4:15-16: “For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us
therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to
help in time of need.” The exhortation of verse 16 is the same that I am upon: namely, that we
would entertain expectations of relief from Christ, which the apostle there calls “grace for seasonable help.”
“If ever,” says the soul, “help were seasonable, it would be so to me in my present condition.
This is that which I long for: grace for seasonable help. I am ready to die, to perish, to be lost
forever. Iniquity will prevail against me if help come not in.” Says the apostle, “Expect this
help, this relief, this grace from Christ.” Yea, but on what account? That which he lays down in
verse 15. And we may observe that the word which we have translated to obtain is literally to
receive. “That we may receive it”: suitable and seasonable help will come in. I shall freely say
that this one thing of establishing the soul by faith in expectation of relief from Jesus Christ
(Mat 11:28), on the account of His mercifulness as our high priest, will be more available to
the ruin of your lust and distemper, and have a better and speedier result, than all the most
rigid means of self-maceration that ever any of the sons of men engaged in. Yea, let me add
that never any soul did or shall perish by the power of any lust, sin, or corruption, who could
raise his soul by faith to an expectation of relief from Jesus Christ (Isa 55:1-3; Rev 3:18).
2). Christ’s faithfulness
Consider His faithfulness Who has promised, which may raise you up and confirm you in
this waiting in an expectation of relief. He has promised to relieve in such cases, and He will
fulfil His Word to the utmost. God tells us that His covenant with us is like the “ordinances” of
heaven: the sun, moon, and stars, which have their certain courses (Jer 31:35-36). Thence David said that he watched for relief from God “more than they that watch for the morning” (Psa
130:6)—a thing that will certainly come in its appointed season. So will be your relief from
Christ. It will come in its season, as the dew and rain upon the parched ground, for faithful is
He Who has promised (Heb 10:23). Particular promises to this purpose are innumerable. Let
the soul be always furnished with some of them that seem peculiarly to suit its condition.

c. Eminent advantages
Now, there are two eminent advantages that always attend this expectation of succor from
Jesus Christ.
1). Speedy assistance
This expectation of help from Christ engages Him to a full and speedy assistance. Nothing
more engages the heart of a man to be useful and helpful to another than the man’s expectation of help from him, if justly raised and countenanced by him who is to give the relief. Our
Lord Jesus has raised our hearts to this expectation by His kindness, care, and promises; certainly our rising up to it must of necessity be a great engagement upon Him to assist us accordingly. This the psalmist gives us as an approved maxim: “Thou, Lord, hast never forsaken
them that seek thee” (Psa 9:10). When the heart is once won to rest in God, to repose itself on
Him, He will assuredly satisfy it. He will never be as water that fails; nor has He said at any

78

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

time to the seed of Jacob, “Seek ye me in vain” (Isa 45:19). If Christ be chosen for the foundation of our supply, He will not fail us.
2). Attend to all Christ’s ways
This expectation of help from Christ engages the heart to attend diligently to all the ways
and means whereby Christ is accustomed to communicate Himself to the soul, and so takes in
the real assistance of all graces and ordinances whatever. He that expects anything from a man
applies himself to the ways and means whereby it may be obtained. The beggar that expects
alms lies at the door or in the way of the person from whom he expects it. The way whereby
and the means wherein Christ ordinarily communicates Himself are His ordinances. He that
expects anything from Him must attend upon Him therein.
It is the expectation of faith that sets the heart on work. It is not an idle, groundless hope
that I speak of. If now there be any vigor, efficacy, and power in prayer or sacrament 98 to this
end of mortifying sin, a man will assuredly be interested in it all by this expectation of relief
from Christ. On this account, I reduce all particular actings—by prayer, meditation, and the
like—to this head; and so shall not further insist on them when they are grounded on this
foundation and spring from this root. They are of singular use to this purpose, and not else.

d. Particular directions
Now, on this direction for the mortification of a prevailing distemper, you may have a thousand testimonials as to its value. Who has walked with God under this temptation, and has not
found the use and success of it? I dare leave the soul under it, without adding any more. Only
some particulars relating thereunto may be mentioned.
1). Act faith upon Christ crucified
First, act faith peculiarly upon the death, blood, and cross of Christ—that is, on Christ as
crucified and slain. Mortification of sin is peculiarly from the death of Christ. It is one peculiar, eminent end of the death of Christ that shall assuredly be accomplished by it. He died to
destroy the works of the devil. Whatever came upon our natures by the devil’s first temptation, 99 whatever receives strength in our persons by his daily suggestions, Christ died to destroy it all.
“He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works” (Ti 2:14). This was Christ’s aim and intention (in
which He will not fail) for His giving Himself for us. It was His design that we might be freed
from the power of our sins and purified from all our defiling lusts. “Christ also loved the
church, and gave himself for it; That he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, That he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or
wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish” (Eph 5:25-27).
And this shall be accomplished by virtue of His death, in various and several degrees.
98

sacrament – baptism and the Lord’s Supper. “Sacraments are holy signs and seals of the covenant of grace,
immediately instituted by Christ, to represent him and his benefits, and to confirm our interest in him,
and solemnly to engage us to the service of God in Christ, according to his Word.”—Savoy Declaration of
Faith and Order, chapter 28. Baptists often refer to these as “ordinances.”
99
devil’s first temptation – temptation in the Garden of Eden (Gen 3), resulting in Adam’s (and thereby all
mankind’s) fall into sin and depravity.

14. How to Mortify Sin

79

Hence our washing, purging, and cleansing from sin is everywhere ascribed to His blood
(1Jo 1:7; Heb 1:3; Rev 1:5). “How much more shall the blood of Christ,” being sprinkled on us,
“purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God” (Heb 9:14). This is that
which we aim at, this we are in pursuit of: that our consciences may be purged from dead
works, that they may be rooted out, destroyed, and have place in us no more. This shall certainly be brought about by the death of Christ: virtue will go out from thence to this purpose.
Indeed, all supplies of the Spirit, all communications of grace and power, are from His death—
as I have elsewhere showed. 100
Thus the apostle states it in Romans 6:2, where the case is proposed that we are considering: “How shall we, that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?” That is, how shall we live in
sin when we are dead to sin by profession; dead to sin by obligation to be so; dead to sin by participation of virtue and power for the killing of it; dead to sin by union and interest in Christ,
in and by Whom it is killed?
This he presses by various considerations all taken from the death of Christ in the ensuing
verses. This must not be: “Know ye not, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ
were baptized into his death?” (6:3). We have in baptism 101 an evidence of our implantation into Christ; we are baptized into Him. But what of Christ are we baptized into an interest in?
“His death,” he says. If indeed we are baptized into Christ (beyond mere outward profession),
we are baptized into His death.
The explanation of this, of one being baptized into the death of Christ, the apostle gives us
in verses 4 and 6:
Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death: that like as Christ was raised up
from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life…Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.
“Our being baptized into the death of Christ,” he says, “is this, namely, our conformity thereunto: to be dead unto sin, to have our corruptions mortified, as He was put to death for sin, so
that as He was raised up to glory, we may be raised up to grace and newness of life.”
He tells us whence it is that we have this baptism into the death of Christ in verse 6, and
this is from the death of Christ itself: “Our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin
might be destroyed”—“is crucified with him,” not in respect of time, but as the cause. We are
crucified with Him meritoriously, 102 in that He procured the Spirit for us to mortify sin; efficiently, in that from His death virtue comes forth for our crucifying; as a representation and
example, in that we shall assuredly be crucified unto sin as He was for our sin. This is what the
apostle intends: Christ by His death—destroying the works of the devil and procuring the
Spirit for us—has so killed sin as to its reign in believers that it shall not obtain its end and
dominion.

100

Owen, Works, Vol. 2, “Communion with Christ,” chapters 7-8.
baptism – water rite, which is an outward sign and symbol of our spiritual identification and union with
Christ in His death, burial, and resurrection; the result of this spiritual union of the soul with Christ is
that the old man, characterized by sin and selfishness, has died, and the new man has risen to love, grace,
and all the fruits of the Spirit in new life in Christ.
102
Our crucifixion with Christ is accomplished based on Christ’s merit, not our own.
101

80

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

2). Act faith in conformity to Christ crucified
Secondly, act faith on the death of Christ under these two notions: first, in expectation of
power; secondly, in endeavors for conformity. 103 For the first, the direction given in general
may suffice. As to the latter, that of the apostle may give us some light into our direction. Let
faith look on Christ in the gospel as He is set forth dying and crucified for us (Gal 3:1). Look
104
on Him under the weight of our sins, praying, bleeding, dying. Bring Him in that condition
into your heart by faith. Apply His blood so shed to your corruptions; and do this daily.
I might draw out this consideration to a great length, in various particulars, but I must
come to a close.

2. Understand the Work of the Spirit
I have only, then, to add the work of the Spirit in this business of mortification, which is so
peculiarly ascribed to Him.
In one word: This whole work, which I have described as our duty, is effected, carried on,
and accomplished by the power of the Spirit, in all the parts and degrees of it.
a. He alone clearly and fully convinces the heart of the evil, guilt, and danger of the corruption, lust, or sin to be mortified. Without this conviction, or while this conviction is so
faint that the heart can wrestle with it or digest it, there will be no thorough work made. An
unbelieving heart (as in part we all have) will try to find a way to avoid any consideration of sin
unless it is overpowered by clear and evident convictions. Now this is the proper work of the
Spirit: “He will reprove [that is, convince] of sin” (Joh 16:8). He alone can do it.
If men’s rational considerations of the preaching of the letter were able to convince them of
sin, it might be that we would see more convictions than we do. There comes by the preaching
of the Word an apprehension upon the understandings of men that they are sinners, that such
and such things are sins, and that they themselves are guilty of them. But this light is not
powerful, nor does it lay hold on the practical principles of the soul, so as to conform the mind
and will unto them to produce effects suitable to such an apprehension. And therefore it is
that wise and knowing men, destitute of the Spirit, do not think those things to be sins at all
in which the chief movings and actings of lust do consist. It is the Spirit alone that can do,
that does, this work to the purpose.
And this is the first thing that the Spirit does in order to the mortification of any lust whatever: it convinces the soul of all the evil of it, cuts off all its pleas, discovers all its deceits, stops
all its evasions, answers its pretenses, and makes the soul own its abomination and lie down
under the sense of it. Unless this is done, all that follows is in vain.
b. The Spirit alone reveals unto us the fullness of Christ for our relief; which is the consideration that stays the heart from false ways and from despairing despondency (1Co 2:9-12).
c. The Spirit alone establishes the heart in expectation of relief from Christ; which is the
great sovereign means of mortification, as has been shown (2Co 1:21).
d. The Spirit alone brings the cross of Christ into our hearts with its sin-killing power,
for by the Spirit are we baptized into the death of Christ.
103
104

Phi 3:10; Col 3:3; 1Pe 1:18-19.
1Co 15:3; 1Pe 1:18-19; 4:1-2; Col 1:14, 18.

14. How to Mortify Sin

81

e. The Spirit is the author and finisher of our sanctification. He gives new supplies and
influences of grace for holiness and sanctification, when the contrary principle is weakened or
decreased (Eph 3:16-18).
f. The soul has support from the Spirit in all its addresses to God in this condition.
Whence is the power, life, and vigor of prayer? Whence its effectiveness to prevail with God? Is
it not from the Spirit? He is the “spirit of grace and of supplications” promised to them “who
look upon me whom they have pierced” (Zec 12:10), enabling them to pray “with groanings
which cannot be uttered” (Rom 8:26). This is confessed to be the great medium or way of
faith’s prevailing with God. Thus Paul dealt with his temptation (whatever it was): “I besought
the Lord thrice, that it might depart from me” (2Co 12:8).
What the work of the Spirit in prayer is, whence and how He gives us assistance and makes
us to prevail, and what we are to do that we may enjoy His help for that purpose, is not my
present intention to demonstrate.


Thus the author ends this great and important work on the
mortification of sin in believers. Let all God’s people
take to heart their serious continual duty to be
mortifying every sin daily, in order to glorify
God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
“Always be killing sin, or it will be killing you!”

Questions for Study and Discussion
Chapter
1. What is the connection between mortification and salvation?
2. a. What about indwelling sin requires mortification to be continuous?
b. What happens when believers do not mortify sin?
3. Why must mortification be the work of the Holy Spirit?
4. How do believers’ life and comfort depend upon mortification?
5. What are some common misconceptions about mortification?
6. Describe what mortification actually is.
7. If mortification is the work of the Holy Spirit, how is the believer’s faith involved?
8. Why is universal diligence needed for mortification?
9. a. What are some of the most dangerous symptoms when mortification is absent?
b. What are these symptoms of?
10. How do you get a clear sense of your sin?
11. a. What two aspects of guilt are important in mortification? Why?
b. How does personal temperament come into mortification?
c. Why is it important to rise at the first evidence of sin?
12. Why is it important to meditate upon God?
13. a. What is it to speak peace to oneself?
b. How is avoiding this important to mortification?
14. How does faith act upon Christ in mortification?