PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 11
The Sovereignty of God in Salvation


The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation.

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

35

individual is decided by the will of God, and blessed it is that such be the case; if it were left to
our wills, the ultimate destination of us all would be the Lake of Fire! It declares that God
Himself does make a difference in the respective destinations to which He assigns His creatures, for one vessel is made “unto honor and another unto dishonor”; some are “vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction,” others are “vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto
glory.”
We readily acknowledge that it is very humbling to the proud heart of the creature to behold all mankind in the hand of God as the clay in the potter’s hand, yet this is precisely how
the Scriptures of truth represent the case. In this day of human boasting, intellectual pride,
and deification of man, it needs to be insisted upon that the potter forms his vessels for himself. Let man strive with his Maker as he will, the fact remains that he is nothing more than
clay in the heavenly Potter’s hands. And while we know that God will deal justly 2 with His
creatures, that the Judge of all the earth will do right, nevertheless He shapes His vessels for
His own purpose and according to His own pleasure. God claims the indisputable right to do
as He wills with His own.
Not only has God the right to do as He wills with the creatures of His own hands, but He
exercises this right, and nowhere is that seen more plainly than in His predestinating grace.
Before the foundation of the world God made a choice, a selection, an election. Before His
omniscient eye stood the whole of Adam’s race, and from it He singled out a people and predestinated them “to be conformed to the image of his Son,” “ordained” them unto eternal life.
2. The fact of God’s choice
Many are the Scriptures that set forth this blessed truth, seven of which will now engage
our attention.
a. Acts 13:48
“As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.”
Every artifice of human ingenuity has been employed to blunt the sharp edge of this Scripture and to explain away the obvious meaning of these words, but it has been employed in
vain, though nothing will ever be able to reconcile this and similar passages to the mind of the
natural man. “As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.” Here we learn four things:
First, that believing is the consequence and not the cause of God’s decree. Second, that a limited number only are “ordained to eternal life,” for if all men without exception were thus ordained by God, then the words “as many as” are a meaningless qualification. Third, that this
“ordination” of God is not to mere external privileges but to “eternal life,” not to service, but
to salvation itself. Fourth, that all—“as many as,” not one less—who are thus ordained by God
to eternal life will most certainly believe.
3
The comments of the beloved Spurgeon on the above passage are well worthy of our notice.
Said he, “Attempts have been made to prove that these words do not teach predestination, but
these attempts so clearly do violence to language that I shall not waste time in answering
them. I read: ‘As many as were ordained to eternal life believed,’ and I shall not twist the text,
2
3

justly – rightly; deservedly; righteously.
Charles H. Spurgeon (1834-1892) – influential English Baptist; history’s most widely read preacher (apart
from those found in Scripture). Today there is available more material written by Spurgeon than by any
other Christian author, living or dead. Born at Kelvedon, Essex, England.

36

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

but shall glorify the grace of God by ascribing to that grace the faith of every man. Is it not
God Who gives the disposition to believe? If men are disposed to have eternal life, does not He,
in every case, dispose them? Is it wrong for God to give grace? If it be right for Him to give it,
is it wrong for Him to purpose to give it? Would you have Him give it by accident? If it is right
for Him to purpose to give grace today, it was right for Him to purpose it before today, and,
since He changes not, from eternity.”
b. Romans 11:5-6
“Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according
to the election of grace. And if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no
more grace. But if it be of works, then is
it no more grace: otherwise work is no more work.”
The words “Even so” at the beginning of this quotation refer us to the previous verse where
we are told, “I have reserved to myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee to
Baal” (Rom 11:4). Note particularly the word “reserved.” In the days of Elijah there were seven
thousand, a small minority, who were divinely preserved from idolatry and brought to the
knowledge of the true God. This preservation and illumination was not from anything in
themselves, but solely by God’s special influence and agency. How highly favored such individuals were to be thus “reserved” by God! Now says the apostle, Just as there was a “remnant”
in Elijah’s days “reserved by God,” even so there is in this present dispensation.
“A remnant according to the election of grace.” Here the cause of election is traced back to
its source. The basis upon which God elected this “remnant” was not faith foreseen in them,
because a choice founded upon the foresight of good works is just as truly made on the ground
of works as any choice can be, and in such a case it would not be “of grace”; for, says the apostle, “if by grace, then it is no more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace”; which means
that grace and works are opposites, they have nothing in common, and will no more mingle
than oil and water. Thus the idea of inherent good foreseen in those chosen, or of anything
meritorious performed by them, is rigidly excluded. “A remnant according to the election of
grace” signifies an unconditional choice resulting from the sovereign favor of God; in a word,
it is absolutely a gratuitous election.
c. 1 Corinthians 1:26-29
“For ye see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: But God hath chosen the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the things
which are mighty: and base things of the world, and things which are despised, hath God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to nought things that are: That no flesh should
glory in his presence.”
Three times over in this passage reference is made to God’s choice, and choice necessarily
supposes a selection, the taking of some and the leaving of others. The chooser here is God
Himself, as said the Lord Jesus to the apostles, “Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you” (Joh 15:16). The number chosen is strictly defined—“not many wise men after the flesh,
not many noble,” etc., which agrees with Matthew 20:16, “So the last shall be first, and the

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

37

first last; for many be called, but few chosen.” So much then for the fact of God’s choice; now
mark the objects of His choice.
3. The objects of God’s choice
The ones spoken of above as chosen of God are “the weak things of the world, base things of
the world, and things which are despised” (1Co 1:26-29). But why? To demonstrate and magnify His grace. God’s ways as well as His thoughts are utterly at variance with man’s. The carnal
mind would have supposed that a selection had been made from the ranks of the opulent and
influential, the amiable and cultured, so that Christianity might have won the approval and
applause of the world by its pageantry and fleshly glory. Ah, but “that which is highly esteemed
among men is abomination in the sight of God” (Luk 16:15).
God chooses the “base things.” He did so in Old Testament times. The nation that He singled out to be the depository of His holy oracles and the channel through which the promised
seed should come was not the ancient Egyptians, the imposing Babylonians, nor the highly
civilized and cultured Greeks. No; that people upon whom Jehovah set His love and regarded
as “the apple 4 of his eye” (Deu 32:10) were the despised, nomadic Hebrews. So it was when our
Lord tabernacled among men. The ones whom He took into favored intimacy with Himself and
commissioned to go forth as His ambassadors were, for the most part, unlettered fishermen.
And so it has been ever since. So it is today: at the present rates of increase, it will not be long
before it is manifested 5 that the Lord has more in despised China who are really His, than He
has in the highly favored U.S.A.; more among the uncivilized blacks of Africa, than He has in
cultured Germany! And the purpose of God’s choice, the raison d’ etre 6 of the selection He has
made, is “that no flesh should glory in his presence.” There being nothing whatever in the objects of His choice that should entitle them to His special favors, then all the praise will be
freely ascribed to the exceeding riches of His manifold grace.
a. Ephesians 1:3-5, 11
“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ:
According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy and without blame before him; Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will...In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according to the purpose of him who worketh all
things after the counsel of his own will.”
Here again we are told at what point in time—if time it could be called—when God made
choice of those who were to be His children by Jesus Christ. It was not after Adam had fallen
and plunged his race into sin and wretchedness, but long ere Adam saw the light, even before
the world itself was founded, that God chose us in Christ. Here also we learn the purpose that
God had before Him in connection with His own elect: it was that they “should be holy and
without blame before him”; it was “unto the adoption of children”; it was that they should “obtain an inheritance.” Here also we discover the motive which prompted Him. It was “in love”
4

apple – The reference is to the pupil of the eye; thus the most tender part of the body and the most cared
for.
5
manifested – made clear or evident; shown plainly; revealed.
6
raison d’ etre – French: reason for being; justification for existence.

38

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

that He “predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself ”—a statement that refutes the oft made and wicked charge that, for God to decide the eternal destiny of
His creatures before they are born, is tyrannical and unjust. Finally, we are informed here,
that in this matter He took counsel with none, but that we are “predestinated according to the
good pleasure of his will.”
b. 2 Thessalonians 2:13
“But we are bound to give thanks alway to God for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because
God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and
belief of the truth.”
There are three things here which deserve special attention. First, the fact that we are expressly told that God’s elect are “chosen to salvation.” Language could not be more explicit.
How summarily do these words dispose of the sophistries 7 and equivocations of all who would
make election refer to nothing but external privileges or rank in service! It is to “salvation”
itself that God hath chosen us.
Second, we are warned here that election unto salvation does not disregard the use of appropriate means: 8 salvation is reached through “sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the
truth.” It is not true that, because God has chosen a certain one to salvation, he will be saved
willy-nilly, whether he believes or not—nowhere do the Scriptures so represent it. The same
God Who predestined the end also appointed the means; the same God Who “chose unto salvation” decreed that His purpose should be realized through the work of the Spirit and belief of
the truth.
Third, that God has chosen us unto salvation is a profound cause for fervent praise. Note
how strongly the apostle expresses this—“we are bound to give thanks always to God for you,
brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation,”
etc. Instead of shrinking back in horror from the doctrine of predestination, the believer, when
he sees this blessed truth as it is unfolded in the Word, discovers a ground for gratitude and
thanksgiving such as nothing else affords, save the unspeakable gift of the Redeemer Himself.
c. 2 Timothy 1:9
“Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began.”
How plain and pointed is the language of Holy Writ! It is man who, by his words, darkeneth
counsel (Job 38:2). It is impossible to state the case more clearly, or strongly, than it is stated
here. Our salvation is not “according to our works”; that is to say, it is not due to anything in
us, nor the rewarding of anything from us; instead, it is the result of God’s own “purpose and
grace”; and this grace was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. It is by grace we are
saved, and in the purpose of God this grace was bestowed upon us not only before we saw the
light, not only before Adam’s fall, but even before that far distant “beginning” of Genesis 1:1.
Herein lies the unassailable comfort of God’s people. If His choice has been from eternity, it
7
8

sophistries – clever but deceitful arguments.
means – instruments through which God works to communicate to the hearts of men.

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

39

will last to eternity! “Nothing can survive to eternity but what came from eternity, and what
has so come, will” (George S. Bishop).
d. 1 Peter 1:2
“Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience
and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.”
Here, again, election by the Father precedes the work of the Holy Spirit in, and the obedience of faith by, those who are saved; thus taking it entirely off creature-ground, and resting it
in the sovereign pleasure of the Almighty. The “foreknowledge of God the Father” does not
here refer to His prescience of all things, but signifies that the saints were all eternally present
in Christ before the mind of God. God did not “foreknow” that certain ones who heard the
gospel would believe it apart from the fact that He had “ordained” these certain ones to eternal
life. What God’s prescience saw in all men was love of sin and hatred of Himself. The “foreknowledge” of God is based upon His own decrees as is clear from Acts 2:23, “Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain.” Note the order here: first God’s “determinate counsel” (His
decree), and second His “foreknowledge.” So it is again in Romans 8:28-29, “For whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son,” but the first word
here, “for,” looks back to the preceding verse and the last clause of it reads, “to them who are
the called according to his purpose”—these are the ones whom He did “foreknow and predestinate.” Finally, it needs to be pointed out that when we read in Scripture of God “knowing”
certain people, the word is used in the sense of knowing with approbation 9 and love: “But if
any man love God, the same is known of him” (1Co 8:3). To the hypocrites Christ will yet say,
“I never knew you”—He never loved them. “Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the
Father” signifies, then, chosen by Him as the special objects of His approbation and love.
4. Summary
Summarizing the teaching of these seven passages we learn
a) that God has “ordained to eternal life” certain ones, and that in consequence of His ordination they, in due time, “believe”;
b) that God’s ordination to salvation of His own elect is not due to any good thing in them
nor to anything meritorious from them, but solely of “His grace”;
c) that God has designedly selected the most unlikely objects to be the recipients of His special favors in order that “no flesh should glory in his presence”;
d) that God chose His people in Christ before the foundation of the world, not because they
were so, but in order that they “should be holy and without blame before him” (Eph 1:4);
e) that having selected certain ones to salvation, He also decreed the means by which His
eternal counsel should be made good;
f) that the very “grace” by which we are saved was, in God’s purpose, “given us in Christ Jesus before the world began”;
g) that long before they were actually created, God’s elect stood present before His mind,
were “foreknown” by Him, i.e., were the definite objects of His eternal love.
9

approbation – warm approval; liking; praise.

40

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Before turning to the next division of this chapter, a further word concerning the subjects
of God’s predestinating grace. We go over this ground again because it is at this point that the
doctrine of God’s sovereignty in predestining certain ones to salvation is most frequently assaulted. Perverters of this truth invariably seek to find some cause outside God’s own will
which moves Him to bestow salvation on sinners. Something or other is attributed to the creature that entitles him to receive mercy at the hands of the Creator. We return then to the
question, Why did God choose the ones He did?
What was there in the elect themselves that attracted God’s heart to them? Was it because
of certain virtues they possessed? because they were generous-hearted, sweet-tempered, truthspeaking? in a word, because they were “good,” that God chose them? No, for our Lord said,
“There is none good but one, that is God” (Mat 19:17). Was it because of any good works they
had performed? No, for it is written, “There is none that doeth good, no, not one” (Rom 3:12).
Was it because they evidenced an earnestness and zeal in inquiring after God? No, for it is written again, “There is none that seeketh after God” (Rom 3:11). Was it because God foresaw they
would believe? No; for how can those who are “dead in trespasses and sins” believe in Christ?
How could God foreknow some men as believers when belief was impossible to them? Scripture declares that we “believed through grace” (Act 18:27). Faith is God’s gift, and apart from
this gift none would believe. The cause of His choice then lies within Himself and not in the
objects of His choice. He chose the ones He did simply because He chose to choose them.
“Sons we are by God’s election; Who on Jesus Christ believe,
By eternal destination, Sovereign grace we now receive,
Lord Thy mercy, Doth both grace and glory give!”

C. The Limited Design of the Son in the Atonement
1. For whom did Christ die?
For whom did Christ die? 10 It surely does not need arguing that the Father had an express
purpose in giving Him to die, or that God the Son had a definite design before Him in laying
down His life—“Known unto God are all his works from the beginning of the world” (Act
15:18). What then was the purpose of the Father and the design of the Son? We answer, Christ
died for “God’s elect.”
We are not unmindful of the fact that the limited design in the death of Christ has been the
subject of much controversy—what great truth revealed in Scripture has not? Nor do we forget that anything which has to do with the Person and work of our blessed Lord requires to be
handled with the utmost reverence, and that a “Thus saith the Lord” must be given in support
of every assertion we make. Our appeal shall be to the Law and to the Testimony.
For whom did Christ die? Who were the ones He intended to redeem by His bloodshedding? Surely the Lord Jesus had some absolute determination before Him when He went
to the cross. If He had, then it necessarily follows that the extent of that purpose was limited,
because an absolute determination of purpose must be effected. If the absolute determination
of Christ included all mankind, then all mankind would most certainly be saved. To escape this
10

For more on this, see For Whom Did Christ Die by Charles Spurgeon; The Atonement by John Murray; or
Free Grace Broadcaster 226, Christ upon the Cross—all available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

41

inevitable conclusion many have affirmed that there was not such absolute determination before Christ, that in His death a merely conditional provision of salvation has been made for all
mankind.
The refutation of this assertion is found in the promises made by the Father to His Son before He went to the cross, yea, before He became incarnate. The Old Testament Scriptures represent the Father as promising the Son a certain reward for His sufferings on behalf of sinners.
At this stage we shall confine ourselves to one or two statements recorded in the well-known
fifty-third of Isaiah. There we find God saying, “When thou shalt make his soul an offering for
sin, he shall see his seed,” that “He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied,”
and that God’s righteous Servant should “justify many” (vv. 10-11). But here we would pause
and ask, How could it be certain that Christ should “see his seed,” and “see of the travail of his
soul and be satisfied,” unless the salvation of certain members of the human race had been divinely decreed, and therefore was sure? How could it be certain that Christ should “justify
many,” if no effectual provision was made that any should receive Him as their Lord and Saviour? On the other hand, to insist that the Lord Jesus did expressly purpose the salvation of all
mankind is to charge Him with that which no intelligent being should be guilty of, namely, to
design that which by virtue of His omniscience He knew would never come to pass!
Hence, the only alternative left us is that, so far as the pre-determined purpose of His death
is concerned, Christ died for the elect only. Summing up in a sentence, which we trust will be
intelligible to every reader, we would say, Christ died not merely to make possible the salvation of all mankind, but to make certain the salvation of all that the Father had given to Him.
Christ died not simply to render sins pardonable, but “to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself ” (Heb 9:26). As to whose “sin” (i.e., guilt, as in 1Jo 1:7, etc.) has been “put away,” Scripture leaves us in no doubt: it was that of the elect, the “world” of God’s people (Joh 1:29)!
2. Evidences of limited design
a. Eternal choice
The limited design in the atonement follows, necessarily, from the eternal choice of the Father of certain ones unto salvation. The Scriptures inform us that, before the Lord became incarnate, He said, “Lo, I come, to do thy will O God” (Heb 10:7), and after He had become
incarnate He declared, “For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of
him that sent me” (Joh 6:38). If then God had from the beginning chosen certain ones to salvation, then, because the will of Christ was in perfect accord with the will of the Father, He
would not seek to enlarge upon His election. What we have just said is not merely a plausible
deduction of our own, but is in strict harmony with the express teaching of the Word. Again
and again our Lord referred to those whom the Father had “given” Him, and concerning
whom He was particularly exercised.
“All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no
wise cast out...And this is the Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath
given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day” (Joh 6:37,
39).
“These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is
come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee; as thou hast given him power
over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him...I have

42

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world: thine they
were, and thou gavest them me; and they have kept thy word...I pray for them: I pray
not for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine...Father, I
will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world” (Joh 17:1-2, 6, 9, 24).
Before the foundation of the world the Father predestinated a people to be conformed to the
image of His Son, and the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus was in order to the carrying out of the divine purpose.
b. Nature of the atonement
The very nature of the atonement evidences that, in its application to sinners, it was limited
in the purpose of God. The atonement of Christ may be considered from two chief viewpoints—Godward and manward. Godward, the cross-work of Christ was a propitiation, an appeasing of divine wrath, a satisfaction rendered to divine justice and holiness; manward, it was
a substitution, the Innocent taking the place of the guilty, the Just dying for the unjust. But a
strict substitution of a Person for persons, and the infliction upon Him of voluntary sufferings,
involve the definite recognition—on the part of the Substitute and of the One He is to propitiate—of the persons for whom He acts, whose sins He bears, whose legal obligations He discharges. Furthermore, if the lawgiver accepts the satisfaction that is made by the substitute,
then those for whom the substitute acts, whose place he takes, must necessarily be acquitted.
If I am in debt and unable to discharge it, and another comes forward and pays my creditor in
full and receives a receipt in acknowledgment, then, in the sight of the law, my creditor no
longer has any claim upon me.
On the cross, the Lord Jesus gave Himself a ransom, and that it was accepted by God was attested by the open grave three days later. The question we would here raise is, “For whom was
this ransom offered?” If it was offered for all mankind, then the debt incurred by every man
has been cancelled. If Christ bore in His own body on the tree the sins of all men without exception, then none will perish. If Christ was “made a curse” for all of Adam’s race, then none
are now “under condemnation.” “Payment God cannot twice demand, first at my bleeding
Surety’s hand and then again at mine.” But Christ did not discharge the debts of all men without exception, for some there are who will be “cast into prison” (cf. 1Pe 3:19, where the same
Greek word for “prison” occurs), and they shall “by no means come out thence, till they have
paid the uttermost farthing” (Mat 5:26)—which, of course, will never be.
Christ did not bear the sins of all mankind, for some there are who “die in their sins” (Joh
8:21), and whose “sin remaineth” (Joh 9:41). Christ was not “made a curse” for all of Adam’s
race, for some there are to whom He will yet say, “Depart from me ye cursed ” (Mat 25:41). To
say that Christ died for all alike, to say that He became the substitute and surety of the whole
human race, to say that He suffered on behalf of and in the stead of all mankind, is to say that
He “bore the curse for many who are now bearing the curse for themselves; that He suffered
punishment for many who are now lifting up their own eyes in hell, being in torments; that
He paid the redemption price for many who shall yet pay in their own eternal anguish the
wages of sin, which is death” (George S. Bishop). But, on the other hand, to say as Scripture
says, that Christ was stricken for the transgressions of God’s people, to say that He gave His
life “for the sheep,” to say He gave His life a ransom “for many,” is to say that He made an

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

43

atonement that fully atones; it is to say He paid a price that actually ransoms; it is to say He
was set forth a propitiation that really propitiates; it is to say He is a Saviour Who truly saves.
c. Priesthood
Closely connected with and confirmatory of what we have said above, is the teaching of
Scripture concerning our Lord’s priesthood. It is as the great High Priest that Christ now
makes intercession. But for whom does He intercede? for the whole human race, or only for
His own people? The answer furnished by the New Testament to this question is clear as a
sunbeam. Our Saviour has entered into heaven itself “now to appear in the presence of God for
us” (Heb 9:24), that is, for those who are “partakers of the heavenly calling” (Heb 3:1). And
again it is written, “Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them” (Heb 7:25). This is in strict
accord with the Old Testament type. 11 After slaying the sacrificial animal, Aaron went into the
Holy of Holies as the representative and on behalf of the people of God: it was the names of Israel’s tribes that were engraven on his breastplate, and it was in their interests he appeared
before God. Agreeable to this are our Lord’s words in John 17:9—“I pray for them: I pray not
for the world, but for them which thou hast given me; for they are thine.”
Another Scripture that deserves careful attention in this connection is found in Romans 8.
In verse 33 the question is asked, “Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect?” and
then follows the inspired answer—“It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also
maketh intercession for us.”
Note particularly that the death and intercession of Christ have one and the same objects!
As it was in the type so it is with the antitype 12—expiation 13 and supplication are co-extensive.
If then Christ intercedes for the elect only, and “not for the world,” then He died for them only. And observe further that the death, resurrection, exaltation, and intercession of the Lord
Jesus are here assigned as the reason why none can lay any “charge” against God’s elect. Let
those who would still take issue with what we are advancing weigh carefully the following
question—If the death of Christ extends equally to all, how does it become security against a
“charge,” seeing that all who believe not are “under condemnation” (Joh 3:18)?
d. Power
The number of those who share the benefits of Christ’s death is determined not only by the
nature of the atonement and the priesthood of Christ, but also by His power. Grant that the
One Who died upon the cross was God manifest in the flesh and it follows inevitably that what
Christ has purposed that will He perform; that what He has purchased that will He possess;
that what He has set His heart upon that will He secure. If the Lord Jesus possesses all power
in heaven and earth, then none can successfully resist His will.
But it may be said, [although] this is true in the abstract, nevertheless Christ refuses to exercise this power, inasmuch as He will never force anyone to receive Him as their Lord and
Saviour. In one sense that is true, but in another sense it is positively untrue. The salvation of
any sinner is a matter of divine power. By nature the sinner is at enmity with God, and naught
11

type – symbol representing something else with similar characteristics.
antitype – person or thing represented by the type or symbol.
13
expiation – removal or covering of sin.
12

44

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

but divine power operating within him can overcome this enmity; hence it is written, “No man
can come unto me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him” (Joh 6:44). It is the divine power overcoming the sinner’s innate enmity that makes him willing to come to Christ
[so] that he might have life.
But this “enmity” is not overcome in all—why? Is it because the enmity is too strong to be
overcome? Are there some hearts so steeled against Him that Christ is unable to gain entrance? To answer in the affirmative is to deny His omnipotence. In the final analysis, it is not
a question of the sinner’s willingness or unwillingness, for by nature all are unwilling. Willingness to come to Christ is the finished product of divine power operating in the human
heart and will in overcoming man’s inherent and chronic “enmity,” as it is written, “Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power” (Psa 110:3). To say that Christ is unable to win to
Himself those who are unwilling, is to deny that all power in heaven and earth is His.
To say that Christ cannot put forth His power without destroying man’s responsibility is a
begging of the question here raised, for He has put forth His power and made willing those
who have come to Him, and if He did this without destroying their responsibility, why “cannot” He do so with others? If He is able to win the heart of one sinner to Himself, why not that
of another? To say, as is usually said, the others will not let Him, is to impeach His sufficiency.
It is a question of His will. If the Lord Jesus has decreed, desired, purposed the salvation of all
mankind, then the entire human race will be saved, or, otherwise, He lacks the power to make
good His intentions; and in such a case it could never be said, “He shall see of the travail of his
soul and be satisfied” (Isa 53:11). The issue raised involves the deity of the Saviour, for a defeated Saviour cannot be God.
3. What saith the Scriptures?
Having reviewed some of the general principles which require us to believe that the death of
Christ was limited in its design, we turn now to consider some of the explicit statements of
Scripture that expressly affirm it.
a. Isaiah 53:8
In that wondrous and matchless fifty-third of Isaiah, God tells us concerning His Son, “He
was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was
cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken” (v. 8).
In perfect harmony with this was the word of the angel to Joseph, “thou shalt call his name
JESUS, for he shall save his people from their sins” (Mat 1:21), i.e., not merely Israel, but all
whom the Father had “given” Him. Our Lord Himself declared, “The Son of man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many” (Mat 20:28)—but
why have said “for many” if all without exception were included? It was “his people” whom He
“redeemed” (Luk 1:68). It was for “the sheep” and not the “goats” that the Good Shepherd gave
His life (Joh 10:11). It was the “church of God” that He “purchased with his own blood” (Act
20:28).
b. John 11:49-52
If there is one Scripture more than any other upon which we should be willing to rest our
case it is John 11:49-52. Here we are told,
“And one of them, named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said unto
them, Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient for us, that one man

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

45

should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not. And this spake he not of
himself: but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation; And not for that nation only, but that also he should gather together in one the
children of God that were scattered abroad.”
Here we are told that Caiaphas “prophesied not of himself,” that is, like those employed by God
in Old Testament times (see 2Pe 1:21), his prophecy originated not with himself, but he spake
as he was moved by the Holy Spirit; thus is the value of his utterance carefully guarded and
the divine source of this revelation expressly vouched for. Here, too, we are definitely informed
that Christ died for “that nation,” i.e., Israel, and also for the one body, His church, for it is
into the church that the children of God—“scattered” among the nations—are now being
gathered “together in one.” And is it not remarkable that the members of the church are here
called “children of God” even before Christ died and, therefore, before He commenced to build
His church! The vast majority of them had not then been born, yet they were regarded as
“children of God”; children of God because they had been chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world, and therefore “predestinated unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself ” (Eph 1:4-5). In like manner, Christ said, “Other sheep I have [not “shall have”] which
are not of this fold” (Joh 10:16).
c. The last week of ministry
If ever the real design of the cross was uppermost in the heart and speech of our blessed
Saviour, it was during the last week of His earthly ministry. What then do the Scriptures that
treat of this portion of His ministry record in connection with our present inquiry? They say,
“When Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto the
Father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end” (Joh 13:1).
They tell us how He said, “Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends” (Joh 15:13). They record His word, “For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they also
might be sanctified through the truth” (Joh 17:19); which means that for the sake of His own,
those “given” to Him by the Father, He separated Himself unto the death of the cross. One
may well ask, Why such discrimination of terms if Christ died for all men indiscriminately?
d. 2 Corinthians 5:14, 17
Ere closing this section of the chapter, we shall consider briefly a few of those passages that
seem to teach most strongly an unlimited design in the death of Christ.
In 2 Corinthians 5:14 we read, “One died for all”—but that is not all this Scripture affirms.
If the entire verse and passage from which these words are quoted be carefully examined, it
will be found that instead of teaching an unlimited atonement, it emphatically argues a limited design in the death of Christ. The whole verse reads, “For the love of Christ constraineth
us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead.” It should be pointed out
that in the Greek there is the definite article before the last “all,” and that the verb here is in
the aorist tense and therefore should read, “We thus judge: that if one died for all, then the all
died.” The apostle is here drawing a conclusion, as is clear from the words “we thus judge, that
if...then were.” His meaning is that those for whom the One died are regarded, judicially, as
having died too. The next verse goes on to say, “And he died for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again.” The
One not only died but “rose again,” and so, too, did the “all” for whom He died, for it is here
said they “live.” Those for whom a substitute acts are legally regarded as having acted them-

46

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

selves. In the sight of the Law the substitute and those whom he represents are one. So it is in
the sight of God. Christ was identified with His people and His people were identified with
Him, hence when He died they died (judicially), and when He rose they rose also.
But further we are told in this passage (v. 17), that if any man be in Christ he is a new creation; he has received a new life, in fact as well as in the sight of the Law; hence, the “all” for
whom Christ died are here bidden to live henceforth no more unto themselves, “but unto him
which died for them, and rose again.” In other words, those who belonged to this “all” for
whom Christ died, are here exhorted to manifest practically in their daily lives what is true of
them judicially: they are to “live unto Christ who died for them.” Thus the “one died for all” is
defined for us: the “all” for which Christ died are they that “live,” and that are here bidden to
live “unto him.”
This passage, then, teaches three important truths, and, the better to show its scope, we
mention them in their inverse order:
• certain ones are here bidden to live no more unto themselves, but unto Christ;
• the ones thus admonished are “they which live,” that is, live spiritually, hence the children
of God, for they alone of mankind possess spiritual life—all others being dead in trespasses and sins;
• those who do thus live are the ones—the “all,” the “them”—for whom Christ died and rose
again.
This passage therefore teaches 1) that Christ died for all His people, the elect, those given to
Him by the Father; 2) that as the result of His death (and rising again “for them”) they “live”—
and the elect are the only ones who do thus “live”; and 3) that this life, which is theirs through
Christ, must be lived “unto him”—Christ’s love must now “constrain” them.
e. 1 Timothy 2:5-6
“For there is one God, and one mediator, between God and men [not “man,” for this
would have been a generic term and signified mankind. O the accuracy of Holy Writ!],
the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time.”
It is upon the words “who gave himself a ransom for all” we would now comment. In Scripture, the word all (as applied to humankind) is used in two senses: absolutely and relatively. In
some passages it means all without exception; in others it signifies all without distinction.
Which of these meanings it bears in any particular passage must be determined by the context
and decided by a comparison of parallel Scriptures.
That the word all is used in a relative and restricted sense, and in such case means all without distinction and not all without exception, is clear from a number of Scriptures, from
which we select two or three as samples. “And there went out unto him all the land of Judea,
and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their
sins” (Mar 1:5). Does this mean that every man, woman, and child, from “all the land of Judea
and they of Jerusalem” were baptized of John in Jordan? Surely not. Luke 7:30 distinctly says,
“But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.” Then what does “all baptized of him” mean? We answer it does not mean all
without exception, but all without distinction, that is, all classes and conditions of men. The
same explanation applies to Luke 3:21.

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

47

Again we read, “And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the people
came unto him; and he sat down, and taught them” (Joh 8:2); are we to understand this expression absolutely or relatively? Does “all the people” mean all without exception or all without distinction, that is, all classes and conditions of people? Manifestly the latter, for the
Temple was not able to accommodate everybody that was in Jerusalem at this time, namely,
the Feast of Tabernacles. Again, we read in Acts 22:15, “For thou [Paul] shalt be his witness
unto all men of what thou hast seen and heard.” Surely “all men” here does not mean every
member of the human race.
Now, we submit that the words “who gave himself a ransom for all” in 1 Timothy 2:6, mean
all without distinction and not all without exception. He gave Himself a ransom for men of all
nationalities, of all generations, of all classes; in a word, for all the elect, as we read in Revelation 5:9, “For thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred,
and tongue, and people, and nation.”
That this is not an arbitrary definition of the “all” in our passage is clear from Matthew
20:28, where we read, “The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
to give his life a ransom for many,” which limitation would be quite meaningless if He gave
Himself a ransom for all without exception. Furthermore, the qualifying words here, “to be
testified in due time,” must be taken into consideration. If Christ gave Himself a ransom for
the whole human race, in what sense will this be “testified in due time,” seeing that multitudes of men will certainly be eternally lost? But if our text means that Christ gave Himself a
ransom for God’s elect, for all without distinction, without distinction of nationality, social
prestige, moral character, age or sex, then the meaning of these qualifying words is quite intelligible, for in “due time” this will be “testified” in the actual and accomplished salvation of every one of them.
f. Hebrews 2:9
“But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death,
crowned with glory and honor; that he by the grace of God should taste death for every
man.”
This passage need not detain us long. A false doctrine has been erected here on a false translation. There is no word whatever in the Greek corresponding to “man” in our English version.
In the Greek it is left in the abstract—“He tasted death for every.” The Revised Version has
correctly omitted “man” from the text, but has wrongly inserted it in italics. Others suppose
the word “thing” should be supplied—“He tasted death for every thing”—but this, too, we
deem a mistake. It seems to us that the words which immediately follow explain our text: “For
it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons
unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings” (Heb 2:10). It is
of “sons” the apostle is here writing, and we suggest an ellipsis of “son”—thus: “He tasted
death for every,” and supply “son” in italics. Thus instead of teaching the unlimited design of
Christ’s death, Hebrews 2:9-10 is in perfect accord with the other Scriptures we have quoted,
which set for the restricted purpose in the atonement: it was for the “sons” and not the human
race our Lord “tasted death.”
In closing this section of the chapter, let us say that the only limitation in the atonement
we have contended for arises from pure sovereignty; it is a limitation not of value and virtue,
but of design and application.

48

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

D. The Restricted Scope of the Holy Spirit in Quickening
1. The Godhead works together
We turn now to consider the sovereignty of God the Holy Spirit in salvation. Since the Holy
Spirit is one of the three persons in the blessed Trinity, it necessarily follows that He is in full
sympathy with the will and design of the other Persons of the Godhead. The eternal purpose of
the Father in election, the limited design in the death of the Son, and the restricted scope of
the Holy Spirit’s operations are in perfect accord. If the Father chose certain ones before the
foundation of the world and gave them to His Son, and if it was for them that Christ gave
Himself a ransom, then the Holy Spirit is not now working to “bring the world to Christ.” The
mission of the Holy Spirit in the world today is to apply the benefits of Christ’s redemptive
sacrifice. The question that is now to engage us is not the extent of the Holy Spirit’s power—
on that point there can be no doubt, it is infinite—but what we shall seek to show is that His
power and operations are directed by divine wisdom and sovereignty.
2. The sovereign will of the Holy Spirit
We have just said that the power and operations of the Holy Spirit are directed by divine
wisdom and indisputable sovereignty. In proof of this assertion we appeal first to our Lord’s
words to Nicodemus in John 3:8, “The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the
sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that
is born of the Spirit.” A comparison is here drawn between the wind and the Spirit. The comparison is a double one: first, both are sovereign in their actions, and second, both are mysterious in their operations. The comparison is pointed out in the word “so.” The first point of
analogy is seen in the words where it listeth (or pleaseth); the second is found in the words
canst not tell. With the second point of analogy we are not now concerned, but upon the first
we would comment further.
“The wind bloweth where it listeth [i.e., pleaseth]...so is every one that is born of the Spirit.”
The wind is an element that man can neither harness nor hinder. The wind neither consults
man’s pleasure nor can it be regulated by his devices; so it is with the Spirit. The wind blows
when it pleases, where it pleases, as it pleases; so it is with the Spirit. The wind is regulated by
divine wisdom, yet, so far as man is concerned, it is absolutely sovereign in its operations; so it
is with the Spirit. Sometimes the wind blows so softly it scarcely rustles a leaf; at other times it
blows so loudly that its roar can be heard for miles. So it is in the matter of the new birth: with
some the Holy Spirit deals so gently that His work is imperceptible to human onlookers; with
14
others His action is so powerful, radical, revolutionary, that His operations are patent to
many. Sometimes the wind is purely local in its reach, at other times widespread in its scope.
So it is with the Spirit: today He acts on one or two souls, tomorrow He may, as at Pentecost,
“prick in the heart” a whole multitude. But whether He works on few or many, He consults
not man. He acts as He pleases. The new birth is due to the sovereign will of the Spirit.
3. The Holy Spirit effects salvation
Each of the three persons in the blessed Trinity is concerned with our salvation: a) with the
Father it is predestination; with the Son propitiation; with the Spirit regeneration. b) The Fa-

14

patent – open to view or knowledge; manifest; evident; plain.

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

49

ther chose us; the Son died for us; the Spirit quickens 15 us. c) The Father was concerned about
us; the Son shed His blood for us, the Spirit performs His work within us. d) What the One did
was eternal, what the Other did was external, what the Spirit does is internal. It is with the
work of the Spirit we are now concerned, with His work in the new birth, and particularly His
sovereign operations in the new birth. e) The Father purposed our new birth; the Son has
made possible (by His “travail”) the new birth; but it is the Spirit who effects the new birth:
“born of the Spirit” (Joh 3:6).
The new birth is solely the work of God the Spirit; and man has no part or lot in it, this
from the very nature of the case. Birth altogether excludes the idea of any effort or work on
the part of the one who is born. Personally we have no more to do with our spiritual birth than
we had with our natural birth. The new birth is a spiritual resurrection, a “passing from death
unto life” (Joh 5:24) and, clearly, resurrection is altogether outside of man’s province. No
corpse can re-animate itself. Hence it is written, “It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh
profiteth nothing” (Joh 6:63).
4. Quickening precedes faith
But the Spirit does not “quicken” everybody—why? The usual answer returned to this question is, Because everybody does not “trust” in Christ. It is supposed that the Holy Spirit quickens only those who believe—but this is to put the cart before the horse. Faith is not the cause
of the new birth, but the consequence of it. This ought not to need arguing. Faith (in God) is
an exotic, something that is not native to the human heart. If faith were a natural product of
the human heart, the exercise of a principle common to human nature, it would never have
been written, “All men have not faith” (2Th 3:2). Faith is a spiritual grace, the fruit of the spiritual nature, and because the unregenerate are spiritually dead—“dead in trespasses and sins”
(Eph 2:1)—then it follows that faith from them is impossible, for a dead man cannot believe
anything. “So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God” (Rom 8:8)—but they could if
it were possible for the flesh to “believe.” Compare with this last-quoted Scripture Hebrews
11:6, “But without faith it is impossible to please him.” Can God be “pleased” or satisfied with
anything that does not have its origin in Himself ?
That the work of the Holy Spirit precedes our believing is unequivocally established by 2
Thessalonians 2:13, “God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.” Note that “sanctification of the Spirit” comes before
and makes possible “belief of the truth.” What then is the “sanctification of the Spirit?” We answer: the new birth. In Scripture “sanctification” always means “separation,” separation for
something and unto something or someone. Let us now amplify our assertion that the “sanctification of the Spirit” corresponds to the new birth and points to the positional effect of it.
Here is a servant of God who preaches the gospel to a congregation in which are an hundred unsaved people. He brings before them the teaching of Scripture concerning their ruined
and lost condition: he speaks of God, His character and righteous demands; he tells of Christ
meeting God’s demands, and dying the Just for the unjust (1Pe 3:18), and declares that
through “this Man” is now preached the forgiveness of sins; he closes by urging the lost to believe what God has said in His Word and receive His Son as their Lord and Saviour. The meeting is over; the congregation disperses. Ninety-nine of the unsaved have refused to come to
15

quickens – makes alive.

50

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Christ that they might have life, and go out into the night having no hope and without God in
the world. But the hundredth heard the Word of life; the seed sown fell into ground that had
been prepared by God. He believed the good news and goes home rejoicing that his name is
written in heaven. He has been “born again,” and just as a newly-born babe in the natural
world begins life by clinging instinctively, in its helplessness, to its mother, so this new-born
soul has clung to Christ. Just as we read, “The Lord opened” the heart of Lydia “that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul” (Act 16:14), so in the case supposed above:
the Holy Spirit quickened that one before he believed the gospel message. Here then is the
“sanctification of the Spirit”: this one soul who has been born again has, by virtue of his new
birth, been separated from the other ninety-nine. Those born again are, by the Spirit, set apart
from those who are dead in trespasses and sins.
A beautiful type of the operations of the Holy Spirit antecedent 16 to the sinner’s “belief of
the truth,” is found in the first chapter of Genesis. We read in verse 2, “And the earth was
without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.” The original Hebrew
here might be literally rendered thus: “And the earth had become a desolate ruin, and darkness was upon the face of the deep.” In “the beginning,” the earth was not created in the condition described in verse 2. Between the first two verses of Genesis 1 some awful catastrophe
had occurred—possibly the fall of Satan—and, as the consequence, the earth had been blasted
17
and blighted, and had become a “desolate ruin,” lying beneath a pall of “darkness.” Such also
is the history of man. Today, man is not in the condition in which he left the hands of his Creator: an awful catastrophe has happened, and now man is a “desolate ruin” and in total “darkness” concerning spiritual things. Next we read in Genesis 1 how God refashioned the ruined
earth and created new beings to inhabit it. First we read, “And the Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the water.” Next we are told, “And God said, Let there be light; and there was light.”
The order is the same in the new creation: there is first the action of the Spirit, and then the
Word of God giving light. Before the Word found entrance into the scene of desolation and
darkness, bringing with it the light, the Spirit of God “moved.” So it is in the new creation.
“The entrance of thy word giveth light” (Psa 119:130), but before it can enter the darkened
human heart the Spirit of God must operate upon it. 18
To return to 2 Thessalonians 2:13: “But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you,
brethren beloved of the Lord, because God hath from the beginning chosen you to salvation
through sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth.” The order of thought here is most
important and instructive: first, God’s eternal choice; second, the sanctification of the Spirit;
third, belief of the truth. Precisely the same order is found in 1 Peter 1:2, “Elect according to
the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification of the Spirit, unto obedience and
16

antecedent – before.
This is a minority view among those who interpret the Bible literally.
18
The priority contended for above is rather in order of nature than of time, just as the effect must ever be
preceded by the cause. A blind man must have his eyes opened before he can see, and yet there is no interval of time between the one and the other. As soon as his eyes are opened, he sees. So a man must be born
again before he can “see the kingdom of God” (Joh 3:3). Seeing the Son is necessary to believing in Him.
Unbelief is attributed to spiritual blindness: those who believed not the “report” of the gospel “saw no
beauty” in Christ that they should desire Him. The work of the Spirit in “quickening” the one dead in
sins, precedes faith in Christ—just as cause ever precedes effect. But no sooner is the heart turned toward
Christ by the Spirit, than the Saviour is embraced by the sinner.—A.W.P.
17

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

51

sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.” We take it that the “obedience” here is the “obedience
to the faith” (Rom 1:5), which appropriates the virtues of the sprinkled blood of the Lord Jesus. So then before the “obedience” (of faith, cf. Heb 5:9), there is the work of the Spirit setting us apart, and behind that is the election of God the Father. The ones “sanctified of the
Spirit” then, are they whom “God hath from the beginning chosen to salvation” (2Th 2:13),
those who are “elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father” (1Pe 1:2).
5. John 16:8-11
But, it may be said, is not the present mission of the Holy Spirit to “reprove [i.e., convict]
the world of sin”? And we answer, it is not. The mission of the Spirit is threefold: to glorify
Christ, to vivify 19 the elect, to edify the saints.
“And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me; Of righteousness, because I go to my
Father, and ye see me no more; Of judgment, because the prince of this world is
judged.”
John 16:8-11 does not describe the “mission” of the Spirit, but sets forth the significance of
His presence here in the world. It treats not of His subjective work in sinners, showing them
their need of Christ by searching their consciences and striking terror to their hearts; what we
have there is entirely objective. To illustrate, suppose I saw a man hanging on the gallows, of
what would that “convince” me? Why, that he was a murderer. How would I thus be convinced? By reading the record of his trial? by hearing a confession from his own lips? No; but
by the fact that he was hanging there. So the fact that the Holy Spirit is here, furnishes proof
of the world’s guilt, of God’s righteousness, and of the devil's judgment.
The Holy Spirit ought not to be here at all. That is a startling statement, but we make it deliberately. Christ is the One Who ought to be here. He was sent here by the Father, but the
world did not want Him, would not have Him, hated Him, and cast Him out. And the presence
of the Spirit here instead evidences its guilt. The coming of the Spirit was a proof to demonstration of the resurrection, ascension, and glory of the Lord Jesus. His presence on earth reverses the world’s verdict, showing that God has set aside the blasphemous judgment in the
palace of Israel’s high priest and in the hall of the Roman governor. The “reproof ” of the Spirit
abides, and abides altogether irrespective of the world’s reception or rejection of His testimony.
Had our Lord been referring here to the gracious work that the Spirit would perform in
those who should be brought to feel [subjectively] their need of Him, He had said that the
Spirit would convict men of their un-righteousness, their lack of righteousness. But this is not
the thought here at all. The descent of the Spirit from heaven establishes God’s righteousness,
Christ’s righteousness. The proof of that is: Christ has gone to the Father. Had Christ been an
impostor, as the religious world insisted when they cast Him out, the Father had not received
Him. The fact that the Father did exalt Him to His own right hand demonstrates that He was
innocent of the charges laid against Him; and the proof that the Father has received Him is
the presence now of the Holy Spirit on earth, for Christ has sent Him from the Father (Joh
16:7)! The world was unrighteous in casting Him out, the Father righteous in glorifying
Him—and this is what the Spirit’s presence here establishes.
19

vivify – to impart life; animate; to bring to spiritual life from spiritual deadness.

52

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

“He will reprove the world…of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged” (v.
11). This is the logical and inevitable climax. The world is brought in guilty for their rejection
of, for their refusal to receive, Christ. Its condemnation is exhibited by the Father’s exaltation
of the spurned One. Therefore nothing awaits the world, and its prince, but judgment. The
“judgment” of Satan is already established by the Spirit’s presence here, for Christ, through
death, set at nought “him who had the power of death, that is, the devil” (Heb 2:14). When
God’s time comes for the Spirit to depart from the earth, then His sentence will be executed,
both on the world and its prince. In the light of this unspeakably solemn passage, we need not
be surprised to find Christ saying, “The Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him.” No, the world wants Him not; He condemns the
world.
“And when he is come, he will reprove [or better: “convict,” bring in guilty] the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment: Of sin, because they believe not on me; Of righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; Of judgment, because the prince
of this world is judged” (Joh 16:8-11). Three things, then, the presence of the Holy Spirit on
earth demonstrates to the world: first, its sin, because the world refused to believe on Christ;
second, God’s righteousness in exalting to His own right hand the One cast out and now no
more seen by the world; third, judgment, because Satan, the world’s prince, is already judged,
though execution of his judgment is yet future.
Thus the Holy Spirit’s presence here displays things as they really are. We repeat, John
16:8-11 makes no reference to the mission of the Spirit of God in the world, for during this
dispensation, the Spirit has no mission and ministry worldward [i.e., to all the people of the
world]. The Holy Spirit is sovereign in His operations and His mission is confined to God’s
elect: they are the ones He “comforts,” “seals,” guides into all truth, shows things to come, etc.
The work of the Spirit is necessary in order to the complete accomplishment of the Father’s
eternal purpose.
Speaking hypothetically, but reverently, be it said that if God had done nothing more than
given Christ to die for sinners, not a single sinner would ever have been saved. In order for any
sinner to see his need of a Saviour, and be willing to receive the Saviour he needs, the work of
the Holy Spirit upon and within him is imperatively required. Had God done nothing more
than given Christ to die for sinners and then sent forth His servants to proclaim salvation
through Jesus Christ, thus leaving sinners entirely to themselves to accept or reject as they
pleased, then every sinner would have rejected, because at heart every man hates God and is at
enmity with Him (Rom 1:30; 8:7). Therefore the work of the Holy Spirit was needed to bring
the sinner to Christ, to overcome his innate opposition, and compel him to accept the provision God has made. We say “compel” the sinner, for this is precisely what the Holy Spirit does,
has to do.
6. The marriage supper
This leads us to consider at some length, though as briefly as possible, the parable of “The
Marriage Supper.”
16
Then said he unto him, A certain man made a great supper, and bade many: 17 And
sent his servant at supper time to say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are
now
ready.
18
And they all with one consent began to make excuse. The first said unto him, I have

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

53

bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go and see it: I pray thee have me excused.
19
And another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them: I pray thee
have me excused. 20 And another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot
come. 21 So that servant came, and shewed his lord these things. Then the master of the
house being angry said to his servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the
city, and bring in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind. 22 And
the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room. 23 And
the lord said unto the servant, Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel [them]
to come in, that my house may be filled. 24 For I say unto you, That none of those men
which were bidden shall taste of my supper. (Luk 14:16-24)
2

The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his son,
And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding: and they
would not come. 4 Again, he sent forth other servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my fatlings are killed, and all
5
things are ready: come unto the marriage. But they made light of it, and went their
ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise: 6 And the remnant took his servants,
and entreated them spitefully, and slew them. 7 But when the king heard thereof, he
was wroth: and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burned up
their city. 8 Then saith he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which were
bidden were not worthy. 9 Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as ye shall
10
find, bid to the marriage. So those servants went out into the highways, and gathered
together all as many as they found, both bad and good: and the wedding was furnished
with guests. (Mat 22:2-10)
3

In Luke 14:16, we read, “A certain man made a great supper, and bade many.” By comparing
carefully what follows here with Matthew 22:2-10, several important distinctions will be observed. We take it that these passages are two independent accounts of the same parable, differing in detail according to the distinctive purpose and design of the Holy Spirit in each
Gospel. Matthew’s account, in harmony with the Spirit’s presentation there of Christ as the
King, says, “A certain king made a marriage for his son.” Luke’s account, where the Spirit presents Christ as the Son of Man, says, “A certain man made a great supper and bade many.”
Matthew 22:3 says, “And sent forth his servants”; Luke 14:17 says, “And sent his servant.” Now
what we wish particularly to call attention to, is that all through Matthew’s account it is “servants,” whereas in Luke it is always “servant.” The class of readers for whom we are writing are
those that believe, unreservedly, in the verbal inspiration of the Scriptures, and such will readily acknowledge there must be some reason for this change from the plural number in Matthew to the singular number in Luke. We believe the reason is a weighty one, and that
attention to this variation reveals an important truth.
We believe that the “servants” in Matthew, speaking generally, are all who go forth preaching the gospel, but that the “Servant” in Luke 14 is the Holy Spirit, for God the Son, in the
days of His earthly ministry, was the Servant of Jehovah (Isa 42:1). It will be observed that in
Matthew 22, the “servants” are sent forth to do three things: first, to “call” to the wedding (v.
3); second, to “tell those which are bidden…all things are ready: come unto the marriage” (v.
4); third, to “bid to the marriage” (v. 9)—and these three are the things that those who minister the gospel today are now doing. In Luke 14, the Servant is also sent forth to do three

54

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

things: first, He is to “say to them that were bidden, Come; for all things are now ready” (v.
17); second, He is to “bring in the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind” (v. 21);
third, He is to “compel them to come in” (v. 23), and the last two of these the Holy Spirit alone
can do!
In the above Scripture we see that “the servant,” the Holy Spirit, compels certain ones to
come in to the “supper”—and herein is seen His sovereignty, His omnipotency, His divine sufficiency. The clear implication from this word “compel” is that those whom the Holy Spirit
does “bring in” are not willing of themselves to come. This is exactly what we have sought to
show in previous paragraphs. By nature, God’s elect are children of wrath even as others (Eph
2:3), and as such their hearts are at enmity with God. But this “enmity” of theirs is overcome
by the Spirit, and He “compels” them to come in. Is it not clear, then, that the reason why
others are left outside, is not only because they are unwilling to go in, but also because the
Holy Spirit does not “compel” them to come in? Is it not manifest that the Holy Spirit is sovereign in the exercise of His power, that as the wind “bloweth where it pleaseth” so the Holy
Spirit operates where He pleases?
And now to sum up. We have sought to show the perfect consistency of God’s ways: that
each Person in the Godhead acts in sympathy and harmony with the Others. God the Father
elected certain ones to salvation, God the Son died for the elect, and God the Spirit quickens
the elect. Well may we sing,
Praise God from Whom all blessings flow,
Praise Him all creatures here below,
Praise Him above ye heavenly host,
20
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. 

20

Commonly known as “The Doxology” and sung to the melody “Old 100th.” The words are the final verse of
a longer hymn entitled “Awake, My Soul, and With the Sun,” written in 1674 by Thomas Ken, a clergyman in the Church of England.

4. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation

55

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

Chapter 3
1. What are the key points 21 of John 3:8, Hebrews 1:3, and Job 38:11?
2. What would result in a world where man can do as he pleases?
3. What are the key points of Psalm 147:15-18; Amos 4:7-10; Daniel 5:24; Proverbs 16:1, 9;
19:21; 21:1; 21:30; Job 23:13?
Chapter 4
4. Are some men too depraved and obstinate to be saved (see 1Ti 1:15)?
5. Explain Romans 3:21-23, Ephesians 2:3 regarding God’s sovereignty.
6. Summarize what we learn about sovereignty from Acts 13:48.
7. Why is it not possible for God’s choice of a person to be based upon foresight of his good
works (see 2Ti 1:9, 1Pe 1:2, Rom 8:28-29)?
8. For whom did Christ die? How do we know this? (Use Scripture.)
9. Describe biblical atonement.
10. How does Christ’s intercession support limited atonement?
11. How is the word all used in Scripture?
12. How does the work of the Holy Spirit in salvation speak against man’s free will to “make a
decision for Christ”?

21

See chapter 2 Questions for clarification regarding what is a “key point.”

5
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD
IN REPROBATION
“Behold therefore the goodness and
severity of God.”—Romans 11:22

A. Overview
1. Man’s opposition to this doctrine
In the last chapter, when treating of the sovereignty of God the Father in salvation, we examined seven passages that represent Him as making a choice from among the children of
men, and predestinating certain ones to be conformed to the image of His Son. The thoughtful
reader will naturally ask, And what of those who were not “ordained to eternal life?” The answer that is usually returned to this question, even by those who profess to believe what the
Scriptures teach concerning God’s sovereignty, is that God passes by the non-elect, leaves
them alone to go their own way, and in the end casts them into the Lake of Fire because they
refused His way and rejected the Saviour of His providing. But this is only a part of the truth;
the other part—that which is most offensive to the carnal mind—is either ignored or denied.
In view of the awful solemnity of the subject here before us, in view of the fact that today
almost all—even those who profess to be Calvinists 1—reject and repudiate this doctrine, and
in view of the fact that this is one of the points in our book which is likely to raise the most
controversy, we feel that an extended inquiry into this aspect of God’s truth is demanded. That
this branch of the subject of God’s sovereignty is profoundly mysterious we freely allow, yet
that is no reason why we should reject it. The trouble is that, nowadays, there are so many
who receive the testimony of God only so far as they can satisfactorily account for all the reasons and grounds of His conduct, which means they will accept nothing but that which can be
measured in the petty scales of their own limited capacities.
2. Reasoning from election
Stating it in its baldest form, the point now to be considered is, Has God foreordained certain ones to damnation? That many will be eternally damned is clear from Scripture; that each
one will be judged according to his works and reap as he has sown, and that in consequence
his “damnation is just” (Rom 3:8), is equally sure. That God decreed that the non-elect should
choose the course they follow, we now undertake to prove.
1

Calvinists – those who hold to the orthodox doctrine of the Christian faith as articulated during the Reformation.
