PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 14
Preparatory Direction IV: Desire Deliverance from Sin's Power

---

Chapter 12

PREPARATORY DIRECTIONS
Meditations upon God
8. Exercise Yourself to Meditate upon God
The eighth preparatory direction for the mortification of sin is:
Use and exercise yourself to such meditations as may serve to fill you at all times with selfabasement and thoughts of your own vileness.
Such meditations include the following.

a. The excellence and majesty of God
Be much in thoughtfulness about the excellence of the majesty of God and your own infinite, inconceivable distance from Him. Many thoughts of it cannot but fill you with a sense of
your own vileness, which strikes deep at the root of any indwelling sin. When Job comes to a
clear discovery of the greatness and the excellence of God, he is filled with self-abhorrence and
is pressed to humiliation (Job 42:5-6). And in what state does the prophet Habakkuk affirm
himself to be cast upon the apprehension of the majesty of God (Hab 3:16)? “With God,” says
Job, “is terrible majesty” (Job 37:22). Hence men of old thought that when they had seen God
they should die.
The Scripture abounds in this self-abasing consideration, comparing the men of the earth
to “grasshoppers,” to “vanity,” to the “dust of the balance,” in respect of God (Isa 40:12-25). Be
much in thoughts of this nature to abase the pride of your heart and to keep your soul humble
within you. There is nothing that will give you a greater indisposition to be imposed on by the
deceits of sin than such a frame of heart. Think greatly of the greatness of God.

b. Your unacquaintedness with God
Think much of your unacquaintedness with God. Though you know enough to keep you
low and humble, yet how little a portion is it that you know of Him! This contemplation cast
that wise man into the apprehension of himself which he expresses, “Surely I am more brutish
than any man, and have not the understanding of a man. I neither learned wisdom, nor have
the knowledge of the holy. Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who hath established all
the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what is his son’s name, if thou canst tell?” (Pro
30:2-4).
Labor with this also to take down the pride of your heart. What do you know of God? How
little a portion is it! How immense is He in His nature! Can you look without terror into the
abyss of eternity? You cannot bear the rays of His glorious being.

12. Preparatory Direction 8: Meditations upon God

61

Because I look on this consideration as of great use in our walking with God, so far as it
may have a consistency with that filial boldness which is given us in Jesus Christ to draw nigh
to the throne of grace (Heb 4:16), I shall further insist upon it, to give an abiding impression
of it to the souls of them who desire to walk humbly with God.

c. Men of high attainment yet know little of God
To keep your heart in continual awe of the majesty of God, consider that persons of the
most high and eminent attainment, of the nearest and most familiar communion with God, do
yet in this life know but a very little of Him and His glory. God reveals His name to Moses—
the most glorious attributes that He has manifested in the Covenant of Grace: “merciful and
gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in goodness and truth…” (Exo 34:57); yet all are but the
“back parts” of God (33:23). All that he knows by it is but little and low compared to the perfections of His glory. Hence it is with peculiar reference to Moses that it is said, “No man hath
seen God at any time” (Joh 1:18). Of him in comparison with Christ he speaks (1:17); and of
him it is here said, “No man”—no, not Moses, the most eminent among them—“hath seen
God at any time.” We speak much of God, can talk of Him, His ways, His works, His counsels,
all the day long; but the truth is, we know very little of Him. Our thoughts, our meditations,
our expressions of Him are low, many of them unworthy of His glory, none of them reaching
His perfections.
1). Objection: Moses was under the Law
You will say that Moses was under the Law when God veiled Himself in darkness and His
mind 86 in types 87 and clouds and dark institutions. Under the glorious shining of the gospel—
which has brought life and immortality to light, God being revealed from His own bosom—we
now know Him much more clearly, and as He is. We see His face now and not His back parts
only, as did Moses.
Answer 1. I acknowledge a vast and almost inconceivable difference between the acquaintance we now have with God, after His speaking to us by His own Son (Heb 1:2), and that which
the generality of the saints had under the Law. For although their eyes were as good, sharp,
and clear as ours, their faith and spiritual understanding not behind ours, and the object as
glorious unto them as unto us—yet our day is more clear than theirs was, the clouds are
blown away and scattered (Song 4:6), the shadows of the night are gone and fled away, the sun
is risen, and the means of sight is made more eminent and clear than formerly.
2. This being so, yet that peculiar sight which Moses had of God was a gospel-sight, a sight
of God as “gracious,” etc., and yet it is called but his “back parts”—that is, but low and more
common in comparison to His excellencies and perfections.
3. The apostle exalts to the utmost this glory of light above that of the Law, making clear
that now the “vail” causing darkness is taken away (2Co 3:15-16), so that “we all, with open [or
uncovered] face [are] beholding…the glory of the Lord” (3:18). And he also tells us how: “as in
a glass.” “In a glass”—how is that? Clearly, perfectly? Alas, no! He tells you how that is: “We
see through a glass, darkly” (1Co 13:12). It is not a telescope, which helps us to see things afar
off, concerning which the apostle speaks. (And yet what poor helps are they; how short do we
86
87

mind – purpose.
types – patterns pointing to greater things.

62

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

come of the truth of things notwithstanding their assistance!) It is a looking-glass 88 to which
he alludes, where are only obscure forms and images of things, and not the things themselves.
He compares our knowledge to a sight therein.
2). We see but little
He tells you also that all that we do see “through [or by] this glass” is in darkness and obscurity, that is, in a riddle. And speaking of himself, who surely was much more clear-sighted
than any now living, he tells us that he saw but “in part.” He saw but the back parts of heavenly things (1Co 13:12), and compares all the knowledge he had attained of God to that he had of
things when he was a child (13:11). It is only a “part,” short of “that which is perfect,” such as
will be “done away” or destroyed. We know what weak, feeble, uncertain notions and apprehensions children have of things of any abstract consideration; how when they grow up with
good training, those incomplete conceptions vanish and they are ashamed of them. It is the
commendation of a child to love, honor, believe, and obey his father; but the father knows his
child’s childishness and folly in knowledge and ideas.
Notwithstanding all our confidence of high attainments, all our notions of God are but
childish in respect of His infinite perfections. We lisp and babble, and say we know not what,
for the most part, in our most accurate conceptions and notions of God, as we think. We may
love, honor, believe, and obey our Father; and therewith He accepts our childish thoughts, for
they are but childish. We see but His back parts; we know but little of Him. Hence is that
promise wherewith we are so often supported and comforted in our distress: “We shall see him
as he is” (1Jo 3:2); we shall see Him “face to face” and “know even as also [we are] known”
(that is, comprehend that for which we are comprehended, 1Co 13:12); and positively, “Now
[we] see him not” (1Pe 1:8). All this is concluding that here we see but His back parts; not as
He is, but in a dark, obscure representation—not in the perfection of His glory.
The queen of Sheba had heard much of Solomon, and framed many great thoughts of his
magnificence in her mind; but when she came and saw his glory, she was forced to confess
that not half the truth had been told her (1Ki 10:1-7). We may suppose that we have here attained great knowledge, clear and high thoughts of God; but, alas, when He shall bring us into
His presence, we shall cry out: We never knew Him as He is; the thousandth part of His glory,
perfection, and blessedness never entered into our hearts!

d. Our unacquaintance with our end
The apostle tells us in 1 John 3:2 that we know not what we ourselves shall be, what we
shall find ourselves in the end. Much less will it enter into our hearts to conceive what God is
and what we shall find Him to be. Consider either Him Who is to be known, or the way whereby we know Him, and this will further appear.
1). Consider God, Who is to be known
We know so little of God, because it is God Who is thus to be known. That is, He has described Himself to us very much by this: that we cannot know Him. What else does He intend
where He calls Himself invisible, incomprehensible, and the like? That is, He Whom we do not,
cannot, know as He is.

88

looking-glass – mirror.

12. Preparatory Direction 8: Meditations upon God

63

Our further progress consists more in knowing what He is not than what He is. Thus He is
described to be immortal and infinite. He is not as we are: mortal, finite, and limited. Hence is
that glorious description of Him: “Who only hath immortality, dwelling in the light which no
man can approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can see” (1Ti 6:16). His light is such as
no creature can approach unto. He is not seen, not because He cannot be seen, but because we
cannot bear the sight of Him. The light of God, in Whom is no darkness, forbids all access to
Him by any creature whatsoever. We, who cannot behold the sun in its glory, are too weak to
bear the beams of infinite brightness.
On this consideration, as was said, the wise man professes himself a very beast, who has
“not the understanding of a man” (Pro 30:2). He knew nothing in comparison to God, so that
he seemed to have lost all his understanding when once he came to the consideration of Him,
His work, and His ways.
In this consideration, let our souls descend to some particulars.
a). The very being of God
We need knowledge of God’s being in order to be able to instruct one another therein by
words and expressions of it. However, we are so far from a knowledge of the actual being of
God, that to frame any conceptions in our mind with such species and impressions of things
(as we receive the knowledge of all other things by) is to make an idol to ourselves—and so to
worship a god of our own making, and not the God that made us. We may as well and as lawfully hew Him out of wood or stone as form Him a being in our minds that is suited to our apprehensions. The utmost of the best of our thoughts of the being of God is that we can have no
thoughts of it. Our knowledge of a being is but low when it mounts no higher than only to
know that we know it not!
b). What God has declared
There be some things of God that He Himself has taught us to speak of, and to regulate our
expressions of them. Yet, when we have so done, we see not the things themselves; we still do
not know them. To believe and admire is all that we attain to. We profess, as we are taught,
that God is infinite, omnipotent, eternal; and we know what disputes and notions there are
about omnipresence, immensity, infiniteness, and eternity. We have, I say, words and ideas
about these things; but as to the things themselves, what do we know? What do we comprehend of them? Can the mind of man do any more but swallow itself up in an infinite abyss,
which is as nothing? Give itself up to what it cannot conceive, much less express? Is not our
understanding “brutish” in the contemplation of such things, and is as if it were not?
Yea, the perfection of our understanding is: not to understand, and to rest there. They are
but the back parts of eternity and infiniteness that we have a glimpse of. What shall I say of the
Trinity, or the subsistence of distinct Persons in the same individual Essence? A mystery by
many denied because by none understood; a mystery whose every letter is mysterious! Who
can declare the generation of the Son, the procession of the Spirit, or the difference of the one
from the other?
But I shall not further instance in particulars. That infinite and inconceivable distance that
is between Him and us keeps us in the dark as to any sight of His face or clear apprehension of
His perfections. We know Him rather by what He does than by what He is—by His doing us
good than by the goodness of His essence. And how little a portion of Him, as Job speaks, is
hereby discovered (Job 26:14)!

64

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

2). The way whereby we should know God
We know little of God, because it is faith alone by which we know Him here. I shall not now
discourse about the remaining impressions on the hearts of all men by nature that there is a
God, nor what they may rationally be taught concerning that God, from the works of His creation and providence which they see and behold. It is, confessedly, and that upon the woeful
experience of all ages, so weak, low, dark, and confused that none ever on that account glorified God as they ought, but, notwithstanding all their knowledge of God, were indeed “without
God in the world” (Eph 2:12).
The chief and almost only acquaintance that we have with God and His dispensations 89 of
Himself is by faith. “He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him” (Heb 11:6). Our knowledge of Him and His rewarding (which
is also the foundation of our obedience or coming to Him) is believing. “We walk by faith, not
by sight” (2Co 5:7); by faith, and so by faith as not to have any express idea, image, or form of
that which we believe. Faith is all the argument we have of “things not seen” (Heb 11:1).
I might here insist upon the nature of faith; and from all its accompaniments and concernments show that we know but the back parts of what we know by faith only. As to its rise,
it is built purely upon the testimony of Him Whom we have not seen: as the apostle speaks,
“How can he love God whom he hath not seen?” (1Jo 4:20)—that is, Whom you know not but
by faith that He is. Faith receives all upon His testimony, Whom it receives to be only on His
own testimony. As to its nature, it is an assent upon testimony, not an evidence upon demonstration. And the object of it, as was said before, is above us. Hence our faith, as was formerly
observed, is called a seeing darkly, as in a glass. All that we know of God, we know this way;
and all that we know this way is but low, dark, and obscure.
a). Objection: Christ reveals Himself to believers
But you will say, “All this is true, but yet it is only so to them that know not God, perhaps,
as He is revealed in Jesus Christ. With them who know Christ it is otherwise. It is true, ‘No
man hath seen God at any time, [but] the only-begotten Son…he hath declared [that is, revealed] him’ (Joh 1:18); and ‘the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that
we may know him that is true’ (1Jo 5:20). ‘The light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the
image of God,’ shines upon believers (2Co 4:4). Yes, and ‘God, who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ’ (4:6). So that though we ‘were sometimes darkness,’ yet we
are now ‘light in the Lord’ (Eph 5:8). And the apostle says, ‘we all, with open face beholding…the glory of the Lord’ (2Co 3:18). Therefore, we are now so far from being in such darkness, or at such a distance from God, that our communion and ‘fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son’ (1Jo 1:3). The light of the gospel whereby now God is revealed is glorious:
not a star, but the sun in His beauty is risen upon us, and the vail is taken from our faces. So
that though unbelievers, yea, and perhaps some weak believers, may be in some darkness, yet
those of any growth or considerable attainments have a clear sight and view of the face of God
in Jesus Christ.”
To which I answer the following.

89

dispensations – self-revelation.

12. Preparatory Direction 8: Meditations upon God

65

1). The truth is, all of us know enough of Him to love Him more than we do, to delight in
Him, serve Him, believe Him, obey Him, and put our trust in Him, above all that we have
hitherto attained. Our darkness and weakness is no plea for our negligence and disobedience.
Who is it that has walked according to the knowledge that he has of the perfections, excellencies, and will of God? God’s end in giving us any knowledge of Himself here is that we may
glorify Him as God—that is, love Him, serve Him, believe and obey Him, and give Him all the
honor and glory that is due from poor sinful creatures to a sin-pardoning God and Creator. We
must all acknowledge that we were never thoroughly transformed into the image of that
knowledge which we have had. And had we used our talents well, we might have been trusted
with more.
2). Comparatively, that knowledge which we have of God by the revelation of Jesus Christ
in the gospel is exceeding eminent and glorious. It is so in comparison of any knowledge of
God that might otherwise be attained, or that was delivered in the Law under the Old Testament, which had but the shadow of good things, not the express image of them. This the apostle pursues at length in 2 Corinthians 3:6ff. Christ has now in these last days revealed the
Father from His own bosom, declared His name, made known His mind, will, and counsel in a
far more clear, eminent, distinct manner than He did formerly while He kept His people under
the tutelage of the Law. This is that which, for the most part, is intended in the places before
mentioned. The clear delivery and declaration of God and His will in the gospel is expressly
exalted in comparison to any other way of revelation of Himself.
3). The difference between believers and unbelievers as to knowledge is not so much in the
matter of their knowledge as in the manner of knowing. Some unbelievers may know more
and be able to say more of God, His perfections, and His will than many believers; but they
know nothing as they ought, nothing in a right manner, nothing spiritually and savingly,
nothing with a holy, heavenly light. The excellency of a believer is not that he has a large apprehension of things, but that what he does apprehend, which perhaps may be very little, he
sees in the light of the Spirit of God, in a saving, soul-transforming light. This is that which
gives us communion with God, and not prying thoughts or inquisitively elevated notions.
4). Jesus Christ by His Word and Spirit reveals to the hearts of all His people God as a Father, as a God in covenant, as a rewarder. He does this in every way sufficiently to teach us to
obey Him here, and to lead us to His bosom, to lie down there in the fruition of Him to eternity. But yet now,
5). Notwithstanding all this, it is but a little portion we know of Him. We see but His back
parts. This is because of the following.
1st. The intention of all gospel revelation is not to unveil God’s essential glory, that we
should see Him as He is, but merely to declare so much of Him as He knows sufficient to be a
foundation for our faith, love, obedience, and coming to Him—that is, of the faith that He
here expects from us, and of such services as are fit for poor creatures in the midst of temptations. But when He calls us to eternal admiration and contemplation without interruption,
[that is, in heaven], He will make a new manner of discovery of Himself. Then the whole shape
of things as it now lies before us will depart as a shadow.
2ndly. We are dull and slow of heart to receive the things that are in the Word revealed.
God, by our infirmity and weakness, keeps us in continual dependence on Him for teachings
and revelations of Himself out of His Word, never in this world bringing any soul to the ut-

66

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

most of what is from the Word to be made out and discovered. Therefore, although the way of
revelation in the gospel be clear and evident, yet we know little of the things themselves that
are revealed.
Let us, then, revive the use and intention of this consideration. Will not a due apprehension
of this inconceivable greatness of God, and that infinite distance wherein we stand from Him,
fill the soul with a holy and awful fear of Him, so as to keep it in a frame that is unsuited to the
thriving or flourishing of any lust whatever? Let the soul be continually accustomed to reverential thoughts of God’s greatness and omnipresence, and it will be much upon its watch as to
any undue behaviors. Consider Him “with whom we have to do”—even “our God is a consuming fire” (Heb 4:13; 12:29). In your greatest humiliations at His presence and eye, know that
your very nature is too narrow to bear apprehensions suitable to His essential glory.