PURITAN GOLD -- Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices by Thomas Brooks: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 12
Satan's First Devices to Draw the Soul to Sin

---

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. By Thomas Brooks.

Chapter 2. Satan's First Devices to Draw the Soul to Sin.

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
(Proverbs 5:8, 1 Thess. 5:22). The best course to prevent falling into the pit is to keep
at the greatest distance from it; he who will be so bold as to attempt to dance upon the
brink of the pit, may find by woeful experience that it is a righteous thing with God that
he should fall into the pit. Joseph keeps at a distance from sin, and from playing with
Satan's golden baits, and stands. David draws near, and plays with the bait, and falls,
and swallows bait and hook! David comes near the snare, and is taken in it, to the
breaking of his bones, the wounding of his conscience, and the loss of fellowship with
his God.
Sin is a plague, yes, the worst and most infectious plague in the world; and yet, ah!
how few are there who tremble at it--who keep at a distance from it! (1 Cor. 5:6)—
"Don't you know that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?" As soon as one sin had
seized upon Adam's heart, all sin entered into his soul and infested it. How has Adam's
one sin spread over all mankind! (Romans 5:12)—"Therefore as by one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned." Ah, how does the father's sin infect the child, the husband's infect the wife, the
master's the servant! The sin that is in one man's heart is able to infect a whole world,
it is of such a spreading and infectious nature.
The story of the Italian, who first made his enemy deny God, and then stabbed him, and
so at once murdered both body and soul, declares the unmixed malignity of sin; and oh!
that what has been spoken upon this head may prevail with you, to stand at a distance
from sin!
Remedy (2). Consider that sin is but a bitter sweet. That seeming sweet that is in sin
will quickly vanish; and lasting shame, sorrow, horror, and terror will come in the room
thereof—"He enjoyed the taste of his wickedness, letting it melt under his tongue. He
savored it, holding it long in his mouth. But suddenly, the food he has eaten turns sour
within him, a poisonous venom in his stomach." (Job 20:12-14). Forbidden profits and
pleasures are most pleasing to vain men, who count madness mirth. Many long to be
meddling with the murdering morsels of sin, which nourish not—but rend and consume
the belly—and the soul that receives them. Many eat that on earth what they digest in
hell. Sin's murdering morsels will deceive those who devour them. Adam's apple was a
bitter sweet; Esau's bowl of stew was a bitter sweet; the Israelites' quails a bitter
sweet; Jonathan's honey a bitter sweet; and Adonijah's dainties a bitter sweet. After the
meal is ended, then comes the reckoning. Men must not think to dance and dine with
the devil, and then to sup with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven; to
feed upon the poison of asps, and yet that the viper's tongue should not slay them.
When the asp stings a man, it does first tickle him so as it makes him laugh, until the
poison, little by little, gets to the heart, and then it pains him more than ever it
delighted him. So does sin; it may please a little at first—but it will pain the soul at last;
yes, if there were the least real delight in sin, there could be no consummate hell,
where men shall most completely be tormented with their sin.
Remedy (3). Solemnly to consider that sin will usher in the greatest and the saddest
losses that can be upon our souls. It will usher in the loss of that divine favor which is
better than life, and the loss of that joy which is unspeakable and full of glory, and the
loss of that peace which passes understanding, and the loss of those divine influences
by which the soul has been refreshed, quickened, raised, strengthened, and gladdened,
20

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
and the loss of many outward desirable mercies, which otherwise the soul might have
enjoyed.
Remedy (4). Seriously to consider that sin is of a very deceitful and bewitching nature.
Sin is from the greatest deceiver, it is a child of his own begetting, it is the ground of all
the deceit in the world, and it is in its own nature exceeding deceitful. "But exhort one
another daily, while it is called 'today', lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin." Heb. 3:13. It will kiss the soul, and look enticing to the soul, and
yet betray the soul forever. It will with Delilah smile upon us, that it may betray us into
the hands of the devil, as she did Samson into the hands of the Philistines. Sin gives
Satan a power over us, and an advantage to accuse us and to lay claim to us, as those
who wear his badge; it is of a very bewitching nature; it bewitches the soul, where it is
upon the throne, that the soul cannot leave it, though it perish eternally by it.
Sin so bewitches the soul, that it makes the soul call evil good, and good evil; bitter
sweet and sweet bitter, light darkness and darkness light; and a soul thus bewitched
with sin will stand it out to the death, at the sword's point with God; let God strike and
wound, and cut to the very bone, yet the bewitched soul cares not, fears not—but will
still hold on in a course of wickedness, as you may see in Pharaoh, Balaam, and Judas.
Tell the bewitched soul that sin is a viper that will certainly kill when it is not killed, that
sin often kills secretly, insensibly, eternally, yet the bewitched soul cannot, and will not,
cease from sin.
When the physicians told Theotimus that except he did abstain from drunkenness and
uncleanness he would lose his eyes; his heart was so bewitched to his sins, that he
answered, "Then farewell, sweet light"; he had rather lose his eyes than leave his sin.
So a man bewitched with sin had rather lose God, Christ, heaven, and his own soul—
than part with his sin. Oh, therefore, forever take heed of playing with or nibbling at
Satan's golden baits!
DEVICE 2: BY PAINTING SIN WITH VIRTUE'S COLORS.
Satan knows that if he would present sin in its own nature and dress, the soul would
rather fly from it than yield to it; and therefore he presents it unto us, not in its own
proper colors—but painted and gilded over with the name and show of virtue, that we
may the more easily be overcome by it, and take the more pleasure in committing of it.
PRIDE, he presents to the soul under the name and notion of neatness and cleanliness;
and COVETOUSNESS (which the apostle condemns for idolatry) to be but good
business; and DRUNKENNESS to be good fellowship, and RIOTOUSNESS under the
name and notion of liberality, and WANTONNESS as a trick of youth.
Remedy (1). Consider that sin is never a whit the less filthy, vile, and abominable—by
its being colored and painted with virtue's colors. A poisonous pill is never a whit the
less poisonous because it is gilded over with gold; nor a wolf is never a whit the less a
wolf because he has put on a sheep's skin; nor the devil is never a whit the less a devil
because he appears sometimes like an angel of light. So neither is sin any whit the less
filthy and abominable by its being painted over with virtue's colors.
Remedy (2). That the more sin is painted forth under the color of virtue, the more
dangerous it is to the souls of men. This we see evident in these days, by those very
21

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
many souls that are turned out of the way that is holy—and in which their souls have
had sweet and glorious communion with God—into ways of highest vanity and folly, by
Satan's neat coloring over of sin, and painting forth vice under the name and color of
virtue. This is so notoriously known that I need but name it. The most dangerous
vermin is too often to be found under the fairest and sweetest flowers, the fairest glove
is often drawn upon the foulest hand, and the richest robes are often put upon the
filthiest bodies. So are the fairest and sweetest names upon the greatest and the most
horrible vices and errors that be in the world. Ah! that we had not too many sad proofs
of this among us!
Remedy (3). To look on sin with that eye with which within a short time, we shall see it.
Ah, souls! when you shall lie upon a dying bed, and stand before a judgment-seat, sin
shall be unmasked, and its dress and robes shall then be taken off, and then it shall
appear more vile, filthy, and terrible than hell itself; then, that which formerly appeared
most sweet will appear most bitter, and that which appeared most beautiful will appear
most ugly, and that which appeared most delightful will then appear most dreadful to
the soul. Ah, the shame, the pain, the gall, the bitterness, the horror, the hell that the
sight of sin, when its dress is taken off, will raise in poor souls! Sin will surely prove evil
and bitter to the soul when its robes are taken off. A man may have the stone who feels
no fit of it. Conscience will work at last, though for the present one may feel no fit of
accusation. Laban showed himself at parting. Sin will be bitterness in the latter end,
when it shall appear to the soul in its own filthy nature.
The devil deals with men as the panther does with beasts; he hides his deformed head
until his sweet scent has drawn them into his danger. Until we have sinned, Satan is a
parasite; when we have sinned, he is a tyrant. O souls! the day is at hand when the
devil will pull off the paint and garnish that he has put upon sin, and present that
monster, sin, in such a monstrous shape to your souls, that will cause your thoughts to
be troubled, your countenance to be changed, the joints of your loins to be loosed, and
your knees to be dashed one against another, and your hearts to be so terrified, that
you will be ready, with Ahithophel and Judas, to strangle and hang your bodies on
earth, and your souls in hell, if the Lord has not more mercy on you than he had on
them. Oh! therefore, look upon sin now as you must look upon it to all eternity, and as
God, conscience, and Satan will present it to you another day!
Remedy (4). Seriously to consider, That even those very sins that Satan paints, and
puts new names and colors upon, cost the best blood, the noblest blood, the life-blood,
the heart-blood of the Lord Jesus. That Christ should come from the eternal bosom of
his Father to a region of sorrow and death; that God should be manifested in the flesh,
the Creator made a creature; that he who was clothed with glory should be wrapped
with rags of flesh; he who filled heaven and earth with his glory should be cradled in a
manger; that the almighty God should flee from weak man—the God of Israel into
Egypt; that the God of the law should be subject to the law, the God of the circumcision
circumcised, the God who made the heavens working at Joseph's homely trade; that he
who binds the devils in chains should be tempted; that he, whose is the world, and the
fullness thereof, should hunger and thirst; that the God of strength should be weary,
the Judge of all flesh condemned, the God of life put to death; that he who is one with
his Father should cry out of misery, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"
(Matt. 27:46); that he who had the keys of hell and death at his belt should lie
imprisoned in the sepulcher of another, having in his lifetime nowhere to lay his head,
22

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
nor after death to lay his body; that that HEAD, before which the angels do cast down
their crowns, should be crowned with thorns, and those EYES, purer than the sun, put
out by the darkness of death; those EARS, which hear nothing but hallelujahs of saints
and angels, to hear the blasphemies of the multitude; that FACE, which was fairer than
the sons of men, to be spit on by those beastly wretched Jews; that MOUTH and
TONGUE, which spoke as never man spoke, accused for blasphemy; those HANDS,
which freely swayed the scepter of heaven, nailed to the cross; those FEET, "like unto
fine brass," nailed to the cross for man's sins; each sense pained with a spear and nails;
his SMELL, with stinking odor, being crucified on Golgotha, the place of skulls; his
TASTE, with vinegar and gall; his HEARING, with reproaches, and SIGHT of his mother
and disciples bemoaning him; his SOUL, comfortless and forsaken; and all this for those
very sins that Satan paints and puts fine colors upon! Oh! how should the consideration
of this stir up the soul against sin, and work the soul to fly from it, and to use all holy
means whereby sin may be subdued and destroyed!
After Julius Caesar was murdered, Antonius brought forth his coat, all bloody and cut,
and laid it before the people, saying, "Look, here you have the emperor's coat thus
bloody and torn"—whereupon the people were presently in an uproar, and cried out to
slay those murderers; and they took their tables and stools which were in the place, and
set them on fire, and ran to the houses of those who had slain Caesar, and burnt them.
So that when we consider that sin has slain our Lord Jesus, ah, how should it provoke
our hearts to be revenged on sin—which has murdered the Lord of glory, and has done
that mischief that all the devils in hell could never have done?
It was good counsel one gave, "Never let go out of your minds the thoughts of a
crucified Christ." Let these be food and drink unto you; let them be your sweetness and
consolation, your honey and your desire, your reading and your meditation, your life,
death, and resurrection.
DEVICE 3: BY EXTENUATING AND LESSENING OF SIN
Ah! says Satan, it is but a little pride, a little worldliness, a little uncleanness, a little
drunkenness, etc. As Lot said of Zoar, "It is but a little one, and my soul shall live"
(Gen. 19:20). Alas! says Satan, it is but a very little sin that you stick so at. You may
commit it without any danger to your soul. It is but a little one; you may commit it, and
yet your soul shall live.
Remedy (1). First, Solemnly consider, that those sins which we are apt to account
small, have brought upon men the greatest wrath of God, as the eating of an apple,
gathering a few sticks on the Sabbath day, and touching of the ark. Oh! the dreadful
wrath that these sins brought down upon the heads and hearts of men! The least sin is
contrary to the law of God, the nature of God, the being of God, and the glory of God;
and therefore it is often punished severely by God; and do not we see daily the
vengeance of the Almighty falling upon the bodies, names, states, families, and souls of
men—for those sins that are but little ones in their eyes? Surely if we are not utterly
forsaken by God, and blinded by Satan—we cannot but see it! Oh! therefore, when
Satan says it is but a little one—you must say, Oh! but those sins which you call little,
are such as will cause God to rain hell out of heaven upon sinners as he did upon the
Sodomites!

23

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Remedy (2). Seriously to consider, That the giving way to a less sin makes way for the
committing of a greater sin. He who, to avoid a greater sin, will yield to a lesser, ten
thousand to one but God in justice will leave that soul to fall into a greater. If we
commit one sin to avoid another, it is just we should avoid neither, we having not law
nor power in our own hands to keep off sin as we please; and we, by yielding to the
lesser, do tempt the tempter to tempt us to the greater. Sin is of an encroaching
nature; it creeps on the soul by degrees, step by step, until it has the soul to the very
height of sin. David gives way to his wandering eye, and this led him to those foul sins
that caused God to break his bones, and to turn his day into night, and to leave his soul
in great darkness. Jacob and Peter, and other saints, have found this true by woeful
experience, that the yielding to a lesser sin has been the ushering in of a greater. The
little thief will open the door, and make way for the greater; and the little wedge
knocked in, will make way for the greater.
Satan will first draw you to sit with the drunkard, and then to sip with the drunkard, and
then at last to be drunk with the drunkard. He will first draw you to be unclean in your
thoughts, and then to be unclean in your looks, and then to be unclean in your words,
and at last to be unclean in your practices. He will first draw you to look upon the
golden wedge, and then to desire the golden wedge, and then to handle the golden
wedge, and then at last by wicked ways to take the golden wedge, though you run the
hazard of losing God and your soul forever; as you may see in Gehazi, Achan, and
Judas, and many in these our days. Sin is never at a stand-still (Psalm 1:1), first
ungodly, then sinners, then scorners. Here they go on from sin to sin, until they come
to the top of sin, that is, to sit in the seat of scorners.
By all this we see, that the yielding to lesser sins, draws the soul to the committing of
greater. Ah! how many in these days have fallen, first to have low thoughts of Scripture
and ordinances, and then to slight Scripture and ordinances, and then to make a nose of
wax of Scripture and ordinances, and then to cast off Scripture and ordinances, and
then at last to advance and lift up themselves, and their Christ-dishonoring and souldamning opinions, above Scripture and ordinances.
Sin gains upon man's soul by insensible degrees. "The beginning of the words of his
mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talking is mischievous madness." (Eccles.
10:13) Corruption in the heart, when it breaks forth, is like a breach in the sea, which
begins in a narrow passage, until it eats through, and cast down all before it. The
debates of the soul are quick, and soon ended; and that may be done in a moment that
may undo a man forever. When a man has begun to sin, he knows not where, or when,
or how he shall make a stop of sin. Usually the soul goes on from evil to evil, from folly
to folly, until it is ripe for eternal misery!
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this third device that Satan has to draw the soul
to sin, is solemnly to consider, That it is sad to sin against God for a trifle. Dives would
not give a crumb, therefore he should not receive a drop (Luke 16:21). It is the greatest
folly in the world—to adventure the going to hell for a small matter. "I tasted but a little
honey," said Jonathan, "and I must die" (1 Sam. 14:29). It is a most unkind and
unfaithful thing to break with God, for a little. Little sins carry with them but little
temptations to sin, and then a man shows most viciousness and unkindness, when he
sins on a little temptation. It is devilish to sin without a temptation; it is little less than
devilish to sin on a little occasion. The less the temptation is to sin—the greater is that
24

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
sin. Saul's sin in not waiting for Samuel, was not so much in the matter—but it was
much in the malice of it; for though Samuel had not come at all, yet Saul should not
have offered sacrifice; but this cost him dear—his soul and kingdom.
It is the greatest unkindness that can be showed to a friend, to venture the
complaining, bleeding, and grieving of his soul—upon a light and a slight occasion. So it
is the greatest unkindness that can be showed to God, Christ, and the Spirit, for a soul
to put God upon complaining, Christ upon bleeding, and the Spirit upon grieving—by
yielding to little sins. Therefore, when Satan says it is but a little one, you must
answer—that oftentimes there is the greatest unkindness showed to God's glorious
majesty, in the acting of the least folly, and therefore you will not displease your best
and greatest friend—by yielding to his greatest enemy.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan, is seriously to consider,
That there is great danger, yes, many times most danger—in the smallest sins. "A little
leaven leavens the whole lump" (1 Cor. 5:6). If the serpent sneaks in his head, he will
draw in his whole body after him. Greater sins do sooner startle the soul, and awaken
and rouse up the soul to repentance, than lesser sins do. Little sins often slide into the
soul, and breed, and work secretly and indiscernibly in the soul, until they come to be
so strong, as to trample upon the soul, and to cut the throat of the soul. There is
oftentimes greatest danger to our bodies in the least diseases that hang upon us,
because we are apt to make light of them, and to neglect the timely use of means for
removing of them, until they are grown so strong that they prove mortal to us. So there
is most danger often in the least sins.
We are apt to take no notice of them, and to neglect those heavenly helps whereby they
should be weakened and destroyed, until they are grown to that strength, that we are
ready to cry out, the medicine is too weak for the disease! I would pray, and I would
hear—but I am afraid that sin is grown up by degrees to such a head, that I shall never
be able to prevail over it; but as I have begun to fall, so I shall utterly fall before it, and
at last perish in it, unless the power and free grace of Christ acts gloriously, beyond my
present apprehension and expectation. The viper is killed by the little young ones that
are nourished and cherished in her belly—so are many men eternally killed and
betrayed by the little sins, as they call them, that are nourished in their own bosoms.
I know not, says one, whether the nurture of the least sin be not worse than the
commission of the greatest—for this may be of frailty, that argues obstinacy. A little
hole in the ship sinks it. A small breach in a dyke carries away all before it. A little stab
at the heart kills a man. A little sin, without a great deal of mercy, will damn a man!
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan, is solemnly to consider, That
other saints have chosen to suffer the worst of torments, rather than commit the least
sin, that is, such as the world accounts little sins. So as you may see in Daniel and his
companions, that would rather choose to burn, and be cast to the lions—than they
would bow to the idol which Nebuchadnezzar had set up. When this 'slight offense', in
the world's account, and a hot fiery furnace stood in competition, that they must either
fall into sin, or be cast into the fiery furnace—such was their tenderness of the honor
and glory of God, and their hatred and indignation against sin, that they would rather
burn than sin! They knew that it was far better to burn for their not sinning, than that
God and conscience should raise a hell, a fire in their bosoms for sin.
25

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

I have read of that noble servant of God, Marcus Arethusius, minister of a church in the
time of Constantine, who had been the cause of overthrowing an idol's temple;
afterwards, when Julian came to be emperor, he would force the people of that place to
build it up again. They were ready to do it—but Marcus refused; whereupon those who
were his own people, to whom he preached, took him, and stripped him of all his
clothes, and abused his naked body, and gave it up to the children, to lance it with their
pen-knives, and then caused him to be put in a basket, and drenched his naked body
with honey, and set him in the sun, to be stung with wasps. And all this cruelty they
showed, because he would not do anything towards the building up of this idol temple!
No, they came to this, that if he would do but the least towards it, if he would give but a
half-penny to it, they would save him. But he refused all, though the giving of a halfpenny might have saved his life; and in doing this, he did but live up to that principle
that most Christians talk of, and all profess—but few come up to, that is—that we must
choose rather to suffer the worst of torments that men and devils can invent and inflict,
than to commit the least sin whereby God should be dishonored, our consciences
wounded, religion reproached, and our own souls endangered.
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That the soul is never able to stand under the guilt and weight of the least sin, when
God shall set it home upon the soul. The least sin will press and sink the stoutest sinner
as low as hell, when God shall open the eyes of a sinner, and make him see the horrid
filthiness and abominable vileness that is in sin! What so little, base, and vile
creatures—as lice or gnats—and yet by these little poor creatures, God so plagued
stout-hearted Pharaoh, and all Egypt, that, fainting under it, they were forced to cry
out, "This is the finger of God!" (Exod. 8:16; 10. 19). When little creatures, yes, the
least creatures, shall be armed with a power from God, they shall press and sink down
the greatest, proudest, and stoutest tyrants who breathe!
So when God shall cast a sword into the hand of a little sin, and arm it against the soul,
the soul will faint and fall under it. Some, who have but contemplated adultery, without
any actual acting it; and others, having found a trifle, and made no conscience to
restore it, knowing, by the light of natural conscience, that they did not do as they
would be done by; and others, that have had some unworthy thought of God, have
been so frightened, amazed, and terrified for those sins, which are small in men's
account, that they have wished they had never been born; that they could take no
delight in any earthly comfort, that they have been put to their wits' end, ready to make
away themselves, wishing themselves annihilated.
William Perkins mentions a good man—but very poor, who, being ready to starve, stole
a lamb, and being about to eat it with his poor children, and as his manner was afore
eating, to ask God's blessing, dare not do it—but fell into a great perplexity of
conscience, and acknowledged his fault to the owner, promising payment if ever he
should be able.
Remedy (7). The seventh remedy against this device is, solemnly to consider, That
there is more evil in the least sin than in the greatest affliction; and this appears as
clear as the sun, by the severe dealing of God the Father with his beloved Son, who let
all the vials of his fiercest wrath upon him, and that for the least sin as well as for the
greatest.
26

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

"The wages of sin is death" (Romans 6:23); of ALL sin, whether great or small, Oh! how
should this make us tremble—as much at the least spark of lust as at hell itself;
considering that God the Father would not spare his bosom Son, no, not for the least
sin—but would make him drink the dregs of his wrath!
And so much for the remedies that may fence and preserve our souls from being drawn
to sin by this third device of Satan.
DEVICE 4: By presenting to the soul the best men's sins, and by hiding from the soul
their virtues; by showing the soul their sins, and by hiding from the soul their sorrows
and repentance: as by setting before the soul the adultery of David, the pride of
Hezekiah, the impatience of Job, the drunkenness of Noah, the blasphemy of Peter, etc.,
and by hiding from the soul the tears, the sighs, the groans, the meltings, the
humblings, and repentings of these precious souls.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider, That
the Spirit of the Lord has been as careful to note the saints' rising by repentance out of
sin, as he has to note their falling into sins. David falls fearfully—but by repentance he
rises sweetly. 'Blot out my transgressions, wash me thoroughly from my iniquity,
cleanse me from my sin; for I acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever
before me. Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter
than snow; deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, God of my salvation.' It is true,
Hezekiah's heart was lifted up under the abundance of mercy that God had cast in upon
him; and it is as true that Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, so that
the wrath of the Lord came not upon him, nor upon Jerusalem, in the days of Hezekiah.
It is true, Job curses the day of his birth, and it is as true that he rises by repentance:
'Behold, I am vile,' says he; 'what shall I answer you? I will lay my hand upon my
mouth. Once have I spoken—but I will not answer; yes twice—but I will proceed no
further. I have heard of you by the hearing of the ear—but now my eye sees you;
wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes' (Job 40:4, 5; 42:5, 6).
Tertullian says that he was born for no other purpose but to repent.
Peter falls dreadfully—but rises by repentance sweetly; a look of love from Christ melts
him into tears. He knew that repentance was the key to the kingdom of grace. As once
his faith was so great that he leaped, as it were, into a sea of waters to come to Christ;
so now his repentance was so great that he leaped, as it were, into a sea of tears,
because he had denied Christ. Some say that, after his sad fall, he was ever and always
weeping, and that his face was even furrowed with continual tears. He had no sooner
took in poison but he vomited it up again, before it got to the vitals; he had no sooner
handled this serpent but he turned it into a rod to scourge his soul with remorse for
sinning against such clear light, and strong love, and sweet discoveries of the heart of
Christ to him. Luther confesses that, before his conversion, he met not with a more
displeasing word in all his study of divinity than repent—but afterward he took delight in
the word. Clement notes that Peter so repented, that all his life after, every night when
he heard the cock crow, he would fall upon his knees, and, weeping bitterly, would beg
pardon of his sin. Ah, souls, you can easily sin as the saints—but can you repent with
the saints? Many can sin with David and Peter, that cannot repent with David and
Peter—and so must perish forever!

27

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Theodosius the emperor, pressing that he might receive the Lord's supper, excuses his
own foul act by David's doing the like; to which Ambrose replies, You have followed
David transgressing, follow David repenting, and then think you of the table of the Lord.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That these saints did not make a trade of sin. They fell once or twice, and rose by
repentance, that they might keep the closer to Christ forever. They fell accidentally,
occasionally, and with much reluctancy; and you sin presumptuously, obstinately,
readily, delightfully, and customarily. The saints cannot sin with a whole will—but, as it
were, with a half-will, an unwillingness; not with a full consent—but with a dissenting
consent. You have, by your making a trade of sin, contracted upon your soul a kind of
cursed necessity of sinning, that you can as well cease to be, or cease to live, as you
can cease to sin. Sin is, by custom, become as another nature to you, which you can
not, which you will not lay aside, though you know that if you do not lay sin aside, God
will lay your soul aside forever; though you know that if sin and your soul do not part,
Christ and your soul can never meet. If you will make a trade of sin, and cry out—Did
not David sin thus, and Noah sin thus, and Peter sin thus? No! their hearts turned aside
to folly one day—but your heart turns aside to folly every day (2 Peter 2:14, Prov. 4:6);
and when they were fallen, they rise by repentance, and by the actings of faith upon a
crucified Christ. But you fall, and have no strength nor will to rise—but wallow in sin,
and will eternally die in your sins, unless the Lord be the more merciful to your soul. Do
you think, O soul, this is good reasoning? — Such a one tasted poison but once, and yet
narrowly escaped; but I daily drink poison, yet I shall escape. Yet such is the mad
reasoning of vain souls. David and Peter sinned once foully and fearfully; they tasted
poison but once, and were sick to death; but I taste it daily, and yet shall not taste of
eternal death. Remember, O souls! that the day is at hand when self-flatterers will be
found self-deceivers, yes, self-murderers! Though sin dwells in the regenerate, yet it
does not reign over the regenerate; they rise by repentance.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That though God does not, nor never will, disinherit his people for their sins, yet he has
severely punished his people for their sins. David sins, and God breaks his bones for his
sin: 'Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which you have broken may
rejoice' (Psalm 51:8). 'And because you have done this, the sword shall never depart
from your house, to the day of your death' (2 Sam. 12:10). Though God will not utterly
take from them his loving-kindness, nor allow his faithfulness to fail, nor break his
covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth, yet will he 'visit their
transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes' (Psalm 89:30, 35). The
Scripture abounds with instances of this kind. This is so known a truth among all that
know anything of truth, that to cite more scriptures to prove it would be to light a
candle to see the sun at noon. Josephus reports that, not long after the Jews had
crucified Christ on the cross, so many of them were condemned to be crucified that
there were not places enough for crosses nor crosses enough for the bodies that were to
be hung thereon.
The Jews have a proverb, 'That there is no punishment comes upon Israel in which
there is not one ounce of the golden calf'; meaning that that was so great a sin, as that
in every plague God remembered it; that it had an influence into every trouble that
befell them. Every man's heart may say to him in his sufferings, as the heart of
Apollodorus in the kettle, 'I have been the cause of this.' God is most angry when he
28

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
shows no anger. God keep me from this mercy; this kind of mercy is worse than all
other kind of misery.
One writing to a dead friend has this expression: 'I account it a part of unhappiness not
to know adversity; I judge you to be miserable, because you have not been miserable.'
Luther says, 'There is not a Christian that carries not his cross.' It is mercy that our
affliction is not execution—but a correction. He who has deserved hanging, may be glad
if he escape with a whipping. God's corrections are our instructions, his lashes our
lessons, his scourges our schoolmasters, his chastisements our admonitions. And to
note this, both the Hebrews and the Greeks express chastening and teaching by one
and the same word (Musar, Paideia),*** because the latter is the true end of the
former, according to that in the proverb, 'Smart makes wit, and vexation gives
understanding.' Whence Luther fitly calls affliction The Christian man's divinity.' So says
Job (Chap. 33:14-19), 'But God speaks again and again, though people do not recognize
it. He speaks in dreams, in visions of the night when deep sleep falls on people as they
lie in bed. He whispers in their ear and terrifies them with his warning. He causes them
to change their minds; he keeps them from pride. He keeps them from the grave, from
crossing over the river of death. Or God disciplines people with sickness and pain, with
ceaseless aching in their bones.' When Satan shall tell you of other men's sins to draw
you to sin—then think of the same men's sufferings to keep you from sin. Lay your hand
upon your heart, and say, O my soul! if you sin with David, you must suffer with David!
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That there are but two main ends of God's recording of the falls of his saints.
And the one is, to keep those from fainting, sinking, and despair, under the burden of
their sins, who fall through weakness and infirmity.
And the other is, that their falls may be as landmarks to warn others to take heed lest
they fall. It never entered into the heart of God to record his children's sins, that others
might be encouraged to sin—but that others might look to themselves, and hang the
faster upon the skirts of Christ, and avoid all occasions and temptations that may
occasion the soul to fall, as others have fallen, when they have been left by Christ. The
Lord has made their sins as landmarks, to warn his people to take heed how they come
near those sands and rocks, those snares and baits, that have been fatal to the choicest
treasures, namely—the joy, peace, comfort, and glorious enjoyments of the bravest
spirits and noblest souls that ever sailed through the ocean of this sinful troublesome
world; as you may see in David, Job, and Peter. There is nothing in the world that can
so notoriously cross the grand end of God's recording of the sins of his saints, than for
any from thence to take encouragement to sin; and wherever you find such a soul, you
may write him Christless, graceless, a soul cast off by God, a soul that Satan has by the
hand, and the eternal God knows where he will lead him. I have known a good man,
says Bernard, who, when he heard of any that had committed some notorious sin, he
was accustomed to say with himself—he fell today, so may I tomorrow.
DEVICE 5: TO PRESENT GOD TO THE SOUL AS ONE MADE UP ALL OF MERCY
Oh! says Satan, you need not make such a matter of sin, you need not be so fearful of
sin, not so unwilling to sin; for God is a God of mercy, a God full of mercy, a God that
delights in mercy, a God that is ready to show mercy, a God that is never weary of
29

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
showing mercy, a God more prone to pardon his people than to punish his people; and
therefore he will not take advantage against the soul; and why then, says Satan, should
you make such a matter of sin?
Remedy (1). The first remedy is, seriously to consider, That it is the greatest judgment
in the world to be left to sin, upon any pretense whatever. O unhappy man! when God
leaves you to yourself, and does not resist you in your sins. Woe, woe to him at whose
sins God does wink. When God lets the way to hell be a smooth and pleasant way, that
is hell on this side hell, and a dreadful sign of God's indignation against a man; a token
of his rejection, and that God does not intend good unto him. That is a sad word,
'Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone' (Hosea 4:17); he will be unteachable and
incorrigible; he has made a match with mischief, he shall have his bellyful of it; he falls
with open eyes; let him fall at his own peril. And that is a terrible saying, 'So I gave
them up unto their own hearts' lusts, and they walked in their own counsels' (Psalm
81:12). A soul given up to sin is a soul ripe for hell, a soul hastening to destruction!
Ah Lord! this mercy! humbly beg, that whatever you give me up to, you will not give me
up to the ways of my own heart; if you will give me up to be afflicted, or tempted, or
reproached, I will patiently sit down, and say, It is the Lord; let him do with me what
seems good in his own eyes. Do anything with me, lay what burden you will upon me,
so you do not give me up to the ways of my own heart.
Augustine says, 'It is a human thing to fall into sin, devilish to persevere therein, and
divine to rise from it. Deliver me, O Lord, from that evil man—myself!
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That God is as JUST, as he is merciful. As the Scriptures speak Him out to be a very
merciful God, so they speak Him out to be a very just God. Witness His casting the
angels out of heaven and His binding them in chains of darkness until the judgment of
the great day.* Witness His turning Adam out of Paradise. Witness His drowning of the
old world. Witness His raining hell out of heaven upon Sodom. Witness all the troubles,
losses, sicknesses, and diseases, which are in the world. Witness Tophet, which "has
long been prepared; it has been made ready for the king. Its fire pit has been made
deep and wide, with an abundance of fire and wood; the breath of the LORD, like a
stream of burning sulfur, sets it ablaze." (Isaiah 30:33) Witness His treasuring up of
wrath against the day of wrath. But above all, witness the pouring forth of all His wrath
upon His bosom Son, when Jesus bore the sins of His people, and cried out, "My God,
My God, why have You forsaken Me?"
*God hanged them up in gibbets, as it were, that others might hear and fear, and do no
more so wickedly.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That sins against God's mercy will bring the greatest and sorest judgments upon men's
heads and hearts. Mercy is God's Alpha, justice is His Omega. David, speaking of these
attributes, places mercy in the forefront, and justice in the rearward, saying, "I will sing
of Your love and justice." (Psalm 101:1). When God's mercy is despised, then His
justice takes the throne!* God is like a prince, who sends not his army against rebels
before he has sent his pardon, and proclaimed it by a herald of arms: he first hangs out
the white flag of mercy; if this wins men in, they are happy forever; but if they remain
30

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
rebellious, then God will put forth his red flag of justice and judgment. If His mercy is
despised, His justice shall be felt!
The higher we are in dignity, the more grievous is our fall and misery.
God is slow to anger—but he recompenses his slowness with grievousness of
punishment. If we abuse His mercy to serve our lust, then, in Salvian's phrase, God will
rain hell out of heaven, rather than not visit for such sins.
See this in the Israelites. He loved them and chose them when they were in their blood,
and most unlovely. He multiplied them, not by means—but by miracle; from seventy
souls they grew in few years to six hundred thousand; the more they were oppressed,
the more they prospered. Like camomile, the more you tread it, the more you spread it;
or like a palm-tree, the more it is pressed, the further it spreads; or like fire, the more it
is raked, the more it burns. Their mercies came in upon them like Job's messengers,
one upon the neck of the other: He put off their sackcloth, and girded them with
gladness, and 'compassed them about with songs of deliverance'; he 'carried them on
the wings of eagles'; he kept them 'as the apple of his eye.' (Psalm 32:7; Exod. 19:4;
Deut. 32:10) But they, abusing his mercy, became the greatest objects of his wrath. As
I know not the man who can reckon up his mercies; so I know not the man who can
sum up the miseries which are coming upon him for their sins!
For as our Savior prophesied concerning Jerusalem, 'that a stone should not be left
upon a stone,' so it was fulfilled forty years after his ascension, by Vespasian the
emperor and his son Titus, who, having besieged Jerusalem, the Jews were oppressed
with a grievous famine, in which their food was old shoes, leather, old hay, and the
dung of beasts. There died, partly by the sword and partly by the famine, eleven
hundred thousand of the poorer sort; two thousand in one night were slaughtered; six
thousand were burned in a porch of the temple; the whole city was sacked and burned,
and laid level to the ground; and ninety-seven thousand taken captives, and forced to
base and miserable service, as Eusebius and Josephus says. (Vespasian broke into their
city at Kedron, where they took Christ, on he same feast day that Christ was taken; he
whipped them where they whipped Christ; he sold twenty Jews for a penny, as they sold
Christ for thirty pence.) And to this day, in all parts of the world, are they not the
offscouring of the world? None more abhorred, than they. Men shall be deeper in hell,
because heaven was offered unto them; but they abused God's mercy. Men's offences
are increased by their obligations.
And so Capernaum, that was lifted up to heaven, was threatened to be thrown down to
hell. No souls fall so low into hell, if they fall, as those souls that by a hand of mercy are
lifted up nearest to heaven. You who are so apt to abuse God's mercy, consider this,
that in the gospel days, the plagues that God inflicts upon the despisers and abusers of
mercy are usually spiritual plagues; as blindness of mind, hardness of heart,
benumbedness of conscience, which are ten thousand times worse than the worst of
outward plagues which can befall you. And therefore, though you may escape temporal
judgments, yet you shall not escape spiritual judgments: 'How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation?' (Heb. 2:3) says the apostle. Oh! therefore, whenever Satan
shall present God to the soul as one made up all of mercy, that he may draw you to do
wickedly, say unto him, that sins against God's mercy, will bring upon the soul the