PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 14
Application: Meditations on Christ's Glory

---

The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 13. Application: Meditations on Christ's Glory.

Part II.
Meditations and Discourses concerning the Glory of Christ.

Application of the foregoing meditations concerning the Glory of Christ:
First, in an Exhortation unto such as are not yet Partakers of Him.
That which remains is, to make some application of the glorious truth insisted on unto the souls of them that are concerned; and what
I have to offer unto that end I shall distribute under two heads. The first shall be with respect unto them who are yet strangers from
this holy and glorious One, – who are not yet made partakers of him, nor have any especial interest in him. And the second shall be
directed unto believers, as a guide and assistance unto their recovery from spiritual decays, and the revival of a spring of vigorous
grace, holiness, and obedience in them.
For the first of these, although it seems not directly to lie in our way, yet is it suited unto the method of the Gospel, that wherever
there is a declaration of the excellencies of Christ, in his person, grace, or office, it should be accompanied with an invitation and
exhortation unto sinners to come unto him. This method he himself first made use of, Matt. 11: 27-30; John 7: 3 7 , 38, and
consecrated it unto our use also. Besides, it is necessary from the nature of the things themselves; for who can dwell on the
consideration of the glory of Christ, being called therewith to the declaration of it, but his own mind will engage him to invite lost
sinners unto a participation of him? But I shall at present proceed no farther in this exhortation, but only unto the proposal of some of
those considerations which may prepare, incline, and dispose their minds unto a closure with him as he is tendered in the Gospels As, 1 . Let them consider well what is their present state with respect unto God and eternity. This Moses wisheth for the Israelites, Deut.
32: 29, “Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!” It is the greatest folly in the
world to leave the issues of these things unto an uncertain hazard; and that man who cannot prevail with himself strictly to examine
what is his state and condition with respect unto eternity, does never do any good nor abstain from any evil in a due manner.
Remember, therefore, that “many are called, but few are chosen.” To be called, is to enjoy all the outward privileges of the Gospel, –
which is all you unto whom I speak can pretend unto; yet this you may do and not be chosen; – even among those unto whom the
word is preached, they are but few that shall be saved. In the distribution made by our Lord Jesus Christ of the hearers of the word
into four sorts of ground, it was but one of them that received real benefit thereby; and if our congregations are no better than were
his hearers, there is not above a fourth part of them that will be saved, – it may be a far less number; – and is it not strange that every
one of them is not jealous over himself and his own condition? Many herein deceive themselves until they fall under woeful surprisals.
And this is represented in the account of the final judgement; for the generality of those who have professed the Gospel are introduced
as complaining of their disappointments, Matt. 25: 41-44 [10-12?]. For what is there spoken is only a declaration of what befell them
here in the close of their lives, and their personal judgement thereon.
2. Take heed of being deluded by common presumptions. Most men have some thoughts in general about what their state is, and
what it will be in the issue; but they make no diligent search into this matter, because a number of common presumptions do
immediately insinuate themselves into their minds for their relief; and they are such as all whose force and efficacy unto this end lies
in this, that they differ from others, and are better than they; – as that they are Christians, that they are in the right way of religion,
that they are partakers of the outward privileges of the Gospel, hearing the word, and participating of the sacraments; – that they
have light and convictions, so as that they abstain from sin, and perform duties so as others do not; and the like. All those with whom
it is not so, who are behind them in these things, they judge to be in an ill state and condition, whence they entertain good hopes
concerning themselves; and this is all that most trust unto. It is not my present business to discourse the vanity of presumptions; – it
has been done by many. I give only this warning in general, unto those who have the least design or purpose to come to Christ, and to
be made partakers of him, that they put no trust in them, that they rely not on them; for if they do so they will eternally deceive their
souls. This was a great part of the preparatory ministry of John the Baptist, Matt. 3: 9, “Think not to say within yourselves, We have
Abraham to our father.” This was their great comprehensive privilege, containing all the outward church and covenant advantages.
These they rested in and trusted to unto their ruin; herein he designed to undeceive them.
3. consider aright what it is to live and die without an interest in Christ, without a participation of him. Where this is not stated in the
mind, where thoughts of it are not continually prevalent, there can be no one step taken in the way towards him. Unless we are
thoroughly convinced that without him we are in a state of apostasy from God, under the curse, obnoxious unto eternal wrath, as
some of the worst of God’s enemies, we shall never flee unto him for refuge in a due manner. “The whole have no need of a physician,
but the sick.” Christ “came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance;” and the conviction intended is the principal end of the
ministry of the law. The miseries of this state have been the subject of innumerable sermons and discourses; but there is a general
misery in the whole, that few take themselves to be concerned therein, or apply these things unto themselves. Let us tell men of it a
thousand times, yet they either take no notice of it, or believe it not, or look on it as that which belongs unto the way and course of
preaching, wherein they are not concerned. These things, it seems, preachers must say; and they may believe them who have a mind
whereunto. It is a rare thing that any one shall as much as say unto himself, Is it so with me? And if we now, together with this
caution, tell the same men again, that whilst they are uninterested in Christ, not ingrafted into him by faith, that they run in vain,

that all their labour in religion is lost, that their duties are all rejected, that they are under the displeasure and curse of God, that their
end is eternal destruction, – which are all unquestionably certain, – yet will they let all these things pass by without any farther
consideration.
But here I must fix with them unto whom I speak at present, – unless there be a full conviction in them of the woeful, deplorable
condition of every soul, of whatever quality, profession, religion, outward state it be, who is not yet made partaker of Christ, all that I
have farther to add will be of no signification. Remember, then, that the due consideration hereof is unto you, in your state, your
chiefest concernment in this world: and be not afraid to take in a full and deep sense of it; for if you are really delivered from it, and
have good evidence thereof, it is nothing unto you but matter of eternal praise and thanksgiving. And if you are not so, it is highly
necessary that your minds should be possessed with due apprehension of it. The work of this conviction is the first effect of true
religion; and the great abuse of religion in the world is, that a pretence of it deludes the minds of men to apprehend that it is not
necessary: for to be of this or that religion, – of this or that way in religion, – is supposed sufficient to secure the eternal state of men,
though they are never convinced of their lost estate by nature.
Consider therefore, his infinite condescension, grace, and love herein. Why all this towards you? Does he stand in need of you? Have
you deserved it at his hands? Did you love him first? Cannot he be happy and blessed without you? Has he any design upon you, that
he is so earnest in calling you unto him? Alas! it is nothing but the overflowing of mercy, compassion, and grace, that moves and acts
him herein. Here lies the entrance of innumerable souls into a death and condemnation far more severe than those contained in the
curse of the law, 2 Cor. 2: 15, 16. In the contempt of this infinite condescension of Christ in his holy invitation of sinners to himself,
lies the sting and poison of unbelief, which unavoidably gives over the souls of men unto eternal ruin. And who shall once pity them to
eternity who are guilty of it? Y ea, but, 5. Perhaps, if you should, on his invitation, begin to look to Him, and resolve to come to him, you are greatly afraid that when it
comes to the trial he will not receive you; for no heart can conceive, no tongue can express, what wretched, vile, and provoking
sinners you have been. That the Lord Christ will receive unto him such as we are, we have no hopes, or that ever we shall find
acceptance with him. I say it is not amiss when persons come so far as to be sensible of what discouragements they have to conflict
withal, what difficulties lie in their way, and what objections do arise against them; for the most do perish in a senseless stupidity, –
they will not consider how it is with them, what is required of them, nor how it will be in the latter end; – they doubt not but that
either they do believe already, or can do so when they please. But when any come so far as to charge the failure of their acceptance
with Christ on their own unworthiness, and so are discouraged from coming unto him, there are arguments for their conviction and
persuasion, which nothing but the devil and unbelief can defeat. Wherefore, that which is now proposed unto consideration in answer
hereunto, is the readiness of Christ to receive every sinner, be he who or what he will, that shall come unto him. And hereof we have
the highest evidences that divine wisdom and grace can give unto us. This is the language of the Gospel, of all that the Lord Christ did
or suffered, which is recorded therein; – this is the divine testimony of the “three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost;” and of the “three that bear witness in earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood:” all give their joint testimony,
that the Lord Christ is ready to receive all sinners that come to him. They who receive not this testimony make God a liar, – both
Father, Son, and Spirit. Whatever the Lord Christ is in the constitution of his person, – in the representation of the Father, – in his
office, – in what he did on the earth, – in what he does in heaven, – proclaims the same truth. Nothing but cursed obstinacy in sin
and unbelief can suggest a thought unto our minds that he is not willing to receive us when we come unto him. Herein we are to bear
testimony against the unbelief of all unto whom the gospel is preached, that come not unto him. Unbelief acting itself herein, includes
a contempt of the wisdom of God, a denial of his truth or faithfulness, an impeachment of the sincerity of Christ in his invitations,
making him a deceiver, and will issue in an express hatred of his person and office, and of the wisdom of God in him. Here, then, you
are shut up, – you cannot from hence take any countenance unto your unbelief
6 . Consider that he is as able to save us as he is ready and willing to receive us. The testimonies which he has given us unto his
goodness and love are uncontrollable; and none dare directly to call in question or deny his power. Generally, this is taken for granted
by all, that Christ is able to save us if he will; yea, who shall question his ability to save us, though we live in sin and unbelief? And
many expect that he will do so, because they believe he can if he will. But indeed Christ has no such power, no such ability: he cannot
save unbelieving, impenitent sinners; for this cannot be done without denying himself, acting contrary to his word, and destroying his
own glory. Let none please themselves with such vain imaginations. Christ is able to save all them, and only them, who come to God
by him. Whilst you live in sin and unbelief, Christ himself cannot save you; but when it comes to the trial in particular, some are apt
to think, that although they will not conclude that Christ cannot save them, yet they do, on various accounts, that they cannot be
saved by him. This, therefore, we also give testimony unto in our exhortation to come unto him, – namely, that his power to save
those that shall comply with his call is sovereign, uncontrollable, almighty, that nothing can stand in the way of. All things in heaven
and earth are committed unto him; – all power is his; – and he will use it unto this end, – namely, the assured salvation of all that
come unto him.
7. Consider greatly what has been spoken of the representation of God, and all the holy properties of his nature, in him. Nothing can
possibly give us more encouragement to come unto him; for we have manifested that God, who is infinitely wise and glorious, has
designed to exert all the holy properties of his nature – his mercy, love, grace, goodness, righteousness, wisdom, and power – in him,
in and unto the salvation of them that do believe. Whoever, therefore, comes unto Christ by faith on this representation of the glory of
God in him, he ascribes and gives unto God all that glory and honour which he aimeth at from his creatures; and we can do nothing
wherewith he is pleased equal unto it. Every poor soul that comes by faith unto Christ, gives unto God all that glory which it is his
design to manifest and be exalted in; – and what can we do more? There is more glory given unto God by coming unto Christ in
believing, than in keeping the whole law; inasmuch as he hath more eminently manifested the holy properties of his nature in the
way of salvation by Christ, than in giving of the law. There is therefore no man who, under gospel invitations, refuseth to come unto
and close with Christ by believing, but secretly, through the power of darkness, blindness, and unbelief, he hates God, dislikes all his
ways, would not have his glory exalted or manifested, choosing rather to die in enmity against him than to give glory to him. Do not
deceive yourselves; it is not an indifferent thing, whether you will come in unto Christ upon his invitations or no, – a thing that you
may put off from one season unto another: your present refusal of it is as high an act of enmity against God as your nature is capable
of.
8. Consider that by coming unto Christ you shall have an interest in all that glory which we have proposed unto you; for Christ will

become yours more intimately than your wives and children are yours; and so all his glory is yours also. All are apt to be affected with
the good things of their relations, – their grace, their riches, their beauty, their power; for they judge themselves to have an interest in
them, by reason of their relation unto them. Christ is nearer to believers than any natural relations are to us whatever; they have
therefore an interest in all his glory. And is this a small thing in your eyes, that Christ shall be yours, and all his glory shall be yours,
and you shall have the advantage of it unto your eternal blessedness? Is it nothing unto you to continue strangers from, and
uninterested in, all this glory? to be left to take your portion in this world, in lusts, and sins, and pleasures, and a few perishing trifles,
with eternal ruin in the close, whilst such durable substance, such riches of glory, are tendered unto you?
Lastly, consider the horrible ingratitude there is in a neglect or refusal to come in to Christ upon his invitation, with the doleful, eternal
ruin that will ensue thereon. “How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?” Impenitent unbelievers under the preaching of
the gospel, are the vilest and most ungrateful of all God’s creation. The devils themselves, as wicked as they are, are not guilty of this
sin; for Christ is never tendered unto them, – they never had an offer of salvation on faith and repentance. This is their peculiar sin,
and will be the peculiar aggravation of their misery unto eternity. “Hear, ye despisers, wonder, and perish”. The sin of the devil is in
malice and opposition unto knowledge, above what the nature of man is in this world. Men, therefore, must sin in some instance
above the devil, or God would not give them their eternal portion with the devil and his angels: – this is unbelief.
Some, it may be, will say, What then shall we do? what shall we apply ourselves unto? what is it that is required of us?
1. Take the advice of the apostle, Heb. 3: 7, 8, 13, “Today, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, in the
day of temptation in the wilderness. But exhort one another daily, while it is called Today; lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin.” This day, even this, is unto you in the tender of grace the acceptable time; – this is the day of salvation. Others
have had this day as well as you, and have missed their opportunity; – take heed lest it should be so with you also. Now if any one
should write it down, or peculiarly commit it to remembrance, “This day there was a tender of Christ and salvation in him made unto
my soul, – from this time I will resolve to give up myself unto him,” and if you form your resolutions, charge your consciences with
what you have engaged, and make yourselves to know that if you go back from it, it is a token that you are going to ruin.
2. Consider that it is high time for you to make somewhat of religion. Do not hang always in suspense; let it not be a question with
yourselves, whether you have a mind to be saved or no. This is as good a time and season for a resolution as ever you are like to have
whilst in this world. Some things, nay, many things, may fall in between this and the next opportunity, that shall put you backward,
and make your entrance into the kingdom of heaven far more difficult than ever it was; and the living in that uncertainty at best,
which you do, of what will become of you unto eternity, is the most miserable kind of life in the world. Those who put far from them
the evil day, and live in the pursuit of lusts and pleasures, have somewhat that gives them present satisfaction, and they say not,
“There is no hope,” because they “find the life of the hand” [Isa. 57: 10]; but you have nothing that gives you any prevalent
refreshment, neither will your latter end be better than theirs, if you die without an interest in Christ Jesus. Come, therefore, at length,
unto a determinate resolution what you will do in this matter. Christ has waited long for you, and who knows how soon he may
withdraw, never to look after you any more?
Upon occasion of the preceding Discourse concerning the Glory of Christ, I thought it necessary to add unto it this brief exhortation
unto faith in him, aiming to suit it unto the capacity of the meanest sinner that is capable of any self-consideration as unto his eternal
welfare. But yet, a little farther to give efficacy unto this exhortation, it will be necessary to remove some of those common and
obvious tergiversations that convinced sinners do usually retake themselves unto, to put off a present compliance with the calls of
Christ to come unto him; for although it is unbelief alone, acting in the darkness of men’s minds and the obstinacy of their wills, that
effectually keeps off sinners from coming unto Christ upon his call, yet it shrouds itself under various pretences, that it may not
appear in its own ugly form. For no sin whereof men can be guilty in this world is of so horrible a nature, and so dreadful an aspect, as
is this unbelief, where a clear view of it is obtained in evangelical light. Wherefore, by the aid of Satan, it suggests other pleas and
pretences unto the minds of sinners, under which they may countenance themselves in a refusal to come to Christ. See 2 Cor. 4: 4.
Any thing else it shall be, but not unbelief; – that they all disavow. I shall therefore speak unto a few of those tergiversations in this
case which are obvious, and which are exemplified in the Gospel itself.
First, Some do say, on such exhortations, What is it that you would have us to do? – We hear the word preached, we believe it as well
as we can, we do many things willingly, and abstain from many evils diligently; what is more required of us? This is the language of
the hearts of the most with whom in this case we have to do. And I say, l. It is usual with them who do something in the ways of God, but not all they should, and so nothing in a due manner, to expostulate
about requiring of them more than they do. So the people dispute with God himself, Mal. 1: 6, 3: 8, 13. So they in the Gospel who
esteemed themselves to have done their duty, being pressed unto faith by Christ Jesus, ask him with some indignation, “What shall we
do, that we might work the works of God?” John 6: 28. If what we do be not enough, what is it that you require more of us? So was it
with the young man, Matt. 19: 20, “What lack I yet?” Be advised, therefore, not to be too confident of your state, lest you should yet
lack that one thing, the want whereof might prove your eternal ruin.
2. The things mentioned, with all of the like nature, which may be multiplied, may be where there is no one spark of saving faith.
Simon Magus heard the word, and believed as well as he could; – Herod heard it, and did many things gladly; – and all sorts of
hypocrites do upon their convictions perform many duties, and abstain from many sins: so as that, notwithstanding this plea, you
may perish for ever.
3. Where these things are sincere, they belong unto the exercise of faith; they may be after a sort without faith, but faith cannot be
without them. But there is a fundamental act of faith, whereby we close with Christ, whereby we receive him, that is, in order of
nature, antecedent unto its acting in all other duties and occasions; – it is laying the foundation; other things belong to the building.
This is that you are called on to secure; and you may know it by these two properties: 1. It is singular. So our Saviour tells the Jews, John 6: 29, “This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent.” The
act, work, or duty of faith, in the receiving of Christ, is a peculiar, singular work, wherein the soul yields especial obedience unto God;
– it is not to be reckoned unto such common duties as those mentioned, but the soul must find out wherein it has in a singular
manner closed with Christ upon the command of God.

2. It is accompanied with a universal spiritual change in the whole soul, 2 Cor. 5: 17, “If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature:
old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new.” Wherefore, if you would not choose rather to deceive and ruin your
own souls, come to the trial whether indeed you have received Christ in such a singular, transforming act of faith: do not on such
pretences want a compliance with the word of exhortation proposed unto you. But, -

Secondly, Some will say, they know not how to proceed in this work.
They can make nothing of it; they have tried to come to this believing, but do still fail in what they design; they go on and off, but can
make no progress, can come to no satisfaction; therefore they think it best to let things go in general as they are, without putting
themselves to farther trouble, as unto any especial act of faith in the receiving of Christ. This is the language of men’s hearts, though
not of their mouths, another shelter of unbelief, – and they act accordingly; they have a secret despondency, which keeps them safe
from attempting a real closure with Christ on the tender of the Gospel. Something may be offered unto this distempered frame of
mind.
1 . Remember the disciples that were fishing, and had toiled all night, but caught nothing, Luke 5: 3, 4. Upon the coming of Christ
unto them, he requires that they should cast out their nets once more; Peter makes some excuse, from the labour which they had
taken in vain all night; however, he would venture once more, on the command of Christ, and had an astonishing draught of fishes,
verses 5-9. Have you been wearied with disappointments in your attempts and resolutions? Y et cast in your net this once more, upon
the command of Christ, – venture this once more to come unto him on his call and invitation; you know not what success he may
give unto you.
2. Consider that it is not failing in this or that attempt of coming to Christ, but a giving over your endeavours, that will be your ruin.
The woman of Canaan, in her great outcry to Christ for mercy, Matt. 15: 22, had many a repulse. First, it is said, he answered her not
a word; then his disciples desired that he would send her away, that she might not trouble him any more; whereon he gives a reason
why he would not regard her, or why he could justly pass her by; she was not an Israelitess, unto whom he was sent; – yet she gives
not over, but pressing into his presence, cries out for mercy, verse 25. Being come to that issue, to try and draw out her faith to the
utmost, which was his design from the beginning, he reckons her among dogs, that were not to have children’s bread given unto
them. Had she now at last given over upon this severe rebuke, she had never obtained mercy; but persisting in her request, she at last
prevailed, verses 27, 28. It may be you have prayed, and cried, and resolved, and vowed, but all without success, as you suppose; sin
has broken through all: however, if you give not over, you shall prevail at last; you know not at what time God will come in with his
grace, and Christ will manifest his love unto you as unto the poor woman, after many a rebuke. It may be, after all, he will do it this
day; and if not, he may do it another: do not despond. Take that word of Christ himself for your encouragement, Prov. 8: 34, “Blessed
is the man that hearth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.” If you hear him, and wait, though you have
not yet admission, but are kept at the gates and posts of the doors, yet in the issue you shall be blessed.
3. The rule in this case is, Hos. 6: 3, “Then shall we know, if we follow on to know.” Are you in the way of knowing Christ in the use of
means, hearing the word, and sincere endeavours in holy duties? Though you cannot yet attain unto any evidence that you have
received him, have closed with him, nothing can ruin you but giving over the way wherein you are; for then shall you know, if you
follow on to know the Lord. Many can give you their experiences, that if they had been discouraged by present overwhelming
difficulties, arising from their disappointments, breaking of vows, relapses into folly, they had been utterly ruined; whereas now they
are at rest and peace in the bosom of Christ. On a great surprisal, Christ lost at once many disciples, and they lost their souls, John 6:
66, “They went back, and walked no more with him.” Take heed of the like discouragements.

Thirdly, These things are necessary but not urgent.
Some may say, yea, practically they do say, that these things indeed are necessary; they must come to Christ by believing, or they are
undone; but this is not the season of it, – there will be time enough to apply themselves unto it when other occasions are past. At
present they have not leisure to enter upon and go through with this duty; wherefore they will abide in their present state for a while,
hearing and doing many things, and when time serves, will apply themselves unto this duty also.
1 . This is an uncontrollable evidence of that sottishness and folly which is come upon our nature by sin, – a depravation that the
apostle places in the head of the evils of corrupted nature, Tit. 3: 1-3. Can any thing be more foolish, sottish, and stupid, than for men
to put off the consideration of the eternal concernment of their souls for one hour, being altogether uncertain whether they shall live
another or n? – to prefer present triodes before the blessedness or misery of an immortal state? For those who never heard of these
things, who never had any conviction of sin and judgement, to put the evil day far from them, is not much to be admired; but for you
who have Christ preached unto you, who own a necessity of coming unto him, to put it off from day to day upon such slight
pretences, – it is an astonishing folly! May you not be spoken unto in the language of the Wisdom of God, Prov. 6: 9-11. Y ou come to
hear the word, and when you go away, the language of your hearts is, “Y et a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to
sleep;” we will abide a little while in our present state, and afterward we will rouse up ourselves. Under this deceit do multitudes perish
every day. This is a dark shade, wherein cursed unbelief lies hid.
2. Consider that this is the greatest engine that Satan makes use of in the world among them that hear the word preached unto them,
for the ruin of their souls. He has other arts, and ways, and methods of dealing with other men, – as by sensual and worldly lusts; but
as unto them who, through their convictions, do attend unto the preaching of the word, this is his great and almost only engine for
their ruin: There needs no haste in this matter, – another time will be more seasonable, – you may be sure not to fail of it before you
die; however, this present day and time is most unfit for it, – you have other things to do, – you cannot part with your present frame,
– you may come again to hear the word the next opportunity. Know assuredly, if your minds are influenced unto delays of coming to
Christ by such insinuations, you are under the power of Satan, and he is like enough to hold you fast unto destruction.
3. This is as evil and dangerous a posture or frame of mind as you can well fall under. If you have learned to put off God, and Christ,
and the word for the present season, and yet relieve yourselves in this, that you do not intend, like others, always to reject them, but
will have a time to hearken to their calls, you are secured and fortified against all convictions and persuasions, all fears; one answer
will serve for all, – within a little while you will do all that can be required of you. This is that which ruins the souls of multitudes

every day. It is better dealing with men openly profligate, than with such a trifling promiser. See Isa. 5: 7, 10.
4 . Remember that the Scripture confines you unto the present day, without the least intimation that you shall have either another
day, or another tender of grace and mercy in any day, 2 Cor. 6: 2; Heb. 3: 7, 13; 12: 15. Take care lest you come short of the grace of
God, miss of it by missing your opportunity. Redeem the time, or you are lost for ever.
5 . As unto the pretence of your occasions and business, there is a ready way to disappoint the craft of Satan in that pretence, –
namely, to mix thoughts of Christ and the renovation of your resolutions either to come or to cleave unto him with all your occasions.
Let nothing put it utterly out of your minds; make it familiar unto you, and you will beat Satan out of that stronghold, Prov. 7: 4.
However, shake yourselves out of this dust, or destruction lies at the door.

Fourthly, They must relinquish and renounce all their lusts and pleasures.
I t is the language of the hearts of some, that if they give up themselves unto a compliance with this exhortation, and go seriously
about this duty, they must relinquish and renounce all their lusts and pleasures; yea, much of their converse and society, wherein they
find so much present satisfaction, as that they know not how to part with them. If they might retain their old ways, at least some of
them, it were another matter; but this total relinquishment of all is very severe.
Ans. 1. The Jesuits, preaching and painting of Christ among some of the Indians, concealed from them his cross and sufferings, telling
them only of his present glory and power; so as they pretended to win them over to faith in him, hiding from them that whereby they
might be discouraged; and so preached a false Christ unto them, one of their own framing. We dare do no such thing for all the world;
we can here use no condescension, no compliance, no composition with respect unto any sin or lust; we have no commission to grant
that request of Lot, “Is it not a little one? let it be spared;” nor to come to Naaman’s terms, “God be merciful to me in this thing; in all
others I will be obedient.” Wherefore, 2. We must here be peremptory with you, whatever be the event; if you are discouraged by it, we cannot help it. Cursed be the man
that shall encourage you to come to Christ with hopes of indulgence unto any one sin whatever. I speak not this as though you could
at once absolutely and perfectly leave all sin, in the root and branches of it; but only you are to do it in heart and resolution, engaging
unto a universal mortification of all sin, as by grace from above you shall be enabled; but your choice must be absolute, without
reserves, as to love, interest, and design; – God or the world, – Christ or Belial, – holiness or sin; there is no medium, no terms of
composition, 2 Cor. 6: 15-18.
As unto what you pretend of your pleasures, the truth is, you never yet had any real pleasure, nor do know what it is. How easy were
it to declare the folly, vanity, bitterness, poison of those things which you have esteemed your pleasures! Here alone – namely, in
Christ, and a participation of him – are true pleasures and durable riches to be obtained; pleasure of the same nature with, and such
as, like pleasant streams, flow down into the ocean of eternal pleasures above. A few moments in these joys are to be preferred above
the longest continuance in the cursed pleasures of this world. See Prov. 3: 13-18.

Fifthly, They are no worse than some others.
It will be said by some, that they do not see those who profess themselves to be believers, to be so much better than they are, as that
you need to press us so earnestly to so great a change; we know not why we should not be accounted believers already, as well as they.
I shall in a few words, as well as I am able, lay this stumbling-block out of the way, though I confess, at this day, it is weighty and
cumbersome. And I say, 1. Among them that profess themselves to be believers, there are many false, corrupt hypocrites; and it is no wonder that on various
occasions they lay the stumbling-block of their iniquities before the faces of others; but they shall bear their own burden and
judgement.
2. It is acknowledged, it must be bewailed, that some whom we have reason to judge to be true believers, yet, through their unfortified
pride, or covetousness, or carelessness in their conversation, or vain attire and conformity to the world, or forwardness, do give just
occasion of offence. We confess that God is displeased herewith, Christ and the Gospel dishonoured, and many that are weak are
wounded, and others discouraged. But as for you, this is not your rule, – this is not proposed unto you; but that word only is so that
will never fail you.
3. The world does not know, nor is able to make a right judgement of believers; nor do you so, for it is the spiritual man alone that
discerneth the things of God. Their infirmities are visible to all, – their graces invisible; the King’s daughter is glorious within. And
when you are able to make a right judgement of them, you will desire no greater advancement than to be of their society, Ps. 16: 3.
These few instances of the pretences wherewith unbelief covers its deformity, and hides that destruction wherewith it is accompanied,
may suffice unto our present purpose; they are multiplied in the minds of men, impregnated by the suggestions of Satan on their
darkness and folly. A little spiritual wisdom will rend the veil of them all, and expose unbelief acting in enmity against Christ under
them. But what has been spoken may suffice to answer the necessity of the preceding exhortation on this occasion.

The Way and Means of the Recovery of Spiritual Decays, and of Obtaining Fresh Springs of Grace.
The application of the same truth, in the second place, belongs unto relievers, especially such as have made any long profession of
walking in the ways of God and the gospel. And that which I design herein, is to manifest, that a steady spiritual view of the glory of
Christ by faith, will give them a gracious revival from inward decays, and fresh springs of grace, even in their latter days. A truth this
is, as we shall see, confirmed by Scripture, with the joyful experience of multitudes of believers, and is of great importance unto all
that are so.

There are two things which those who, after a long profession of the gospel, are entering into the confines of eternity do long for and
desire. The one is, that all their breaches may be repaired, their decays recovered, their backsliding healed; for unto these things they
have been less or more obnoxious in the course of their walking before God. The other is, that they may have fresh springs of spiritual
life, and vigorous acting of all divine graces, in spiritual-mindedness, holiness, and fruitfulness, unto the praise of God, the honour of
the gospel, and the increase of their own peace and joy. These things they value more than all the world, and all that is in it; about
these things are their thoughts and contrivances exercised night and day. Those with whom it is otherwise, whatever they pretend, are
in the dark unto themselves and their own condition; for it is in the nature of this grace to grow and increase unto the end. As rivers,
the nearer they come unto the ocean whither they tend, the more they increase their waters, and speed their streams; so will grace
flow more freely and fully in its near approaches to the ocean of glory. That is not saving which does not so.
An experience hereof – I mean of the thriving of grace towards the end of our course – is that alone which can support us under the
troubles and temptations of life, which we have to conflict withal. So the apostle tells us, that this is our great relief in all our distresses
and afflictions, “for which cause we faint not; but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day,” 2 Cor.
4: 16. If it be so, that in the daily decays of the outward man, in all the approaches of its dissolution, we have inward spiritual revivals
and renovation, we shall not faint in what we undergo. And without such continual renovations, we shall faint in our distresses,
whatever other things we may have, or whatever we pretend unto the contrary.
And ordinarily it is so, in the holy, wise providence of God, that afflictions and troubles increase with age. It is so, in an especial
manner, with ministers of the gospel; they have many of them a share in the lot of Peter, which our Lord Jesus Christ declared unto
him, John 21: 18, “When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou shalt be old,
thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.” Besides those natural
distemper and infirmities which accompany the decays of life, troubles of life, and in their affairs, do usually grow upon them, when
they look for nothing less, but were ready to say with Job, “We shall die in our nest,” Job 29: 18. So was it with Jacob, after all his
hard labour and travail to provide for his family, such things fell out in it in his old age as had almost broken his heart. And oft times
both persecutions and public dangers do befall them at the same season. Whilst the outward man is thus perishing, we need great
supportment, that we faint not. And this is only to be had in an experience of daily spiritual renovations in the inner man.
The excellency of this mercy the Psalmist expresseth in a heavenly manner, Ps. 92: 12-15, “The righteous shall flourish like the palm
tree; he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of the LORD shall flourish in the courts of our God.
They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing; to show that the LOBD is upright: he is my rock, and there
is no unrighteousness in him.”
The promise in the 12th verse respects the times of the Messiah, or of the New Testament; for so it is prophesied of him, “In his days
the righteous shall flourish,” Ps. 72: 7, – namely, through the abundance of grace that should be administered from his fulness, as
John 1: 16; Col. 1: 19. And herein consists the glory of the gospel, and not in outward prosperity or external ornaments of divine
worship. The flourishing of the righteous, I say, in grace and holiness is the glory of the office of Christ and of the gospel. Where this is
not, there is no glory in the profession of our religion. The glory of kings is in the wealth and peace of their subjects; and the glory of
Christ is in the grace and holiness of his subjects.
This flourishing is compared to the palm-tree, and the growth of the cedar. The palm-tree is of the greatest verdure, beauty, and
fruitfulness, and the cedar of the greatest and longest growth of any trees. So are the righteous compared to the palm-tree for the
beauty of profession and fruitfulness in obedience; and unto the cedar for a continual, constant growth and increase in grace. Thus it
is with all that are righteous, unless it be from their own sinful neglect, as it is with many in this day. They are hereon rather like the
shrubs and heaths in the wilderness, which see not when good comes, than like the palm-tree or the cedars of Lebanon. And hereby do
men what lies in them to obscure the glory of Christ and his kingdom, as well as disquiet their own souls.
The words that follow, verse 13, “Those that be planted in the house of the LORD shall flourish in the courts of our God,” are not
distinctive of some from other, as though some only of the nourishing righteous were so planted; but they are descriptive of them all,
with an addition of the way and means whereby they are caused so to grow and flourish. And this is, their implantation in the house
of the Lord; – that is, in the church, which is the seat of all the means of spiritual life, both as unto growth and flourishing, which God
is pleased to grant unto believers. To be planted in the house of the Lord, is to be fixed and rooted in the grace communicated by the
ordinances of divine worship. Unless we are planted in the house of the Lord, we cannot flourish in his courts. See Ps. 1: 3. Unless we
are partakers of the grace administered in the ordinances, we cannot flourish in a fruitful profession. The outward participation of
them is common unto hypocrites, that bear some leaves, but neither grow like the cedar nor bear fruit like the palm-tree. So the
apostle prays for believers, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith, that they may be “rooted and grounded in love,” Eph. 3: 17, –
“rooted, built up, and established,” Col. 2: 7. The want hereof is the cause that we have so many fruitless professors; they have entered
the courts of God by profession, but were never planted in his house by faith and love. Let us not deceive ourselves herein; – we may
be entered into the church, and made partakers of the outward privileges of it, and not be so planted in it as to flourish in grace and
fruitfulness.
That which on this occasion I principally intend, is the grace and privilege expressed, verse 14, “They shall still bring forth fruit in old
age; they shall be fat and flourishing.” There be three things which constitute a spiritual state, or belong to the life of God. 1. That
believers be fat; that is, by the heavenly juice, sap, or fatness of the true olive, of Christ himself, as Rom. 11: 17. This is the principle of
spiritual life and grace derived from him. When this abounds in them, so as to give them strength and vigour in the exercise of grace,
to keep them from decays and withering, they are said to be fat; which, in the Scripture phrase, is strong and healthy. 2. That they
flourish in the greenness (as the word is) and verdure of profession; for vigorous grace will produce a flourishing profession. 3. That
they still bring forth fruit in all duties of holy obedience. All these are promised unto them even in old age.
Even trees, when they grow old (the palm and the cedar), are apt to lose of their juice and verdure: and men in old age are subject
unto all sorts of decays, both outward and inward. It is a rare thing to see a man in old age naturally vigorous, healthy, and strong;
and would it were not more rare to see any spiritually so at the same season! But this is here promised unto believers as an especial
grace and privilege, beyond what can be represented in the growth or fruit-bearing of plants and trees.

The grace intended is, that when believers are under all sorts of bodily and natural decays, and, it may be, have been overtaken with
spiritual decays also, there is provision made in the covenant to render them fat, flourishing, and fruitful, – vigorous in the power of
internal grace, and flourishing in the expression of it in all duties of obedience; which is that which we now inquire after.
Blessed be God for this good word of his grace, that he has given us such encouragement against all the decays and temptations of old
age which we have to conflict withal!
And the Psalmist, in the next words, declares the greatness of this privilege: “To show that the LORD is upright; he is my rock, and
there is no unrighteousness in him.” Consider the oppositions that lie against the flourishing of believers in old age, the difficulties of it,
the temptations that must be conquered, the acting of the mind above its natural abilities which are decayed the weariness that is apt
to befall us in a long spiritual conflict, the cries of the flesh to be spared, and we shall see it to be an evidence of the faithfulness, power,
and righteousness of God in covenant; – nothing else could produce this mighty effect. So the prophet, treating of the same promise,
Hos. 14: 4-8, closes his discourse with that blessed remark, verse 9, “Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and
he shall know them? for the ways of the LORD are right, and the just shall walk in them.” Spiritual wisdom will make us to see that
the faithfulness and power of God are exerted in this work of preserving believers flourishing and fruitful unto the end.
Having laid the foundation of this illustrious testimony, I shall farther declare and confirm my intention, so to make way for the
application of the truth under consideration unto this case, – manifesting that the way whereby we may be made partakers of this
grace, is by a steady view of the glory of Christ, as proposed to us in the Gospel.
There is a latter spring in the year, a spring in autumn; it is, indeed, for the most part, but faint and weak, – yet is it such as the
husbandman cannot spare. And it is an evident sign of barren ground, when it does not put forth afresh towards the end of the year.
God, the good husband man, looks for the same from us, especially if we had a summer’s drought in spiritual decays; as the Psalmist
complains, Ps. 32: 4. Had we not had a latter spring the last year, the land had greatly suffered under the drought of the summer. And
if we have had such a drought in the course of our profession by spiritual decays, as God, the good husband man, looks for a latter
spring in us, even in old age, in the vigorous acting of grace and fruitful obedience; so without it we can neither have peace nor joy in
our own souls. If a man, therefore, has made a great appearance of religion in his former or younger days, and when he is growing
into age becomes dead, cold, worldly, selfish, – if he have no fresh springs of spiritual life in him, it is an evidence that he has a barren
heart, that was never really fruitful to God. I know that many stand in need of being excited by such warning unto a diligent
consideration of their state and condition.
It is true, that the latter spring does not bring forth the same fruit with the former. There is no more required in it but that the ground
evidence itself to be in good heart, and put forth that which is proper unto the season. It may be, such graces as were active and
vigorous in men at their first conversion unto God, as were carried in a stream of warm, natural affections, may not so eminently
abound in the latter spring of old age; but those which are proper for the season – as namely, spirituality, heavenly-mindedness,
weanedness from the world, readiness for the cross and death – are necessary, even in old age, to evidence that we have a living
principle of grace, and to show thereby that God is upright; He is our rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.
What is farther to be insisted one shall be reduced unto these four heads: I. That the constitution of spiritual life is such as is meet to thrive, grow, and increase unto the end, and will do so, unless it be from
the default of them in whom it is.
II. That notwithstanding this nature and constitution of spiritual life, yet believers are subject unto many decays, partly gradual, and
partly by surprisals in temptation, whereby the growth of it is obstructed, unto the dishonour of the gospel and the loss of their own
peace with joy.
III. I shall show that such at present is the condition of many professors, – namely that they are visibly fallen under spiritual decays,
and do not evidence any interest in the blessed promise insisted on.
I V. On the confirmation of these things, our inquiry will be, how such persons may be delivered from such decays, and by what
means they may obtain the grace here promised, of spiritual flourishing in old age, both in the strengthening of the inward principle of
life and abounding in fruits of obedience, which are to the praise of God by Jesus Christ; and then we shall make application unto this
case of that truth which is the subject of the preceding discourse.
I. The constitution of spiritual life is such as is meet to grow and increase unto the end. Hereby it does distinguish itself from that faith
which is temporary; for there is a temporary faith, which will both flourish for a season and bring forth some fruit; but it is not in its
nature and constitution to abide, to grow and increase, but rather to decay and wither. It is described by our Lord Jesus Christ, Matt.
13: 20, 21. Either some great temptation extinguishes it, or it decays insensibly, until the mind wherein it was do manifest itself to be
utterly barren. And, therefore, whoever is sensible of any spiritual decays, he is called unto a severe trial and examination of himself,
as unto the nature of the principle of his profession and obedience; for such decays do rather argue a principle of temporary faith only,
unto which they are proper and natural, than that whose nature it is to thrive and grow to the end, whereon those that have it shall,
as it is in the promise, still bring forth fruit, and, without their own great guilt, be always freed from such decays.
That this spiritual life is in its nature and constitution such as will abide, thrive, and grow to the end, is three ways testified unto in the
Scripture.
1. In that it is compared unto things of the most infallible increase and progress; for besides that its growth is frequently likened unto
that of plants and trees well watered, and in a fruitful soil, which fail not to spring, unless it be from some external violence; it is
likewise compared unto such things as whose progress is absolutely infallible, Prov. 4: 18, “The path of the just is, as the shining light,
that shineth more and more unto the perfect day.” The path of the just is his covenant-walk before God, as it is frequently called in the
Scripture, Ps. 119: 35,105; Isa. 26: 7; Ps. 23: 3; Matt. 3: 3; Heb. 12: 13; and it compriseth the principle, profession, and fruits of it. This,
saith the wise man, is as the shining light; that is, the morning light. And wherein is it so? Why, as that goes on by degrees, and
shineth more and more unto the high noon (though it may be interrupted sometimes by clouds and storms); so is this path of the just,
– it goes on and increaseth unto the high noon, the perfect day of glory. It is in its nature so to do, though it may sometimes meet

with obstructions, as we shall see afterward; and so does the morning light also.
There is no visible difference, as unto light, between the light of the morning and the light of the evening; yea, this latter sometimes,
from gleams of the setting sun, seems to be more glorious than the other. But herein they differ: the first goes on gradually unto more
light, until it comes to perfection; the other gradually gives place unto darkness, until it comes to be midnight. So is it as unto the light
of the just and of the hypocrite, and so is it as unto their paths. At first setting out they may seem alike and equal; yea, convictions and
spiritual gifts acted with corrupt ends in some hypocrites, may for a time give a greater lustre of profession than the grace of others
sincerely converted unto God may attain unto. But herein they discover their different natures: the one increaseth and goes on
constantly, though it may be sometimes but faintly; the other decays, grows dim, gives place to darkness and crooked walking.
This, then, is the nature of the path of the just; and where it is otherwise with us in our walk before God, we can have no evidence
that we are in that path, or that we have a living, growing principle of spiritual life in us. And it is fit that professors of all sorts should
be minded of these things; for we may see not a few of them under visible decays, without any sincere endeavours after a recovery,
who yet please themselves that the root of the matter is in them. It is so, if love of the world, conformity unto it, negligence in holy
duties, and coldness in spiritual love, be an evidence of such decays. But let none deceive their own souls; wherever there is a living
principle of grace, it will be thriving and growing unto the end. And if it fall under obstructions, and thereby into decays for a season, it
will give no rest or quietness unto the soul wherein it is, but will labour continually for a recovery. Peace in a spiritually-decaying
condition, is a soul-ruining security; better be under terror on the account of surprisal into some sin, than be in peace under evident
decays of spiritual life.
And, by the way, this comparing of the path of the just unto the morning light minds me of what I have seen more than once. That
light has sometimes cheerfully appeared unto the world, when, after a little season, by reason of clouds, tempests, and storms, it has
given place again to darkness, like that of the night; but it has not so been lost and buried like the evening light. After a while it has
recovered itself unto a greater lustre than before, manifesting that it increased in itself whilst it was eclipsed as to us. So has it been
with not a few at their first conversion unto God: great darkness and trouble have, by the efficacy of temptation and injections of
Satan, possessed their minds; but the grace which they have receded, being as the morning light, has after a while disentangled itself,
and given evidence that it was so far from being extinguished, as that it grew and thrived under all those clouds and darkness; for the
light of the just does in the issue always increase by temptations, as that of the hypocrite is constantly impaired by them.
Again, as it is as the morning light, than which nothing has a more assured progress; so it is called by our Saviour “living water,” John
4: 10, yea, “a well of water, springing up into everlasting life,” verse 14. It is an indeficient spring, – not a pool or pond, though never
so large, which may be dried up. Many such pools of light, gifts, and profession, have we seen utterly dried up, when they have come
into age, or been ensnared by the temptations of the world. And we may see others every day under dangerous decays; their
countenances are changed, and they have lost that oil which makes the face of a believer to shine, – namely, the oil of love, meekness,
self denial, and spirituality of converse; and instead thereof, there is spread upon them the fulsome ointment of pride, self-love,
earthly-mindedness, which increaseth on them more and more. But where this principle of spiritual life is, it is as the morning light, as
an indeficient spring that never fails, nor can do so, until it issue in eternal life. And sundry other ways there are whereby the same
truth is asserted in the Scripture.
2. There are sundry divine promises given unto believers that so it shall be, or to secure them of such supplies of grace as shall cause
their spiritual life to grow, increase, and flourish unto the end; such as that in the psalm which we have considered. For these
promises are the means whereby this spiritual life is originally communicated unto us, and whereby it is preserved in us; by them are
we made partakers of this divine nature, 2 Pet. 1: 4; and through them is it continued in us. Now [as to] promises of this nature, –
namely, that by the dispensation of the Spirit of Christ, and supplies of his grace, our spiritual life shall flourish, and be made fruitful
to the end, – I shall briefly call over one of them only at present, which is recorded, Isa. 44: 3, 4, “I will pour water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: and they shall
spring up as among the grass, as willows by the water-courses.”
Although this promise may have respect unto the gracious dealing of God with the people of the Jews after their return from the
captivity, yet has it so only as it was typical of the redemption of the church by Jesus Christ; but it belongs properly to the times of the
gospel, when the righteous were to flourish, and it is a promise of the new covenant, as is manifest in that it is not only given unto
believers, but is also extended unto their seed and offspring; which is an assured signature of new covenant promises. And here is, – 1.
A supposition of what we are in ourselves, both before and after our conversion unto God, – namely, as thirsty, dry, and barren
ground. We have nothing in ourselves, no radical moisture to make us flourishing and fruitful. And as it is before, so it is after
conversion: “We are not sufficient of ourselves; our sufficiency is of God,” 2 Cor. 3: 5. Being left to ourselves, we should utterly wither
and perish. But, – 2. Here is the blessed relief which God in this case has provided; he will pour the sanctifying water of his Spirit and
the blessing of his grace upon us. And this he will so do as to cause us to spring up as among the grass, as willows by the watercourses. There is nothing of a more eminent and almost visible growth than willows by the water-courses. Such shall be the spiritual
growth of believers under the influences of these promises; that is, they shall be fat and flourishing, and still bring forth fruit. And
other promises of the same nature there are many; but we must observe three things concerning them, that we may be satisfied in
their accomplishment. As, (1.) The promises of the new covenant, as unto the first communication of grace unto the elect, are absolute and unconditional; they
are the executive conveyances of God’s immutable purposes and decrees. And what should be the condition of the communication of
the first grace unto us? Nothing that is not grace can be so. If it be said that this also is of God in us, which is the condition of the
communication of the first saving grace unto us, then I would know whether that be bestowed upon us without any condition. If it
be, then that is the first grace, as being absolutely free; if it be not, then what is the condition whereon it is bestowed? concerning
which the same inquiry must be made, – and so for ever. But this is the glory of covenant promises, that, as unto the communication
of the grace of conversion and sanctification unto the elect, they are absolutely free and unconditionate. But, (2.) The promises which respect the growth, degrees, and measures of this grace in believers are not so. There are many duties
required of us, that these promises may be accomplished towards us and in us; yea, watchful diligence in universal gospel obedience is
expected from us unto this end. See 2 Pet. 1: 4-10. This is the ordinary method of the communication of all supplies of grace to make
u s spiritually flourish and be fruitful, – namely, that we be found in the diligent exercise of what we have received. God does