PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 14
The Spirit of Mercy Should Move Us


The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 5. The Spirit of Mercy Should Move Us.

5. The Spirit of Mercy Should Move Us
Preachers need to take heed therefore how they deal with young
believers. Let them be careful not to pitch matters too high, making
things necessary evidences of grace which agree not to the experience of
many a good Christian, and laying salvation and damnation upon things
that are not fit to bear so great a weight. In this way men are needlessly
cast down and may not soon be raised up again by themselves or others.
The ambassadors of so gentle a Saviour should not be overbearing,
setting up themselves in the hearts of people where Christ alone should
sit as in his own temple. Too much respect to man was one of the inlets of
popery. `Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ' (1 Cor.
4:1), neither more nor less, just so much. How careful was Paul in cases of
conscience not to lay a snare upon any weak conscience.
SIMPLICITY AND HUMILITY
Preachers should take heed likewise that they hide not their meaning in
dark speeches, speaking in the clouds. Truth fears nothing so much as
concealment, and desires nothing so much as clearly to be laid open to
the view of all. When it is most unadorned, it is most lovely and powerful.
Our blessed Saviour, as he took our nature upon him, so he took upon
him our familiar manner of speech, which was part of his voluntary
abasement. Paul was a profound man, yet he became as a nurse to the
weaker sort (1 Thess. 2:7).
That spirit of mercy that was in Christ should move his servants to be
content to abase themselves for the good of the meanest. What made the
kingdom of heaven `suffer violence' (Matt. 11:12) after John the Baptist's
time, but that comfortable truths were laid open with such plainness and
evidence that the people were so affected with them as to offer a holy
violence to obtain them?
Christ chose those to preach mercy who had felt most mercy, as Peter and
Paul, that they might be examples of what they taught. Paul became all
things to all men (1 Cor. 9:22), stooping unto them for their good. Christ

came down from heaven and emptied himself of majesty in tender love to
souls. Shall we not come down from our high conceits to do any poor soul
good? Shall man be proud after God has been humble? We see the
ministers of Satan turn themselves into all shapes to `make one proselyte'
(Matt. 23:15). We see ambitious men study accommodation of themselves
to the humours of those by whom they hope to be raised, and shall not we
study application of ourselves to Christ, by whom we hope to be
advanced, nay, are already sitting with him in heavenly places? After we
are gained to Christ ourselves, we should labour to gain others to Christ.
Holy ambition and covetousness will move us to put upon ourselves the
disposition of Christ. But we must put off ourselves first.
Again we should not rack their wits with curious or `doubtful
disputations' (Rom. 14:1), for so we shall distract and tire them, and give
occasion to make them cast off the care of all. That age of the church
which was most fertile in subtle questions was most barren in religion;
for it makes people think religion to be only a matter of cleverness, in
tying and untying of knots. The brains of men inclining that way are
hotter usually than their hearts.
Yet notwithstanding, when we are cast into times and places wherein
doubts are raised about principal points, here people ought to labour to
be established. God suffers questions oftentimes to arise for trial of our
love and exercise of our abilities. Nothing is so certain as that which is
certain after doubts. Shaking settles and roots. In a contentious age, it is a
wise thing to be a Christian, and to know what to pitch our souls upon. It
is an office of love here to take away the stones, and to smooth the way to
heaven. Therefore, we must take heed that, under pretence of avoidance
of disputes, we do not suffer an adverse party to get ground upon the
truth; for thus may we easily betray both the truth of God and souls of
men.
And likewise those are failing that, by overmuch austerity, drive back
troubled souls from having comfort by them, for, as a result of this, many
smother their temptations, and burn inwardly, because they have none
into whose bosom they may vent their grief and ease their souls.
We must neither bind where God looses, nor loose where God binds,

neither open where God shuts, nor shut where God opens. The right use
of the keys is always successful. In personal application, there must be
great heed taken; for a man may be a false prophet, and yet speak the
truth. If it be not a truth to the person to whom he speaks, if he grieve
those whom God has not grieved by unseasonable truths, or by comforts
in an ill way, the hearts of the wicked may be strengthened. One man's
meat may be another's poison.
If we look to the general temper of these times, rousing and waking
Scriptures are fittest; yet there are many broken spirits who need soft and
comforting words. Even in the worst time the prophets mingled sweet
comfort for the hidden remnant of faithful people. God has comfort. The
prophet is told, `Comfort ye my people' (Isa. 40:1), as well as, `Lift up thy
voice as a trumpet' (Isa. 58:1).
SOUND JUDGMENT
And here likewise there needs a caveat. Mercy does not rob us of our right
judgment, so as to take stinking fire brands for smoking flax. None will
claim mercy more of others than those who deserve due severity. This
example does not countenance lukewarmness, nor too much indulgence
to those that need quickening. Cold diseases must have hot remedies. It
made for the just commendation of the church of Ephesus that it could
not bear them which were evil (Rev. 2:2). We should so bear with others
as to manifest also a dislike of evil. Our Saviour Christ would not forbear
sharp reproof where he saw dangerous infirmities in his most beloved
disciples. It brings under a curse to do the work of the Lord deceitfully
(Jer. 48:10), even where it is a work of just severity, as when it is
sheathing the sword in the bowels of the enemy. And those whom we
suffer to be betrayed by their worst enemies, their sins, will have just
cause to curse us one day.
It is hard to preserve just bounds of mercy and severity without a spirit
above our own, by which we ought to desire to be led in all things. That
wisdom which dwells with prudence (Prov. 8:12) will guide us in these
particulars, without which virtue is not virtue, truth not truth. The rule
and the case must be laid together; for if there be not a keen insight,
seeming likeness in conditions will give rise to errors in our opinions of

them. Those fiery, tempestuous and destructive spirits in popery that
seek to promote their religion by cruelty show that they are strangers to
that wisdom which is from above, which makes men gentle, peaceable
and ready to show that mercy which they themselves have felt. It is a way
of prevailing agreeable both to Christ and to man's nature to prevail by
some forbearance and moderation.
And yet often we see a false spirit in those that call for moderation. Their
doing so is but to carry their own projects with the greater strength; and
if they prevail they will hardly show that moderation to others which they
now call for from others. And there is a proud kind of moderation
likewise, when men will take upon them to censure both parties, as if they
were wiser than both, although, if the spirit be right, an onlooker may see
more than those that are in conflict.
HOW THOSE IN AUTHORITY SHOULD ACT
In the censures of the church, it is more suitable to the spirit of Christ to
incline to the milder part, and not to kill a fly on the forehead with a
mallet, nor shut men out of heaven for a trifle. The very snuffers (wick
trimmers) of the tabernacle were made of pure gold, to show the purity of
those censures whereby the light of the church is kept bright. The power
that is given to the church is given for edification, not destruction. How
careful was Paul that the incestuous Corinthian (2 Cor. 2:7), if he
repented, should not be swallowed up with too much grief. Civil
magistrates, for civil exigencies and reasons of state, must let the law
have its course; yet thus far they should imitate this mild king, as not to
mingle bitterness and passion with authority derived from God. Authority
is a beam of God's majesty, and prevails most where there is least mixture
of that which is man's. It requires more than ordinary wisdom to manage
it aright. This string must not be too tight, nor too loose. Justice is a
harmonious thing. Herbs hot or cold beyond a certain degree, kill. We see
even contrary elements preserved in one body by wisely tempering them
together. Justice in rigor is often extreme injustice, where some
considerable circumstances should incline to moderation; and the
reckoning will be easier for bending rather to moderation than rigor.
Insolent behavior toward miserable persons, if humbled, is unseemly in

any who look for mercy themselves. Misery should be a lodestone of
mercy, not a footstool for pride to trample on. Sometimes it falls out that
those who are under the government of others are most injurious by
waywardness and harsh censures, herein disparaging and discouraging
the endeavors of superiors for public good. In so great weakness of man's
nature, and especially in this crazy age of the world, we ought to take in
good part any moderate happiness we enjoy by government, and not be
altogether as a nail in the wound, exasperating things by misconstruction.
Here love should have a mantle to cast upon lesser errors of those above
us. Oftentimes the poor man is the oppressor by unjust clamors. We
should labour to give the best interpretation to the actions of governors
that the nature of the actions will possibly bear.
WE ARE DEBTORS TO THE WEAK
In the last place, there is something for private Christians, even for all of
us in our common relations, to take notice of: we are debtors to the weak
in many things.
1. Let us be watchful in the use of our liberty, and labour to be inoffensive
in our behavior, that our example compel them not. There is a
commanding force in an example, as there was in Peter (Gal. 2).
Looseness of life is cruelty to ourselves and to the souls of others. Though
we cannot keep those who will perish from perishing, yet if we do that
which is apt of itself to destroy the souls of others their ruin is imputable
to us.
2. Let men take heed of taking up Satan's office, in misrepresenting the
good actions of others, as he did Job's case, `Doth Job fear God for
naught?' (Job 1:9), or slandering their persons, judging of them according
to the wickedness that is in their own hearts. The devil gets more by such
discouragements and reproaches that are cast upon religion than by fire
and faggot. These, as unseasonable frosts, nip all gracious inclinations in
the bud, and as much as in them lies, with Herod, labour to kill Christ in
young professors. A Christian is a hallowed and a sacred thing, Christ's
temple; and he that destroys his temple, him will Christ destroy (1
Cor.3:17).

3. Among the things that are to be taken heed of, there is among ordinary
Christians a bold usurpation of censure towards others, not considering
their temptations. Some will unchurch and unbrother in a passion. But ill
humours do not alter true relations; though the child in a fit should
disclaim the mother, yet the mother will not disclaim the child.
There is therefore in these judging times good ground of James's caveat
that there should not be `many masters' (James 3:1), that we should not
smite one another by hasty censures, especially in things of an indifferent
nature; some things are as the mind of him is that does them, or does
them not; for both may be unto the Lord.
A holy aim in things neither clearly right nor wrong makes the judgments
of men, although seemingly contrary, yet not so much blamable. Christ,
for the good aims he sees in us, overlooks any ill in them, so far as not to
lay it to our charge. Men must not be too curious in prying into the
weaknesses of others. We should labour rather to see what they have that
is for eternity, to incline our heart to love them, than into that weakness
which the Spirit of God will in time consume, to estrange us. Some think
it strength of grace to endure nothing in the weaker, whereas the
strongest are readiest to bear with the infirmities of the weak.
Where most holiness is, there is most moderation, where it may be
without prejudice of piety to God and the good of others. We see in Christ
a marvelous temper of absolute holiness, with great moderation. What
would have become of our salvation, if he had stood upon terms, and not
stooped thus low unto us? We need not affect to be more holy than
Christ. It is no flattery to do as he does, so long as it is to edification.
The Holy Ghost is content to dwell in smoky, offensive souls. Oh, that
that Spirit would breathe into our spirits the same merciful disposition!
We endure the bitterness of wormwood, and other distasteful plants and
herbs, only because we have some experience of some wholesome quality
in them; and why should we reject men of useful parts and graces, only
for some harshness of disposition, which, as it is offensive to us, so it
grieves themselves?
Grace, while we live here, is in souls which, because they are imperfectly

renewed, dwell in bodies subject to several humours, and these will
incline the soul sometimes to excess in one passion, sometimes to excess
in another. Bucer was a deep and a moderate divine. After long
experience he resolved to refuse none in whom he saw aliquid Christi,
something of Christ. The best Christians in this state of imperfection are
like gold that is a little too light, which needs some grains of allowance to
make it pass. You must grant the best their allowance.
We must supply out of our love and mercy that which we see wanting in
them. The church of Christ is a common hospital, wherein all are in some
measure sick of some spiritual disease or other, so all have occasion to
exercise the spirit of wisdom and meekness.
So that we may do this the better, let us put upon ourselves the Spirit of
Christ. There is a majesty in the Spirit of God. Corruption will hardly
yield to corruption in another. Pride is intolerable to pride. The weapons
of this warfare must not be carnal (2 Cor. 10:4). The great apostles would
not set upon the work of the ministry until they were `endued with power
from on high' (Luke 24:49). The Spirit will only work with his own tools.
And we should think what affection Christ would carry to the party in this
case. That great physician, as he had a quick eye and a healing tongue, so
had he a gentle hand, and a tender heart.
And, further, let us take to ourselves the condition of him with whom we
deal. We are, or have been, or may be in that condition ourselves. Let us
make the case our own, and also consider in what near relation a
Christian stands to us, even as a brother, a fellow member, heir of the
same salvation. And therefore let us take upon ourselves a tender care of
them in every way; and especially in cherishing the peace of their
consciences. Conscience is a tender and delicate thing, and must be so
treated. It is like a lock: if its workings are faulty, it will be troublesome to
open.
