PURITAN GOLD -- Human Nature in Its Fourfold State by Thomas Boston: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 13
The Eternal State: Death

---

death?"
His joys and delights are in God the Lord, in the light of his countenance,
in his law, and in his people, because they are like him.
Sin is what he chiefly fears: it is a fountain of sorrow to him now, though
formerly a spring of pleasure.
(2.) Regeneration regulates the affections, which are placed on
SUITABLE objects. Our affections, when placed on the creature, are
naturally exorbitant. When we joy in it, we are apt to overjoy; and when
we sorrow, we are ready to sorrow overmuch: but grace bridles these
affections, clips their wings, and keeps them within bounds, that they
don't overflow all their banks. It makes a man "hate his father, and
mother, and wife, and children; yes, and his own life also," comparatively;
that is, to love them less than he loves God, Luke 14:26.
Grace also rectifies LAWFUL affections; bringing them forth from
right principles, and directing them to right ends. There may be unholy
desires after Christ and his grace; as when men desire Christ, not from
any love to him—but merely out of love to themselves. "Give us of your
oil," said the foolish virgins, "for our lamps are gone out," Matt. 25:8.
There may be an unsanctified sorrow for sin; as when one sorrows for it,
not because it is displeasing to God—but only because of the wrath
annexed to it, as did Pharaoh, Judas, and others. So a man may love his
father and mother from mere natural principles, without any respect to
the command of God binding him thereto. But grace sanctifies the
affections, in such cases, making them to run in a new channel of love to
God, respect to his commands, and regard to his glory.
Again, grace raises the affections where they are too low. It gives
the chief seat in them to God, and pulls down all other rivals, whether
people or things, making them lie at his feet. Psalm 73:25, "Whom have I
in heaven but you? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides
you." He is loved for himself, and other people or things for his sake.
What is lovely in them, to the renewed heart, is some ray of the divine

goodness appearing in them: for unto gracious souls they shine only by
borrowed light. This accounts for the saints loving all men; and yet hating
those who hate God, and despising the wicked as vile people. They hate
and despise them for their wickedness; there is nothing of God in that,
and therefore nothing lovely nor honorable in it: but they love them for
their commendable qualities or perfections, whether natural or moral;
because, in whomever these things are, they are from God, and can be
traced to him as their fountain.
Finally, regenerating grace sets the affections so firmly on God, that the
man is disposed, at God's command, to leave his hold of everything else,
in order to keep his hold of Christ; to hate father and mother, in
comparison with Christ, Luke 14:26. It makes even lawful enjoyments,
like Joseph's mantle to hang loose about a man, that he may leave them,
when he is in danger of being ensnared by holding them.
If the stream of our affections has never been turned, we are, doubtless,
going down the stream into the pit. If "the lust of the eye, the lust of the
flesh, and the pride of life," have the throne in our hearts, which should
be possessed by the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; if we never had so much
love to God, as to ourselves; if sin has been somewhat bitter to us—but
never so bitter as suffering, never so bitter as the pain of being weaned
from it: truly we are strangers to this saving change of regeneration. For
grace turns the affections upside down, whenever it comes into the heart.

4. The CONSCIENCE is renewed. As a new light is set up in the soul,
in regeneration, conscience is enlightened, instructed and informed. That
candle of the Lord, Prov. 20:27, is now snuffed and brightened; so that it
shines, and sends forth its light into the most retired corners of the heart:
discovering sins which the soul was not aware of before; and, in a special
manner, discovering the corruption or depravity of nature—that seed and
spawn whence all actual sins proceed. This produces the new complaint,
Rom. 7:24, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the
body of this death?"
Conscience, which lay sleeping in the man's bosom before, is now

awakened, and makes its voice to be heard through the whole soul;
therefore, there is no more rest for him in the sluggard's bed; he must get
up and be doing, arise, "haste, and escape for his life." It powerfully
incites to obedience, even in the most spiritual acts, which lie not within
the view of the natural conscience; and powerfully restrains from sin,
even from those sins which do not lie open to the observation of the
world. It urges the sovereign authority of God, to which the heart is now
reconciled, and which it willingly acknowledges. And so it engages the
man to his duty, whatever be the hazard from the world; for it fills the
heart so with the fear of God—that the force of the fear of man is broken.
This has engaged many to put their life in their hand, and follow the
cause of Christ, which they once despised, and resolutely walk in the path
they formerly abhorred, Gal. 1:23, "He who persecuted us in times past,
now preaches the faith which once he destroyed."
Guilt now makes the conscience smart. It has bitter remorse
for sins past—which fills the soul with anxiety, sorrow, and
self-loathing. And every new reflection on these sins is apt to affect,
and make its wounds bleed afresh with regret. It is made tender, in point
of sin and duty, for the time to come: being once burnt, it dreads the fire,
and fears to break the hedge where it was formerly bitten by the serpent.
Finally, the renewed conscience drives the sinner to Jesus Christ, as the
only Physician who can draw out the sting of guilt; and whose blood alone
can purge the conscience from dead works, Heb. 9:14, refusing all ease
offered to it from any other hand. This is an evidence that the conscience
is not only awakened—as it may be in an unregenerate state; but oiled
also, with regenerating grace.

5. As the MEMORY lacked not its share of depravity, it is also bettered
by regenerating grace. The memory is weakened, with respect to those
things that are not worth their room therein; and men are taught to forget
injuries, and drop their resentments, Matt. 5:44, 45, "Do good to those
who hate you, and pray for those who despitefully use you – that you may
be," that is, appear to be, "the children of your Father who is in heaven."

It is strengthened for spiritual things. We have Solomon's receipt for an
ill memory, Prov. 3:1, "My son," says he, "forget not my law." But how
shall it be kept in mind? "Let your heart keep my commandments."
Grace makes a heart-memory, even where there is no good
head-memory, Psalm 119:11, "Your word have I hid in my heart." The
heart, truly touched with the powerful sweetness of truth, will help the
memory to retain what is so relished. If divine truths made deeper
impressions on our hearts, they would impress themselves with more
force on our memories, Psalm 119:93, "I will never forget your precepts,
for with them you have quickened me."
Grace sanctifies the memory. Many have large—but unsanctified
memories, which serve only to gather knowledge, whereby to aggravate
their condemnation: but the renewed memory serves to "remember his
commandments—to do them," Psalm 103:18. It is a sacred storehouse,
from whence a Christian is furnished in his way to Zion; for faith and
hope are often supplied out of it, in a dark hour. It is the storehouse of
former experiences; and these are the believer's way-marks, by noticing
of which he comes to know where he is, even in a dark time. Psalm 42:6,
"O my God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember
you from the land of Jordan," etc. It also helps the soul to godly sorrow
and self-loathing, presenting old guilt anew before the conscience, and
making it bleed afresh, though the sin be already pardoned; Psalm 25:7,
"Remember not the sins of my youth." Where unpardoned guilt is lying
on the sleeping conscience, it is often employed to bring in a word, which
in a moment sets the whole soul on the stir; as when "Peter remembered
the words of Jesus – he went out and wept bitterly," Matt. 26:75. The
word of God laid up in a sanctified memory, serves a man to resist
temptations, puts the sword in his hand against his spiritual enemies, and
is a light to direct his steps in the way of true religion and righteousness.

6. There is a change made on the BODY, and the members thereof,
in respect of their use; they are consecrated to the Lord. Even "the body is
– for the Lord," 1 Cor. 6:13. It is "the temple of the Holy Spirit," ver. 19.
The members thereof, which were formerly "instruments of
unrighteousness unto sin," become "instruments of righteousness unto

God," Rom. 6:13, "servants to righteousness unto holiness," ver. 19. The
eye, that conveyed sinful imaginations into the heart, is under a
covenant, Job 31:1, to do so no more; but to serve the soul, in viewing the
works of God, and reading the word of God. The ear, that had often been
death's porter, to let in sin, is turned to be the gate of life, by which the
word of life enters the soul. The tongue, that set on fire the whole course
of nature, is restored to the office it was designed for by the Creator;
namely, to be an instrument of glorifying him, and setting forth his
praise. In a word, the whole man is for God, in soul and body, which by
this blessed change are made his.

7. This gracious change shines forth in the LIFE. Even the
outward man is renewed. A new heart makes newness of life. When "the
king's daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold,"
Psalm 45:13. "The single eye" makes "the whole body full of light," Matt.
6:22. This change will appear in every part of a man's life; particularly in
the following things.
(1.) In the change of his COMPANY. Formerly, he despised the
company of the saints—but now they are "the excellent, in whom is all his
delight," Psalm 16:3. "I am a companion of all who fear you," says the
royal psalmist, Psalm 119:63. A renewed man joins himself with the
saints; for he and they are like-minded, in that which is their main work
and business; they have all one new nature: they are all traveling to
Immanuel's land, and converse together in the language of Canaan. In
vain do men pretend to true religion, while ungodly company is their
choice; for "a companion of fools shall be destroyed," Prov. 13:20.
Religion will make a man shy of throwing himself into an ungodly family,
or any unnecessary familiarity with wicked men; as one who is healthy
will beware of going into an infected house.
(2.) In his RELATIVE capacity, he will be a new man. Grace
makes men gracious in their several relations, and naturally leads them
to the conscientious performance of relative duties. It does not only make
good men and good women—but makes good subjects, good husbands,
good wives, children, servants, and, in a word, good relatives in the

church, commonwealth, and family. It is a just exception made against
the religion of many, namely, that they are bad relatives, they are bad
husbands, wives, masters, servants, etc. How can we prove ourselves to
be new creatures, if we be just such as we were before, in our different
relations? 2 Cor. 5:17, "Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature: old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new."
Real godliness will gain a testimony to a man, from the consciences of his
nearest relations; though they know more of his sinful infirmities than
others do, as we see in the case, 2 Kings 4:1, "Your servant my husband is
dead, and you know that he did fear the Lord."
(3.) In the way of his following his worldly BUSINESS, there is
a great change. It appears to be no more his all, as it was before.
Though saints apply themselves to worldly business, as well as others—
yet their hearts are not swallowed up in it. It is evident that they are
carrying on a trade with heaven, as well as a trade with earth, Phil. 3:20,
"For our conversation is in heaven." They go about their employment in
the world, as a duty laid upon them by the Lord of all, doing their lawful
business as the will of God, Eph. 6:7, working, because he has said, "You
shall not steal."
(4.) Such have a special concern for the advancement of the
kingdom of Christ in the world: they espouse the interests of
religion, and "prefer Jerusalem above their chief joy," Psalm 137:6.
However privately they live, grace gives them a public spirit, will concern
itself in the ark and work of God, in the Gospel of God, and in the people
of God, even in those of them whom they never saw. As children of God,
they naturally care for these things. They have a new concern for the
spiritual good of others: no sooner do they taste of the power of grace
themselves—but they are inclined to set up to be agents for Christ and
holiness in the world; as appears in the case of the woman of Samaria,
who when Christ had manifested himself to her, "went her way into the
city, and said unto the men, Come, see a man which told me all things
that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" John 4:28, 29.
They have seen and felt the evil of sin, and therefore pity the
world lying in wickedness. They would gladly pluck the brands out of

the fire, remembering that they themselves were plucked out of it. They
labor to commend religion to others, both by word and example; and
rather deny themselves the liberty in indifferent things, than, by the
uncharitable use of it, destroy others; 1 Cor. 8:13, "Therefore, if meat
make my brother to sin, I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I
make my brother to sin."
(5.) In their use of LAWFUL COMFORTS, there is a great
change. They rest not in them, as their end; but use them as means to
help them in their way. They draw their satisfaction from the higher
springs—even while lower springs are running. Thus Hannah, having
obtained a son, rejoiced not so much in the gift, as in the giver, 1 Sam. 2:1,
"And Hannah prayed and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord." Yes, when
the comforts of life are gone, they can exist without them, and "rejoice in
the Lord although the fig-tree do not blossom," Hab. 3:17, 18.
Grace teaches to use the conveniences of the present life as
pilgrims; and to show a holy moderation in all things. The heart,
which formally reveled in these things without fear, is now shy of being
over much pleased with them. Being apprehensive of danger, it uses them
warily; as the dogs of Egypt run, while they lap their water out of the river
Nile, for fear of the crocodiles that are in it.
(6.) This change shines forth in the man's performance of
PIOUS DUTIES. He who lived in the neglect of them will do so no
more, if once the grace of God enter into his heart. If a man be new-born,
he will desire the sincere milk of the word 1 Pet. 2:2, 3. Whenever the
prayerless person gets the Spirit of grace, he will be in him a Spirit of
supplication, Zech. 12:10. It is as natural for one that is born again
to pray, as for the new-born babe to cry. Acts 9:11, "Behold, he
prays!" His heart will be a temple for God, and his house a church. His
devotion, which before was superficial and formal, is now spiritual and
lively; for as much as heart and tongue are touched with a live coal from
heaven: and he rests not in the mere performance of duties, as careful
only to get his task done—but in every duty seeks communion with
God in Christ; justly considering them as means appointed of God for
that end, and reckoning himself disappointed if he miss of it.

Thus far of the NATURE of regeneration.

II. I come to show WHY this change is called regeneration, a
being born again. It is so called, because of the resemblance between
natural and spiritual birth, which lies in the following particulars.
1. Natural birth is a MYSTERIOUS thing: and so is spiritual
birth. John 3:8, "The wind blows where it wills, and you hear the sound
thereof—but can not tell whence it comes and where it goes: so is every
one that is born of the Spirit." The work of the Spirit is felt; but his
way of working is a mystery we cannot comprehend. A new light
is let into the mind, and the will is renewed; but how that light is
conveyed there, how the will is fettered with cords of love, and how the
rebel is made a willing captive—we can no more tell, than we can tell
"how the bones grow in the womb of her that is with child," Eccl. 11:5. As
a man hears the sound of the wind, and finds it stirring—but knows not
where it begins, and where it ends, "so is every one that is born of the
Spirit." He finds the change that is made upon him; but how it is
produced he knows not. One thing he may know, that whereas he was
blind, now he sees. But "the seed of grace" "springs and grows up—he
knows not how," Mark 4:26, 27.
2. In both, the creature comes to a being it had not before. The
child is not, until it be born; and a man has no gracious being, no being in
grace, until he is re-born. Regeneration is not so much the curing of a sick
man, as "the quickening of a dead man," Eph. 2:1-5. Man in his depraved
state, is a mere nonentity in grace, and is brought into a new being by the
power of Him "who calls things that are, not as though they were;" being
"created in Jesus Christ unto good works," Eph. 2:10. Therefore, our Lord
Jesus, to give ground of hope to the Laodiceans, in their wretched and
miserable state, proposes himself as "the beginning of the creation of
God," Rev. 3:14, namely, the active beginning of it; "for all things were
made by him" at first, John 1:3. From whence they might gather, that as
he made them when they were nothing, he could make them over again,
when worse than nothing; the same hand that made them his creatures,
could make them new creatures.

3. As the child is PASSIVE in birth, so is the child of God in
regeneration. The one contributes nothing to its own birth; neither
does the other contribute anything, by way of efficiency, to its own
regeneration: for though a man may lay himself down at the pool—yet he
has no hand in moving the water, no power in performing the cure. One
is born the child of a king, another the child of a beggar: the child has no
hand at all in this difference. God leaves some in their depraved state;
others he brings into a state of grace, or regeneracy. If you be thus
honored, no thanks to you; for "who makes you to differ from another?
and what have you that you did not receive?" 1 Cor. 4:7.
4. There is a wonderful combination of parts in both births.
Admirable is the structure of man's body, in which there is such a variety
of organs; nothing lacking, nothing superfluous. The psalmist,
considering his own body, looks on it as a piece of marvelous work; "I am
fearfully and wonderfully made," says he, Psalm 139:14, "and marvelously
wrought in the womb," ver. 15; where I know not how the bones grow,
any more than I know what is doing in the lowest parts of the earth. In
natural birth we are marvelously wrought, like a piece of needle-work; as
the word imports: even so it is in regeneration. Psalm 45:14, "She shall be
brought unto the King in raiment of needle-work," raiment marvelously
wrought. It is the same word in both texts. What that raiment is, the
apostle tells us, Eph. 4:24. It is "the new man, which after God is created
in righteousness and true holiness." This is the raiment which he says, in
the same place, we must put on; not excluding the imputed righteousness
of Christ. Both are marvelously wrought, as masterpieces of the manifold
wisdom of God. O the wonderful combination of graces in the new
creature! O glorious creature, new-made after the image of God! It is
grace for grace in Christ, which makes up this new man, John 1:16; even
as in bodily birth, the child has member for member in the parent; has
every member which the parent has in a certain proportion.
5. All this, in both cases, has its rise from that which is in itself
very small and inconsiderable. O the power of God, in making such
a creature of the corruptible seed, and much more in bringing forth the
new creature from such small beginnings! It is as "the little cloud, like a
man's hand," which spread, until "heaven was black with clouds and

wind, and there was a great rain," 1 Kings 18:44, 45. A man gets a word
from God at a sermon, which hundreds besides him hear, and let slip: but
it remains with him, works in him, and never leaves him, until the little
world is turned upside down by it; that is, until he becomes a new man. It
is like the dream which got up into Ahasuerus's head, and cut off sleep
from his eyes, Esther 6:1, which proved a spring of such motions as never
ceased, until Mordecai, in royal pomp, was brought on horseback through
the streets, proud Haman trudging at his foot; the same Haman
afterwards hanged, Mordecai advanced, and the church delivered from
Haman's hellish plot. "The grain of mustard seed becomes a tree," Matt.
13:31, 32. God loves to bring great things out of small beginnings.
6. Natural birth is carried on by degrees. So is regeneration. It is
with the soul, ordinarily, in regeneration, as with the blind man cured by
our Lord, who first "saw men as trees walking," afterward "saw every man
clearly," Mark 8:23-25. It is true, regeneration being, strictly speaking, a
passage from death to life, the soul is quickened in a moment; like as
when the embryo is brought to perfection in the womb, the soul is infused
into the lifeless lump. Nevertheless, we may imagine somewhat like
conception in spiritual regeneration, whereby the soul is prepared for
quickening; and the new creature is capable of growth, 1 Peter 2:2, and of
having life more abundantly, John 10:10.
7. In both there are new relations. The regenerate may call God,
Father; for they are his children, John 1:12, 13, "begotten of him," 1 Pet.
1:3. The bride, the Lamb's wife, that is, the church, is their mother, Gal.
4:26. They are related, as brethren and sisters, to angels and glorified
saints; "the family of heaven." They are of the heavenly stock: the lowest
of them, "the base things of the world," 1 Cor. 1:28, the kinless things, as
the word imports, who cannot boast of the blood that runs in their veins,
are yet, by their new birth, near of kin with the excellent in the earth.
8. There is a likeness between the parent and the child.
Everything that generates, generates its like; and the regenerate are
"partakers of the divine nature," 2 Peter 1:4. The moral perfections of the
divine nature are, in measure and degree, communicated to the renewed
soul: thus the divine image is restored; so that, as the child resembles the
father, the new creature resembles God himself, being holy as he is holy.

9. As there is no birth without pain, both to the mother and to
the child, so there is great pain in bringing forth the new
creature. The children have more or less of these birth-pains, whereby
they are "pricked in their heart," Acts 2:37. The soul has sore pains when
under conviction and humiliation. "A wounded spirit who can bear?" The
mother is pained; "Zion travails," Isaiah 66:8. She sighs, groans, cries,
and has hard labor, in her ministers and members—to bring forth
children to her Lord, Gal. 4:19, "My little children, of whom I travail in
birth again, until Christ be formed in you." Never was a mother more
feelingly touched with "joy, that a child is born into the world," than she
is upon the new birth of her children.
But, what is more remarkable than all this, we read not only of our Lord
Jesus Christ's "travail," or toil "of soul," Isaiah 53:11—but, what is more
directly to our purpose, of his "pains," or pangs, as of one travailing in
childbirth; so the word used, Acts 2:24, properly signifies. Well might he
call the new creature, as Rachel called her dear-bought son, Benoni, that
is, the son of my sorrow; and as she called another, Naphtali, that is, my
wrestling: for the pangs of that travail put him to "strong crying and
tears," Heb. 5:7; yes, into an "agony and bloody sweat," Luke 22:44. And
in the end he died of these pangs; they became to him "the pains of
death," Acts 2:24.

III. I shall now APPLY this doctrine.
Use 1. By what is said, you may try whether you are in the state
of grace or not. If you are brought out of the state of wrath or ruin, into
the state of grace or salvation, you are new creatures, you are born again.
Objection. But you will say, How shall we know whether we are born
again, or not?
Answer. Were you to ask me, if the sun were risen, and how you should
know whether it were risen or not? I would bid you look up to the
heavens, and see it with your eyes. And, would you know if the light be

risen in your heart? Look in, and see. Grace is light, and discovers itself.
Look into your mind, see if it has been illuminated in the knowledge of
God. Have you been inwardly taught what God is? Were your eyes ever
turned inward to see yourself; the sinfulness of your depraved state, the
corruption of your nature; the sins of your heart and life? Were you ever
led into a view of the exceeding sinfulness of sin? Have your eyes seen
King Jesus in his beauty; the manifold wisdom of God in him, his
transcendent excellence, and absolute fullness and sufficiency, with the
vanity and emptiness of all things else?
Next, What change is there on your will? Are the fetters taken off,
wherewith it was formerly bound up from moving heavenward? Has your
will got a new turn? Do you find an aversion to sin, and an inclination to
good, wrought in your heart? Is your soul turned towards God, as your
chief end? Is your will new-molded into some measure of conformity to
the preceptive and providential will of God? Are you heartily reconciled to
the covenant of peace, and fixedly disposed to the receiving of Christ, as
he is offered in the gospel?
And as to a change on your affections, are they rectified, and placed on
right objects? Are your desires going out after God? Are they to his name,
and the remembrance of him? Isaiah 26:8.
Are your hopes in him? Is your love set upon him, and your hatred set
against sin? Does your offending a good God affect your heart with
sorrow, and do you fear sin more than suffering? Are your affections
regulated? Are they, with respect to created comforts, brought down, as
being too high; and with respect to God in Christ, raised up, as being too
low? Has he the chief seat in your heart? And are all your lawful worldly
comforts and enjoyments laid at his feet?
Has your conscience been enlightened and awakened, refusing all ease
—but from the application of the blood of a Redeemer? Is your memory
sanctified, your body consecrated to the service of God? And are you now
walking in newness of life? Thus you may discover whether you are born
again or not.

But, for your farther help in this matter, I will discourse a little of another
sign of regeneration, namely, the love of the brethren; an evidence
whereby the weakest and most timorous saints have often had comfort,
when they could have little or no consolation from other marks proposed
to them. This the apostle lays down, 1 John 3:14, "We know that we have
passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren." It is not to be
thought that the apostle, by the brethren in this place means brethren by
a common relation to the first Adam—but to the second Adam, Christ
Jesus; because, however true it is, that universal benevolence, a good will
to the whole race of mankind, takes place in the renewed soul, as being a
lively lineament of the divine image—yet the whole context speaks of
those that are "the sons of God," ver. 1, 2; "children of God," ver. 10;
"born of God," ver. 9; distinguishing between "the children of God," and
"the children of the devil," ver. 10; between those that are "of the devil,"
ver. 8, 12, and those that are "of God," ver. 10.
The text itself comes in as a reason why we should not marvel that the
world hates the brethren, the children of God, ver. 13. How can we marvel
at it, seeing the love of the brethren is an evidence of one's having passed
from death to life? Therefore, it were absurd to look for that love among
the men of the world, who are dead in trespasses and sins. They cannot
love the brethren; no wonder, then, that they hate them. Wherefore it is
plain, that by brethren here, are meant brethren by regeneration.
Now, in order to set this mark of regeneration in a true light, consider
these three things.
1. This love to the brethren, is a love to them as such. Then do
we love them in the sense of the text, when the grace, or image
of God in them, is the chief motive of our love to them. When we
love the godly for their godliness, the saints for their sanctity or holiness,
then we love God in them, and so may conclude were born of God; for
"every one that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of
him," 1 John 5:1. Hypocrites may love saints, on account of civil relations
to them; because of their obliging conversation; for their being of the
same opinion as to outward religious matters; and on many other such
like accounts, whereby wicked men may be induced to love the godly. But
happy they who love them merely for grace in them; for their heaven-

born temper and disposition; who can pick this pearl even out of
infirmities in and about them; lay hold of it, and love them for it.
2. It is a love that will be given to all in whom the grace of God
appears. Those who love one saint, because he is a saint, will have "love
to all the saints," Eph. 1:15. They will love all, who, in their view, bear the
image of God. Those who cannot love a gracious person in rags—but
confine their love to those who wear rich clothing, have not this love to
the brethren in them. Those who confine their love to a church party, to
whom God has not confined his grace, are souls too narrow to be put
among the children. In whatever points men differ from us, in their
judgment or way; yet if they appear to agree with us, in love to God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, and in bearing his image, we shall love them as
brethren, if we are of the heavenly family.
3. If this love be in us, the more grace any person appears to be
possessed of, he will be the more beloved by us. The more
vehemently the holy fire of grace does flame in any, the hearts of true
Christians will be the more warmed in love to them. It is not with the
saints as with many other men, who make themselves the standards for
others; and love them so far as they think they are like themselves. But, if
they seem to outshine and darken them, their love is turned to hatred and
envy, and they endeavor to detract from the due praise of their exemplary
piety; because nothing is liked with them, in the practice of religion, that
goes beyond their own measure; what of the life and power of religion
appears in others, serves only to raise the serpentine grudge and envy in
their pharisaical hearts.
But as for those who are born again, their love and affection to the
brethren bears proportion to the degrees of the divine image they discern
in them.
Now, if you would improve these to the knowledge of your
state, I would advise you,
1. To set apart some time, when you are at home, for a review
of your case, to try your state by what has been said. Many have
comfort and clearness as to their state, at a sermon, who in a little time

lose it again; because while they hear the word preached, they make
application of it; but do not consider these things more deliberately and
leisurely when alone. The impression is too sudden and short to give
lasting comfort; and it is often so inconsiderate, that it has bad
consequences. Therefore, set about this work at home, after earnest and
serious prayer to God for his help in it. Complain not of your lack of time
while the night follows the busy day; nor of place, while fields and houses
are to be got.
2. Renew your repentance before the Lord. Guilt lying on the
conscience, unrepented of, may darken all your evidences and marks of
grace. It provokes the Spirit of grace to withdraw; and when he goes, our
light ceases. It is not a fit time for a saint to read his evidences, when the
candle is blown out by some conscience-wounding guilt.
3. Exert the powers of the new nature; let the graces of the
divine Spirit discover themselves in you by action. If you would
know whether there is sacred fire in your bosom, or not, you must blow
the coal; for although it exist, and be a live coal—yet if it be under the
ashes, it will give you no light. Settle in your hearts a firm purpose,
through the grace that is in Christ Jesus, to comply with every known
duty, and watch against every known sin, having readiness of mind to be
instructed in what you know not.
If gracious souls would thus manage their inquiries into their state, it is
likely that they would have a comfortable outcome. And if others would
take such a solemn review, and make trial of their state, impartially
examining themselves before the tribunal of their consciences, they might
have a timely discovery of their own sinfulness; but the neglect of selfexamination leaves most men under sad delusions as to their state, and
deprives many saints of the comfortable sight of the grace of God in them.
But that I may afford some farther help to true Christians in their
inquiries into their state, I shall propose and briefly answer some
cases or doubts, which may possibly hinder some people from the
comfortable view of their happy state. The children's bread must not be
withheld; though, while it is held forth to them, the dogs should snatch at
it.

Case 1. "I doubt if I be regenerate, because I know not the
precise time of my conversion; nor can I trace the particular
steps of the way in which it was brought to pass."
Answer. Though it is very desirable to be able to give an account of the
beginning, and the gradual advances, of the Lord's work upon our souls,
as some saints can distinctly do, the manner of the Spirit's working being
still a mystery—yet this is not necessary to prove the truth of grace.
Happy he who can say, in this case, as the blind man in the Gospel, "One
thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see." As, when we see flame,
we know there is fire, though we know not how or when it began; so the
truth of grace may be discerned in us, though we know not how
or when it was dropped into our hearts. If you can perceive the
happy change which is wrought on your soul; if you find your mind is
enlightened, your will inclined to comply with the will of God in all
things; especially to fall in with the divine plan of salvation, through a
crucified Redeemer; in vain do you trouble yourself, and refuse comfort,
because you know not how and what way it was brought about.
Case 2. "If I were a new creature, sin could not prevail against
me as it does."
Answer. Though we must not lay pillows for hypocrites to rest their heads
upon, who indulge themselves in their sins, and make the doctrine of
God's grace subservient to their lusts, lying down contentedly in the bond
of iniquity like men that are fond of golden chains; yet it must be owned,
"the just man falls seven times a day;" and iniquity may prevail against
the children of God.
But if you are groaning under the weight of the body of death, the
corruption of your nature; loathing yourself for the sins of your heart and
life; striving to mortify your lusts; fleeing daily to the blood of Christ for
pardon; and looking to his Spirit for sanctification: though you may be
obliged to say with the Psalmist, "Iniquities prevail against me;" yet you
may add with him, "As for our transgressions you shall purge them
away," Psalm 65:3. The new creature does not yet possess the house
alone: it dwells by the side of an ill neighbor, namely, remaining
corruption, the relics of depraved nature. They struggle together for the

mastery. "The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the
flesh," Gal. 5:17. And sometimes corruption prevails, bringing the child of
God into captivity to the law of sin, Rom. 7:23. Let not therefore the
prevailing of corruption make you, in this case, conclude you are none of
God's children: but let it humble you, to be the more watchful, and to
thirst the more intensely after Jesus Christ, his blood and Spirit; and that
very disposition will evidence a principle of grace in you, which seeks the
destruction of sin that prevails so often against you.
Case 3. "I find the motions of sin in my heart more violent
since the Lord began his work on my soul, than they were
before that time. Can this consist with a change of my nature?"
Answer. Dreadful is the case of many, who, after God has had a
remarkable dealing with their souls, tending to their reformation, have
thrown off all bonds, and have become grossly and openly immoral and
profane; as if the devil had returned into their hearts with seven spirits
worse than himself. All I shall say to such people is, that their state is
exceedingly dangerous; they are in danger of sinning against the Holy
Spirit: therefore, let them repent, before it be too late.
But if it be not thus with you; though corruption is stirring itself more
violently than formerly, as if all the forces of hell were raised, to hold fast,
or bring back, a fugitive; yet these stirrings may consist with a change of
your nature. When the restraint of grace is newly laid upon corruption,
it is no wonder if it acts more vigorously than before, "warring against
the law of the mind," Rom. 7:23. The motions of sin may really be most
violent, when the new principle is brought in to cast it out. The sun
sending its beams through the window, discovers the motes in the house,
and their motions, which were not seen before; so the light of grace
may discover the risings and actings of corruption, in another
manner than ever the man saw them before, though they really
do not rise nor act more vigorously.
Sin is not quite dead in the regenerate soul; it is but dying, and
dying a lingering death, being crucified: no wonder there are great
fightings, when it is sick at the heart, and death is at the door. Besides,
temptations may be more in number, and stronger, while Satan is

striving to bring you back, who are escaped, than while he only
endeavored to retain you: "After you were illuminated, you endured a
great fight of affliction," says the apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 10:32. But
"cast not away your confidence," ver. 35. Remember his "grace is
sufficient for you," and "the God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly."
Pharaoh and his Egyptians never made such a formidable appearance
against the Israelites, as at the Red Sea, after they were brought out of
Egypt: but then were the pursuers nearest to a total overthrow, Exod.,
chap. 14. Let not this case, therefore, make you raze the foundations of
your trust; but be you emptied of self, and strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, and you shall come off victorious.
Case 4. "But when I compare my love to God with my love to
some created enjoyments, I find the pulse of my affections beat
stronger to the creature than to the Creator. How then can I call
him Father? Nay, alas! those turnings of heart within me, and glowings of
affection to him, which I had, are gone; so that I fear all the love which I
ever had to the Lord has been but a fit and flash of affection, such as
hypocrites often have.
Answer. It cannot be denied, that the predominant love of the
world is a certain mark of an unregenerate state, 1 John 2:15, "If
any man loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him."
Nevertheless, those are not always the strongest affections which are
most violent. A man's affections may be more moved, on some occasions,
by an object that is little regarded, than by another that is exceedingly
beloved; even as a little brook sometimes makes more noise than a great
river. The strength of our affections is to be measured by the firmness
and fixedness of the root, not by the violence of their actings.
Suppose a person meeting with a friend, who has been long abroad, finds
his affections more vehemently acting towards his friend on that
occasion, than towards his own wife and children; will he therefore say,
that he loves his friend more than them? Surely not. Even so, although
the Christian may find himself more moved in his love to the creature,
than in his love to God; yet it is not therefore to be said, that he loves the

creature more than God, seeing love to God is always more firmly rooted
in a gracious heart, than love to any created enjoyment whatever: as
appears when competition arises in such a manner, that the one or other
is to be foregone.
Would you, then, know your case? Retire into your own hearts, and there
lay the two in the balance, and try which of them weighs down the other.
Ask yourself, as in the sight of God, whether you would part with Christ
for the creature, or part with the creature for Christ, if you were left to
your choice in the matter? If you find your heart disposed to part with
what is dearest to you in the world for Christ at his call, you have no
reason to conclude you love the creature more than God; but, on the
contrary, that you love God more than the creature, although you do not
feel such violent motions in the love of God, as in the love of some created
thing, Matt. 10:37, "He who loves father or mother more than me, is not
worthy of me." Luke 14:26, "If any man comes to me, and hates not his
father and mother – he cannot be my disciple." From which texts
compared, we may infer, that he who hates, that is, is ready to part with,
father and mother for Christ, is, in our Lord's account, one that loves
them less than him, and not one who loves father and mother more than
him.
Moreover, you are to consider that there is a twofold love to
Christ.
1. There is a SENSIBLE love to him, which is felt as a dart in the
heart, and makes a holy love-sickness in the soul, arising from lack of
enjoyment, as in that case of the spouse, Cant. 5:8, "I charge you, O
daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my beloved, that you tell him that I
am sick of love:" or else from the fullness of it, as in Cant. 2:5, "Stay me
with flagons, comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love." These
glowings of affection are usually wrought in young converts, who are
ordinarily made "to sing in the days of their youth," Hos. 2:15.
While the fire-edge is upon the young convert, he looks upon others,
reputed to be godly, and not finding them in such a temper or disposition
as himself, he is ready to censure them; and to think there is far less
religion in the world than indeed there is. But when his own cup comes to

settle below the brim, and he finds that in himself which made him
question the state of others, he is more humbled, and feels more and
more the necessity of daily recourse to the blood of Christ for pardon,
and to the Spirit of Christ for sanctification; and thus grows downwards
in humiliation, self-loathing, and self-denial.
2. There is a RATIONAL love to Christ, which, without these
sensible emotions felt in the former case, evidences itself by a dutiful
regard to the divine authority and command. When one bears such a love
to Christ, though the vehement stirrings of affection be lacking—yet he is
truly tender of offending a gracious God; endeavors to walk before him
unto all well pleasing; and is grieved at the heart for what is displeasing
unto him, 1 John 5:3, "For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments."
Now, although that sensible love does not always continue with you, you
have no reason to deem it a hypocritical fit, while the rational love
remains with you; any more than a loving and faithful wife needs
question her love to her husband, when her fondness is abated.
Case 5. "The attainments of hypocrites and apostates are a
terror to me, and come like a shaking storm on me, when I am
about to conclude, from the marks of grace, which I seem to
find in myself, that I am in the state of grace."
Answer. These things should, indeed, stir us up to a most serious and
impartial examination of ourselves; but ought not to keep us in a
continued suspense as to our state. Sirs, you see the outside of hypocrites,
their duties, their gifts, their tears, and so on—but you see not their
inside; you do not discern their hearts, the bias of their spirits. Upon
what you see of them, you found a judgment of charity as to their state;
and you do well to judge charitably in such a case, because you cannot
know the secret springs of their actions: but you are seeking, and ought to
have, a judgment of certainty as to your own state; and therefore are to
look into that part of religion, which none in the world but yourselves can
discern in you, and which you can as little see in others.
A hypocrite's region may appear far greater than that of a

sincere soul: but that which makes the greatest figure in the
eyes of men, is often of least worth before God. I would rather
utter one of those groans which the apostle speaks of, Rom. 8:26, than
shed Esau's tears, have Balaam's prophetic spirit, or the joy of the stonyground hearer. "The fire that shall try every man's work," will try, not of
what bulk it is—but "of what kind it is," 1 Cor. 3:13. Though you may
know what bulk of religion another has, and that it is more bulky than
your own—yet God does not regard that; why, then, do you make such a
matter of it? It is impossible for you, without divine revelation, certainly
to know of what sort another man's religion is: but you may certainly
know what sort your own is of, without extraordinary revelation;
otherwise the apostle would not exhort the saints to "give diligence to
make their calling and election sure," 2 Peter 1:10. Therefore, the
attainments of hypocrites and apostates should not disturb you, in your
serious inquiry into your own state.
I will tell you two things, wherein the lowest saints go beyond
the most refined hypocrites:
1. In denying themselves; renouncing all confidence in
themselves, and their own works; acquiescing in, being well
pleased with, and venturing their souls upon, God's plan of
salvation through Jesus Christ, Matt. 5:3, "Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." And, chap. 11:6, "Blessed is he who
shall not be offended in me." Phil. 3:3, "We are the true circumcision,
who worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Jesus Christ, and have no
confidence in the flesh."
2. In a real hatred of all sin; being willing to part with every
lust, without exception, and to comply with every duty which
the Lord makes, or shall make known to them, Psalm 119:6, "Then
shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all your
commandments." Try yourselves by these.
Case 6. "I see myself fall so far short of the saints mentioned in
the Scriptures, and of several excellent people of my own
acquaintance, that, when I look on them, I can hardly look on
myself as one of the same family with them."

Answer. It is, indeed, matter of humiliation, that we do not get forward to
that measure of grace and holiness which we see is attainable in this life.
This should make us more vigorously press towards the mark: but surely
it is from the devil, that weak Christians make a rack for themselves, of
the attainments of the strong. To yield to the temptation, is as
unreasonable as for a child to dispute away his relation to his father,
because he is not of the same stature with his elder brethren. There are
saints of several sizes in Christ's family; some fathers, some young
men, and some little children, 1 John 2:13, 14.
Case 7. "I never read in the word of God, nor did I ever know of
a child of God, so TEMPTED, and so left of God, as I am; and
therefore, no saint's case being like mine, I can only conclude
that I am none of their number.
Answer. This objection arises to some from their ignorance of the
Scriptures, and the experience of Christians. It is profitable, in this case,
to impart the matter to some experienced Christian friend, or to some
godly minister. This has been a blessed means of peace to some people;
while their case, which appeared to them to be singular, has been proved
to have been the case of other saints. The Scriptures give instances of very
horrid temptations, wherewith the saints have been assaulted. Job was
tempted to blaspheme; this was the great thing the devil aimed at in the
case of that great saint, Job 1:11, "He will curse you to your face." Chap.
2:9, "Curse God and die." Asaph was tempted to think it was in vain to
be pious, which was in effect to throw off all religion, Psalm 73:13, "Verily
I have cleansed my heart in vain." Yes, Christ himself was tempted to
"cast himself down from a pinnacle of the temple," and to "worship the
devil," Matt. 4:6-9. And many of the children of God have not only been
attacked with—but have actually yielded to very gross temptation for a
time. Peter denied Christ, and cursed and swore that he knew him not,
Mark 14:71. Paul, when a persecutor, compelled even saints to
blaspheme, Acts 26:10, 11.
Many of the saints can, from their sad experience, bear witness to very
gross temptations, which have astonished their spirits, made their very
flesh to tremble, and sickened their bodies. Satan's fiery darts make
terrible work; and will cost some pains to quench them, by a vigorous

managing of the shield of faith, Eph. 6:16. Sometimes he makes such
desperate attacks, that never was one more put to it, in running to and
fro; without intermission, to quench the fire-balls incessantly thrown into
his house by an enemy, designing to burn the house about him, than the
poor tempted saint is, to repel Satanical injections. But these injections,
these horrid temptations, though they are a dreadful affliction, they are
not the sins of the tempted, unless they make them theirs by consenting
to them. They will be charged upon the tempter alone, if they be not
consented to; and will no more be laid to the charge of the tempted party,
than a bastard's being laid down at a chaste man's door will fix guilt upon
him.
But suppose neither minister nor private Christian, to whom you go, can
tell you of any who has been in your case; yet you ought not thence to
infer that your case is singular, far less to give up hope: for it is not to be
thought, that every godly minister, or private Christian, has had
experience of all the cases which a child of God may be in. We need not
doubt that some have had distresses known only to God and their own
consciences; and so to others these distresses are as if they had never
been. Yes, and though the Scriptures contain suitable directions for every
case which a child of God can be in, and these illustrated with a sufficient
number of examples; yet it is not to be imagined that there are in the
Scriptures perfect instances of every particular case incident to the saints.
Therefore, though you cannot find an instance of your case in the
Scripture—yet bring your case to it, and you shall find suitable remedies
prescribed there for it.
Study rather to make use of Christ for your case, who has a remedy for all
diseases, than to know if ever any was in your case. Though one should
show you an instance of your case, in an undoubted saint; yet none could
promise that it would certainly give you ease: for a scrupulous conscience
would readily find out some difference. And if nothing but a perfect
conformity of another's case to yours will satisfy, it will be hard, if not
impossible, to satisfy you; for it is with people's cases, as with their
natural faces: though the faces of all men are of one make, and some are
so very like others, that, at first view, we are ready to take them for the
same; yet if you view them more accurately, you will see something in

every face, distinguishing it from all others; though possibly you cannot
tell what it is. Therefore I conclude, that if you can find in yourselves the
marks of regeneration, proposed to you from the word, you ought to
conclude you are in the state of grace, though your case were singular,
which is indeed unlikely.
Case 8. "The AFFLICTIONS I meet with are strange and
unusual. I doubt if ever a child of God was tried with such
dispensations of providence as I am."
Answer. Much of what was said on the preceding case, may be helpful in
this. Holy Job was assaulted with this temptation, Job 5:1, "To which of
the saints will you turn?" But he rejected it, and held fast his integrity.
The apostle supposes that Christians may be tempted to "think it strange
concerning the fiery trial," 1 Pet. 4:12. But they have need of larger
experience than Solomon's, who will venture to say, "See this is new,"
Eccl. 1:10. What though, in respect of the outward dispensations of
providence, "it happen to you according to the work of the wicked?" yet
you may be just notwithstanding; according to Solomon's observation,
Eccl. 8:14. Sometimes we travel in ways where we can neither perceive
the prints of the foot of man or beast; yet we cannot from thence conclude
that there was never any there before us: so, though you can not perceive
the footsteps of the flock, in the way of your affliction, you must not
therefore conclude that you are the first that ever traveled that road.
But what if it were so? Some one saint or other must be first, in drinking
of each bitter cup the rest have drunk of. What warrant have you or I to
limit the Holy One of Israel to one trodden path, in his dispensations
towards us? "Your way is in the sea, and your path in the great waters;
and your footsteps are not known," Psalm 77:19. If the Lord should carry
you to heaven by some retired road, so to speak, you would have no
ground of complaint. Learn to allow sovereignty a latitude; be at your
duty; and let no affliction cast a veil over any evidences you otherwise
have for your being in the state of grace: for "no man knows either love or
hatred by all that is before him," Eccl. 9:1.
Use 2. You who are strangers to this new birth, be convinced of the
absolute necessity of it. Are all who are in the state of grace born again?

then you have neither part nor lot in it, who are not born again. I must
tell you in the words of our Lord and Savior, and O that he would speak
them to your hearts! "You must be born again," John 3:7. For your
conviction, consider these few things.
1. Regeneration is absolutely necessary to qualify you to do
anything really good and acceptable to God. While you are not
born again, your best works are but glittering sins; for though the
matter of them is good, they are quite marred in the performance.
Consider,
(1.) That without regeneration there is no faith, and "without faith
it is impossible to please God," Heb. 11:6. Faith is a vital act of the
new-born soul. The evangelist, showing the different treatment which
our Lord Jesus had from different people, some receiving him, some
rejecting him, points at regenerating grace as the true cause of that
difference, without which, never any one would have received him. He
tells us, that "as many as received him," were those "who were born – of
God," John 1:11-13. Unregenerate men may presume; but true faith they
cannot have. Faith is a flower that grows not in the field of
nature. As the tree cannot grow without a root, neither can a man
believe without the new nature, whereof the principle of believing is a
part.
(2.) Without regeneration a man's works are dead works. As is
the principle, so must the effects be: if the lungs are rotten, the breath
will be unsavoury; and he who at best is dead in sin, his works at best will
be but dead works. "Unto those who are defiled and unbelieving, is
nothing pure – being abominable, and disobedient, and unto every good
work reprobate," Tit. 1:15, 16. Could we say of a man, that he is more
blameless in his life than any other in the world; that he reduces his body
with fasting; and has made his knees as hard as horns with continual
praying; but he is not born again: that exception would mar all. As if one
should say, There is a well proportioned body—but the soul is gone; it is
but a dead lump. This is a melting consideration. You do many things
materially good; but God says, All these things avail not—as long as I see
the old nature reigning in the man. Gal. 6:15, "For in Jesus Christ neither
circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision—but a new creature."

If you are not born again,
(1.) All your REFORMATION is nothing in the sight of God. You have
shut the door—but the thief is still in the house. It may be you are not
what once you were; yet you are not what you must be, if ever you would
see heaven; for "except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God," John 3:3.
(2.) Your PRAYERS are an "abomination to the Lord," Prov. 15:8. It may
be, others admire your seriousness; you cry as for your life; but God
accounts of the opening of your mouth, as one would account of the
opening of a grave full of rottenness, Rom. 3:13, "Their throat is an open
sepulcher." Others are affected with your prayers; which seem to them, as
if they would rend the heavens; but God accounts them but as the
howling of a dog: "They have not cried unto me with their hearts, when
they howled upon their beds," Hos. 7:14. Others take you for a wrestler
and prevailer with God; but he can take no delight in you nor your
prayers, Isaiah 66:3, "Their offerings will not be accepted. When such
people sacrifice an ox, it is no more acceptable than a human sacrifice.
When they sacrifice a lamb or bring an offering of grain, it is as bad as
putting a dog or the blood of a pig on the altar! When they burn incense,
it is as if they had blessed an idol." Why, because you are yet "in the gall
of bitterness, and bond of iniquity!"
(3.) All you have DONE for God, and his cause in the world, though it
may be followed with temporal rewards—yet it is lost as to divine
acceptance. This is clear from the case of Jehu, who was indeed rewarded
with a kingdom, for his executing due vengeance upon the house of Ahab;
as being a work good for the matter of it, because it was commanded of
God, as you may see, 2 Kings 9:7; yet was he punished for it in his
posterity, because he did it not in a right manner, Hos. 1:4, "I will avenge
the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu." God looks chiefly to the
heart: and if so, truly, though the outward appearance be fairer than that
of many others—yet the hidden man of your heart is loathsome; you look
well before men—but are not, as Moses was, fair to God, as the margin
has it, Acts 7:20. O, what a difference is there between the characters of
Asa and Amaziah! "The high places were not removed; nevertheless, Asa's

heart was perfect with the Lord all his days," 1 Kings 15:14. "Amaziah did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord—but not with a perfect
heart," 2 Chron. 25:2. It may be you are zealous against sin in others, and
do admonish them of their duty, and reprove them for their sin; and they
hate you, because you do your duty: but I must tell you, God hates you
too, because you do it not in a right manner; and that you can never do,
while you are not born again.
(4.) All your STRUGGLES AGAINST SIN in your own heart and life, are
nothing. The proud Pharisee afflicted his body with fasting, and God
struck his soul, in the mean time, with a sentence of condemnation, Luke
18. Balaam struggled with his covetous temper, to that degree, that
though he loved the wages of unrighteousness—yet he would not win
them by cursing Israel: but he died the death of the wicked, Numb. 31:8.
All you do, while in an unregenerate state, is for yourself:
therefore, it will fare with you as with a subject, who having reduced the
rebels, puts the crown on his own head, and loses all his good service and
his head too.
Objection. "If it be thus with us, then we need never perform any
religious duty at all."
Answer. The conclusion is not just. No inability of yours can excuse from
the duty which God's law lays on you: and there is less evil in doing your
duty, than there is in the omission of it. But there is a difference between
omitting a duty, and doing it as you do it. A man orders the masons to
build him a house. If they quite neglect the work, that will not be
accepted; if they build on the old rotten foundation, neither will that
please: but they must raze the foundation, and build on firm ground. "Go
and do likewise." In the mean time, it is not in vain even for you to seek
the Lord: for though he regards you not—yet he may have respect to his
own ordinances, and do you good thereby, as was said before.
2. Without regeneration there is no communion with God.
There is a society on earth, whose "fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ," 1 John 1:3. But out of that society, all the
unregenerate are excluded; for they are all enemies to God, as you heard
before at large. Now, "can two walk together, except they be agreed?"

Amos 3:3. They are all unholy: and "what communion has light with
darkness – Christ with Belial?" 2 Cor. 6:14, 15. They may have a show and
semblance of holiness; but they are strangers to true holiness, and
therefore "without God in the world." How sad is it, to be employed in
religious duties—yet to have no fellowship with God in them! You would
not be content with your food, unless it nourished you; nor with your
clothes, unless they kept you warm: and how can you satisfy yourselves
with your duties, while you have no communion with God in them?
3. Regeneration is absolutely necessary to qualify you for
heaven. None go to heaven but those who are made meet for it, Col. 1:12.
As it was with Solomon's temple, 1 Kings 6:7, so is it with the temple
above. It is "built of stone made ready before it is brought there;" namely,
of "living stones," 1 Pet. 2:5, "wrought for the selfsame thing," 2 Cor. 5:5;
for they cannot be laid in that glorious building just as they come out of
the quarry of depraved nature. Jewels of gold are not fit for swine, and far
less jewels of glory for unrenewed sinners. Beggars, in their rags, are not
fit for kings' houses; nor sinners to enter into the King's palace, without
the raiment of needlework, Psalm 45:14, 15. What wise man would bring
fish out of the water to feed in his meadows? or send his oxen to feed in
the sea? Just as little are the unregenerate fit for heaven, or
heaven fit for them. It would never be relished by them.
The unregenerate would find fault with heaven on several accounts. As,
(1.) That it is a strange country. Heaven is the renewed man's native
country: his Father is in heaven; his mother is Jerusalem, which is above,
Gal. 4:26. He is born from above, John 3:3. Heaven is his home, 2 Cor.
5:1; therefore, he looks on himself as a stranger on this earth, and his
heart is homeward, Heb. 11:16, "They desire a better country, that is, a
heavenly country." But the unregenerate man is the man of the earth,
Psalm 10:18; written in the earth, Jer. 17:13. Now, "Home is home, be it
ever so homely:" therefore, he minds earthly things, Phil. 3:19. There is a
peculiar sweetness in our native soil; and with difficulty are men drawn to
leave it, and dwell in a strange country. In no case does that prevail more
than in this; for unrenewed men would forfeit their pretensions to
heaven, were it not that they see they cannot make a better bargain.

(2.) There is nothing in heaven that they delight in, as agreeable to the
carnal heart, Rev. 21:27, "For there shall never enter into it anything that
defiles." When Mahomet explained his paradise to be a place of sensual
delights, his religion was greedily embraced; for that is the heaven men
naturally choose. If the covetous man could get bags full of gold there,
and the voluptuous man could promise himself his sensual delights, they
might be reconciled to heaven, and fitted for it too; but since it is not so,
though they may utter fair words about it, truly it has little of their hearts.
(3.) Every corner there is filled with that which of all things they have the
least liking for; and that is holiness, true holiness, perfect holiness. Were
one who abhors swine's flesh, bidden to a feast where all the dishes were
of that sort of meat—but variously prepared, he would find fault with
every dish at the table, notwithstanding all the art used to make them
palatable. It is true, there is joy in heaven—but it is holy joy; there are
pleasures in heaven—but they are holy pleasures; there are places in
heaven—but it is holy ground: that holiness which in every place, and in
everything there—would mar all to the unregenerate.
(4.) Were they carried there, they would not only change their place,
which would be a great heart-break—but they would change their
company too. Truly, they would never like the company there, who care
not for communion with God here; nor value the fellowship of his people,
at least in the vitals of practical godliness. Many, indeed, mix themselves
with the godly on earth, to procure a name to themselves, and to cover
the sinfulness of their hearts; but that trade cannot be managed there.
(5.) They would never like the employment of heaven, they care so little
for it now. The business of the saints there would be an intolerable
burden to them, seeing it is not agreeable to their nature. To be taken up
in beholding, admiring, and praising him that sits on the throne, and the
Lamb, would be work unsuitable, and therefore unsavoury to an
unrenewed soul.
(6.) They would find this fault with it, that the whole is of everlasting
continuance. This would be a killing ingredient in it to them. How would
such as now account the Sabbath day a burden, brook the celebration of
an everlasting Sabbath in the heavens!

4. Regeneration is absolutely necessary to your being admitted
into heaven, John 3:3. No heaven without it. Though carnal men could
digest all those things which make heaven so unsuitable for them—yet
God will never bring them there. Therefore, born again you must be, else
you shall never see heaven; you shall perish eternally. For,
(1.) There is a bill of exclusion against you in the court of heaven, and
against all of your sort; "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God," John 3:3. Here is a bar before you, that men and angels
cannot remove. To hope for heaven, in the face of this peremptory
sentence, is to hope that God will recall his word, and sacrifice his truth
and faithfulness to your safety; which is infinitely more than to hope that
"the earth shall be forsaken for you, and the rock removed out of its
place."
(2.) There is no holiness without regeneration. It is "the new man which
is created in true holiness," Eph. 4:24. And no heaven without holiness;
for "without holiness no man shall see the Lord," Heb. 12:14. Will the
gates of pearl be opened, to let in dogs and swine? No; their place
is outside, Rev. 22:15. God will not admit such into the holy place of
communion with him here; and will he admit them into the holiest of all
hereafter? Will he take the children of the devil, and permit them to sit
with him in his throne? Or, will he bring the unclean into the city, whose
street is pure gold? Be not deceived; grace and glory are but two links of
one chain, which God has joined, and no man shall put asunder. None are
transplanted into the paradise above—but out of the nursery of grace
below. If you are unholy while in this world, you will be forever miserable
in the world to come.
(3.) All the unregenerate are without Christ, and therefore have no hope
while in that case, Eph. 2:12. Will Christ prepare mansions of glory for
those who refuse to receive him into their hearts? Nay, "Since you
neglected all my counsel and did not accept my correction, I, in turn, will
laugh at your calamity. I will mock when terror strikes you, when terror
strikes you like a storm and your calamity comes like a whirlwind, when
trouble and stress overcome you. Proverbs 1:25-27
(4.) There is an infallible connection between a finally unregenerate state

and damnation, arising from the nature of the things themselves; and
from the decree of heaven which is fixed and immovable, as mountains of
brass, John 3:3; Rom. 8:6, "To be carnally minded is death." An
unregenerate state is hell in the bud. It is eternal destruction in
embryo, growing daily, though you do not discern it. Death is painted on
many a fair face, in this life. Depraved nature makes men fit to be
partakers of the inheritance of the damned, in utter darkness.
[1.] The heart of stone within you, is a sinking weight. As a
stone naturally goes downward, so the hard stony heart tends
downward to the bottomless pit. You are hardened against reproof;
though you are told your danger—yet you will not see it, you will not
believe it. But remember that the conscience being now seared with a hot
iron, is a sad presage of everlasting burnings.
[2.] Your unfruitfulness under the means of grace, fits you for the axe
of God's judgments, Matt. 3:10, "Every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire." The withered branch is fuel
for the fire, John 15:6. Tremble at this, you despisers of the Gospel: if you
be not thereby made fit for heaven, you will be like the barren ground,
bearing briers and thorns, "near unto cursing, whose end is to be
burned," Heb. 6:8.
[3.] The hellish dispositions of mind, which discover themselves in
profanity of life, fit the guilty for the regions of horror. A profane life
will have a miserable end. "Those who do such things, shall not
inherit the kingdom of God," Gal. 5:19-21. Think on this, you prayerless
people, you mockers of religion, you cursers and swearers, you unclean
and unjust people, who have not so much as moral honesty to keep you
from lying, cheating, and stealing. What sort of a tree do you think it is,
upon which these fruits grow? Is it a tree of righteousness, which the
Lord has planted? Or is it not such a one as cumbers the ground, which
God will pluck up for fuel to the fire of his wrath?
[4.] Your being dead in sin, makes you fit to be wrapped in flames of
brimstone, as a winding-sheet; and to be buried in the bottomless pit, as
in a grave. Great was the cry in Egypt, when the first-born in
each family was dead; but are there not many families, where

all are spiritually dead together? Nay, many there are who are twice
dead, plucked up by the root. Sometimes in their life they have been
roused by apprehensions of death, and its consequences; but now they
are so far on in their way to the land of darkness, that they hardly ever
have the least glimmering of light from heaven.
[5.] The darkness of your minds presages eternal darkness. O, the
horrid ignorance with which some are plagued; while others, who have
got some rays of the light of reason in their heads, are utterly void of
spiritual light in their hearts! If you knew your case, you would cry out,
Oh! darkness! darkness! darkness! making way for the blackness of
darkness forever! The face-covering is upon you already, as condemned
people; so near are you to everlasting darkness. It is only Jesus Christ
who can stop the execution, pull the napkin off the face of the condemned
malefactor, and put a pardon in his hand; Isa. 25:7, "He will destroy, in
this mountain, the face of covering cast over all people," that is, the facecovering cast over the condemned, as in Haman's case, Esther. 7:8, "As
the word went out of the king's mouth, they covered Haman's face."
[6.] The chains of darkness you are bound with in the prison of your
depraved state, Isa. 61:1, fits you to be cast into the burning fiery furnace.
Ah, miserable men! Sometimes their consciences stir within them, and
they begin to think of amending their ways. But alas! they are in chains,
they cannot do it. They are chained by the heart: their lusts cleave so fast
to them, that they cannot, nay, they will not shake them off. Thus you see
what affinity there is between an unregenerate state, and the
state of the damned, the state of absolute and irretrievable
misery. Be convinced, then, that you must be born again; put a high
value on the new birth, and eagerly desire it.
The text tells you, that the word is the seed, whereof the new creature is
formed: therefore, take heed to it, and entertain it, as it is your life. Apply
yourself to the reading of the Scriptures. You who cannot read, get others
to read it to you. Wait diligently on the preaching of the word, as by
divine appointment the special mean of conversion; "for – it pleased God,
by the foolishness of preaching, to save those who believe," 1 Cor. 1:21.
Therefore cast yourselves in Christ's way; reject not the means of grace,
lest you be found to judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life. Attend

carefully to the word preached. Hear every sermon, as if you were hearing
for eternity; take heed that the fowls of the air steal away this seed from
you, as it is sown. "Give yourself wholly to it," 1 Tim. 4:15. "Receive it not
as the word of men—but, as it is in truth, the word of God," 1 Thess. 2:13.
Hear it with application, looking on it as a message sent from heaven, to
you in particular; though not to you only, Rev. 3:22, "He who has an ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says unto the churches." Lay it up in your
hearts; meditate upon it; and be not as the unclean beasts, which chew
not the cud. But by earnest prayer, beg that the dew of Heaven may fall
on your heart, that the seed may spring up there.
More particularly,
(1.) Receive the testimony of the word of God, concerning the misery of
an unregenerate state, the sinfulness thereof, and the absolute necessity
of regeneration.
(2.) Receive its testimony concerning God, what a holy and just One he is.
(3.) Examine your ways by it; namely, the thoughts of your heart, the
expressions of your lips, and the tenor of your life. Look back through the
several periods of your life; and see your sins from the precepts of the
word, and learn, from its threatening, what you are liable to on account of
these sins.
(4.) By the help of the same word of God, view the corruption of your
nature, as in a mirror which manifests our ugly face in a clear manner.
Were these things deeply rooted in the heart, they might be the seed of
that fear and sorrow, on account of your soul's state, which are necessary
to prepare and stir you up to look after a Savior. Fix your thoughts upon
him offered to you in the Gospel, as fully suited to your case; having, by
his obedience unto death, perfectly satisfied the justice of God, and
brought in everlasting righteousness. This may prove the seed of
humiliation, desire, hope and faith; and move you to stretch out the
withered hand unto him, at his own command.
Let these things sink deeply into your hearts, and improve them
diligently. Remember, whatever you are, you must be born again; else it

had been better for you, that you had never been born. Therefore, if any
of you shall live and die in an unregenerate state, you will be inexcusable,
having been fairly warned of your danger.

Mystical Union Between Christ and Believers
"I am the vine you are the branches." John 15:5
Having spoken of the change made by regeneration, on all those who will
inherit eternal life, in opposition to their natural real state, the state of
degeneracy; I proceed to speak of the change made on them, in their
union with the Lord Jesus Christ, in opposition to their natural relative
state, the state of misery. The doctrine of the saints' union with Christ, is
very plainly and fully insisted on, from the beginning to the eighth verse
of this chapter; which is a part of our Lord's farewell sermon to his
disciples. Sorrow had now filled their hearts; they were apt to say, Alas!
what will become of us, when our Master is taken from our head? Who
will then instruct us? Who will solve our doubts? How shall we be
supported under our difficulties and discouragements? How shall we be
able to live without our accustomed communication with him? Therefore,
our Lord Jesus Christ seasonably teaches them the mystery of their union
with him, comparing himself to the vine, and them to the branches.
1. He compares himself to a VINE. "I am the vine." He had been
celebrating, with his disciples, the sacrament of his supper, that sign and
seal of his people's union with him; and had told them, "That he would
drink no more of the fruit of the vine, until he should drink it new with
them in his Father's kingdom:" and now he shows himself to be the vine,
from whence the wine of their consolation should come. The vine has less
beauty than many other trees—but it is exceedingly fruitful; fitly
representing the low condition in which our Lord was in, bringing many
sons to glory. But that which is chiefly aimed at, in his comparing himself
to a vine, is to represent himself as the supporter and nourisher
of his people, in whom they live and bring forth fruit.
2. He compares them to BRANCHES; you are the branches of that
vine. You are the branches knit to, and growing on this stock, drawing all
your life and sap from it. It is a beautiful comparison; as if he had said, I
am as a vine, you are as the branches of that vine. Now there are two sorts
of branches. (1.) Natural branches, which at first spring out of the stock.

These are the branches that are in the tree, and were never out of it. (2.)
There are engrafted branches, which are branches cut off from the tree
that first gave them life, and put into another, to grow upon it. Thus
branches come to be on a tree, which originally were not on it. The
branches mentioned in the text, are of the latter sort; branches broken
off, as the word in the original language denotes, namely, from the tree
which first gave them life. None of the children of men are natural
branches of the second Adam, that is, Jesus Christ, the true vine; they are
the natural branches of the first Adam, that degenerate vine: but the elect
are all of them, sooner or later, broken off from their natural stock, and
engrafted into Christ, the true vine.
DOCTRINE. They who are in the state of grace, are engrafted in,
and united to, the Lord Jesus Christ. They are taken out of
their natural stock, cut off from it; and are now engrafted into
Christ, as the new stock.
In general, for understanding the union between the Lord Jesus Christ
and his elect, who believe in him, and on him, I observe,
1. It is a SPIRITUAL union. Man and wife, by their marriage-union,
become one flesh; Christ and true believers, by this union, become one
spirit, 1 Cor. 6:17. As one soul or spirit actuates both the head and the
members in the natural body, so the one Spirit of God dwells in Christ
and the Christian; for, "if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his," Romans 8:9. Earthly union is made by contact; so the stones in a
building are united: but this is a union of another nature. Were it possible
that we could eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ, in a corporeal
and carnal manner, it would profit nothing, John 6:63. It was not
Mary's bearing him in her womb—but her believing on him,
that made her a saint, Luke 11:27, 28, "A woman in the crowd called
out, "Blessed is the mother who gave you birth and nursed you." He
replied, "Blessed rather are those who hear the word of God and obey it."
2. It is a REAL union. Such is our weakness in our present state, so
much are we sunk in sin, that in our mind, we are prone to suspect
spiritual realities to be only a fiction. But nothing is more real than what
is spiritual: as approaching nearest to the nature of him who is the

fountain of all reality, namely, God himself. We do not see with our eyes
the union between our own soul and body; neither can we represent it to
ourselves truly, by imagination, as we do sensible things: yet the reality of
it is not to be doubted. Faith is no fancy—but "the substance of things
hoped for," Heb. 11:1. Neither is the union thereby made between Christ
and believers imaginary—but most real: "For we are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones," Eph. 5:30.
3. It is a most close and INTIMATE union. Believers, regenerate
people, who believe in him, and rely on him, have put on Christ, Gal.
3:27. If that be not enough, he is in them, John 17:23, formed in them as
the child in the womb, Gal. 4:19. He is the foundation, 1 Cor. 3:11; they
are the living stones built upon him, 1 Pet. 2:5. He is the head, and they
the body, Eph. 1:22, 23. Nay, he lives in them, as their very souls live in
their bodies, Gal. 2:20. And what is more than all this, they are one in the
Father and the Son, as the Father is in Christ, and Christ in the Father,
John 17:21, "That they all may be one; as you Father are in me, and I in
you, that they also may be one in us."
4. Though it is not a mere LEGAL union—yet it is a union
supported by law. Christ, as the surety, and Christians as the principal
debtors, are one in the eye of the law. When the elect had run themselves,
with the rest of mankind, in debt to the justice of God, Christ became
surety for them, and paid the debt. When they believe on him, they are
united to him in a spiritual marriage union; which takes effect so far, that
what he did and suffered for them is reckoned in law, as if they had done
and suffered it themselves. Hence, they are said to be crucified with
Christ, Gal. 2:20; buried with him, Col. 2:12; yes, raised up together,
namely, with Christ, "and made to sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus," Eph. 2:6. In which places, saints on earth, of whom the
apostle there speaks, cannot be said to be sitting—but in the way of law
reckoning.
5. It is an INDISSOLUBLE union. Once in Christ, ever in him.
Having taken up his habitation in the heart, he never leaves. None can
untie this happy knot. Who will dissolve this union? Will he himself? No,
he will not; we have his word for it; "I will not turn away from them," Jer.
32:40. But perhaps the sinner will do this mischief to himself? No, he

shall not; "they shall not depart from me," says their God. Can devils do
it? No, unless they be stronger than Christ and his Father too; "Neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand," says our Lord, John 10:28.
"And none is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand," verse 30. But
what say you of death, which parts husband and wife; yes, separates the
soul from the body? Will not death do it? No: the apostle, Romans 8:38,
39, is "persuaded that neither death," terrible as it is, "nor life," desirable
as it is; "nor" devils, those evil "angels, nor" the devil's persecuting
agents, though they be "principalities, nor powers" on earth; "nor" evil
"things present," already lying on us; "nor" evil "things to come" on us;
"nor" the "height" of worldly felicity; "nor depth" of worldly misery; "nor
any other creature," good or evil, "shall be able to separate us from the
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord."
As death separated Christ's soul from his body—but could not separate
either his soul or body from his divine nature; so, though the saints
should be separated from their nearest relations in the world, and from
all their earthly enjoyments; yes, though their souls should be separated
from their bodies separated in a thousand pieces, their "bones scattered,
as one cuts or cleaves wood;" yet soul and body shall remain united to the
Lord Christ; for even in death, "they sleep in Jesus," 1 Thess. 4:14; and
"he keeps all their bones," Psalm 34:20. Union with Christ, is "the grace
wherein we stand," firm and stable, "as Mount Zion, which cannot be
removed."
6. It is a MYSTERIOUS union. The gospel is a doctrine of mysteries.
It discovers to us the substantial union of the three persons in one
Godhead, 1 John 5:7, "These three are one;" the hypostatic union, of the
divine and human natures, in the person of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Tim.
3:16, "God was manifest in the flesh;" and the mystical union, between
Christ and believers; "This is a great mystery" also, Eph. 5:32. O, what
mysteries are here! The head in heaven, the members on earth—yet really
united! "Christ in the believer, living in him, walking in him:" and "the
believer dwelling in God, putting on the Lord Jesus, eating his flesh, and
drinking his blood!" This makes the saints a mystery to the world; yes, a
mystery to themselves.
I come now more particularly to speak of this union with, and engrafting

into, Jesus Christ.
I. I shall consider the natural stock, which the branches are taken out of.
II. The supernatural stock they are engrafted into.
III. What branches are cut off the old stock, and put into the new.
IV. How it is done. And,
V. The benefits flowing from this union and engrafting.
I. Let us take a view of the natural stock, which the branches
are taken out of. The two Adams, that is, Adam and Christ, are the two
stocks: for the Scripture speaks of these two, as if there had been no more
men in the world than they, 1 Cor. 15:45, "The first man Adam was made
a living soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit;" verse 47, "The
first man is of the earth earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven."
And the reason is, there never were any that were not branches of one of
these two; all men being either in the one stock or in the other: for in
these two sorts all mankind stand divided, verse 48, "As is the earthy,
such are they also which are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they
also that are heavenly." The first Adam then, is the natural stock: on this
stock are the branches found growing at first, which are afterwards cut
off, and engrafted into Christ. As for the fallen angels, as they had no
relation to the first Adam, so they have none to the second.
There are four things to be remembered here.
(1.) That all mankind, the man Christ excepted, are naturally branches of
the first Adam, Romans 5:12, "By one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin: and so death passed upon all men."
(2.) The bond which knit us unto the natural stock, was the covenant of
works. Adam, being our natural root, was made the moral root also,
bearing all his posterity, as representing them in the covenant of works.
For "by one man's disobedience many were made sinners," Romans 5:19.
It was necessary that there should be a peculiar relation between that one
man and the many, as a foundation for imputing his sin to them. This

relation did not arise from the mere natural bond between him and us, as
a father to his children; for so we are related to our immediate parents,
whose sins are not thereupon imputed to us, as Adam's sin is: but it arose
from a moral bond between Adam and us; the bond of a covenant, which
could be no other than the covenant of works, wherein we are united to
him, as branches to a stock. Hence Jesus Christ, though a son of Adam,
Luke 3:23-38, was none of these branches; for as he came not of Adam, in
virtue of the blessing of marriage, which was given before the fall, Gen.
1:28, "Be fruitful, and multiply," etc.—but in virtue of a special promise
made after the fall, Gen. 3:15, "The seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpent's head," he could not be represented by Adam in a covenant made
before his fall.
(3.) As it is impossible for a branch to be in two stocks at once, so no man
can be at one and the same time, both in the first and second Adam.
(4.) Hence it evidently follows, that all who are not engrafted in Jesus
Christ, are yet branches of the old stock; and so partake of the nature of
the same.
Now, as to the first Adam, our natural stock, consider,
First, What a stock he was originally. He was a vine of the Lord's planting,
a choice vine, a noble vine, wholly good. There was a consultation of the
Trinity at the planting of this vine, Gen. 1:26, "Let us make man in our
image, after our own likeness." There was no rottenness at the heart of it.
There was sap and juice enough in it to have nourished all the branches,
to bring forth fruit unto God. My meaning is, Adam was made able
perfectly to keep the commandments of God, which would have procured
eternal life to himself, and to all his posterity; for as all die by Adam's
disobedience, all would have had life by his obedience, if he had stood.
Consider,
Secondly, What that stock now is. Ah! most unlike to what it was
when planted by the Author of all good. A blast from hell, and a
bite with the venomous teeth of the old serpent, have made it a
degenerate stock; a dead stock; nay, a killing stock.

1. It is a degenerate EVIL stock. Therefore, the Lord God said to
Adam in that dismal day, "Where are you?" Gen. 3:9. In what condition
are you now? "How are you turned into the degenerate plant of a strange
vine unto me?" Or, "Where were you?" Why not in the place of meeting
with me? Why so long in coming? What means this fearful change; this
hiding of yourself from me? Alas! the stock is degenerate, quite spoiled, is
become altogether evil, and brings forth wild grapes. Converse with the
devil is preferred to communion with God. Satan is believed; and God,
who is truth itself, disbelieved. He who was the friend of God is now in
conspiracy against him. Darkness is come in the place of light; ignorance
prevails in the mind, where divine knowledge shone; the will, which was
righteous and regular, is now turned rebel against its Lord: and the whole
man is in dreadful disorder.
Before I go farther, let me stop and observe, Here is a mirror both for
saints and sinners. Sinners, stand here and consider what you are; and
saints, learn what you once were. You, sinners, are branches of a
degenerate stock. Fruit you may bear indeed; but now that your vine is
the vine of Sodom, your grapes must of course be grapes of gall, Deut.
32:32. The Scripture speaks of two sorts of fruit which grow on the
branches of the natural stock; and it is plain that they are of the nature of
their degenerate stock. (1.) The wild grapes of wickedness, Isaiah 5:2.
These grow in abundance, by influence from hell. See Gal. 5:19-21. At its
gates are all manner of these fruits, both new and old. Storms come from
heaven to check them; but still they grow. They are struck at with the
sword of the Spirit, the word of God; conscience gives them many a secret
blow; yet they thrive. (2.) Fruit to themselves, Hos. 10:1. What else are all
the unrenewed man's acts of obedience, his reformation, sober
deportment, his prayers, and good works? They are all done chiefly for
himself, not for the glory of God. These fruits are like the apples of
Sodom, fair to look at—but full of ashes when handled and tried. You
think you have not only the leaves of a profession—but the fruits of a holy
practice too; but if you be not broken off from the old stock, and
engrafted in Christ Jesus, God accepts not, and regards not your fruits.
Here I must take occasion to tell you, there are five faults will be found in
heaven with your best fruits.

(1.) Their bitterness; your "clusters are bitter," Deut. 32:32. There is a
spirit of bitterness, wherewith some come before the Lord, in religious
duties, living in malice and envy; and which some professors entertain
against others, because they outshine them in holiness of life, or because
they are not of their opinion. This, wherever it reigns, is a fearful
symptom of an unregenerate state. But I do not so much mean this, as
that which is common to all the branches of the old stock, namely, the
leaves of hypocrisy, Luke 12:1, which sours and embitters every duty
they perform. Wisdom, which is full of good fruits, is without hypocrisy,
James 3:17.
(2.) Their ill savor. Their works are abominable, for they themselves are
corrupt, Psalm 14:1. They all savor of the old stock, not of the new. It is
the peculiar privilege of the saints, that they are unto God a sweet savor
of Christ, 2 Cor. 2:15. The unregenerate man's fruits savor not of love to
Christ, nor of the blood of Christ, nor of the incense of his intercession;
and therefore will never be accepted in heaven.
(3.) Their unripeness. Their grape is an unripe grape, Job 15:33. There
is no influence on them from the Sun of righteousness to bring them to
perfection. They have the shape of fruit—but no more. The matter of duty
is in them—but they lack right principles and ends: their works are not in
God, John 3:21. Their prayers drop from their lips, before their hearts are
impregnated with the vital sap of the Spirit of supplication: their tears fall
from their eyes before their hearts are truly softened; their feet turn to
new paths, and their way is altered, while their nature still is unchanged.
(4.) Their lightness. Being weighed in the balances, they are found
lacking, Dan. 5:27. For evidence whereof, you may observe that they do
not humble the soul—but lift it up in pride. The good fruits of holiness
bear down the branches they grow upon, making them to salute the
ground, 1 Cor. 15:19, "I labored more abundantly than they all: yet not I—
but the grace of God which was with me." But the blasted fruits of
unrenewed men's performances, hang lightly on branches towering up to
heaven, Judges 17:13, "Now know I, that the Lord will do me good, seeing
I have a Levite as my priest." They look, indeed, too high for God to
behold them: "Why have we fasted, say they, and you see not" Isaiah
58:3. The more duties they do, and the better they seem to perform them,

the less are they humbled, and the more are they lifted up. This
disposition of the sinner is the exact reverse of what is to be found in the
saint. To men, who neither are in Christ, nor are solicitous to be found in
him, their duties are like floating bladders, wherewith they think to swim
ashore to Immanuel's land; but these must needs break, and they
consequently sink, because they take not Christ for the lifter up of their
heads, Psalm 3:3, 5. They are not all manner of pleasant fruits, Cant. 7:13.
Christ, as a king, must be served with variety. Where God makes the heart
his garden, he plants it as Solomon did his, with trees of all kinds of
fruits, Eccl. 2:5. Accordingly, it brings forth the fruit of the Spirit in all
goodness, Eph. 5:9. But the ungodly are not so; their obedience is never
universal; there is always some one thing or other excepted. In one word,
their fruits are fruits of an evil tree, which cannot be accepted in heaven.
2. Our natural stock is a DEAD stock, according to the threatening,
Gen. 2:17, "In the day you eat thereof, you shall surely die." Our root is
now rottenness; no wonder the blossom goes up as dust. The stroke has
gone to the heart, the sap is let out, and the tree is withered. The curse of
the first covenant, like a hot thunderbolt from heaven, has lighted on it,
and ruined it. It is cursed now as that fig-tree, Matt. 21:19, "Let no fruit
grow on you henceforward forever." Now it is good for nothing—but to
cumber the ground, and furnish fuel for Tophet.
Let me enlarge a little here also. Every unrenewed man is a branch of a
dead stock. When you see, O sinner, a dead stock of a tree, exhausted of
all its sap, having branches on it in the same condition, look on it as a
lively representation of your soul's state.
(1.) Where the stock is dead, the branches must needs be barren. Alas! the
barrenness of many professors plainly discovers on what stock they are
growing. It is easy to pretend to faith—but "I can't see your faith if you
don't have good deeds." James 2:18.
(2.) A dead stock can convey no sap to the branches, to make them bring
forth fruit. The covenant of works was the bond of our union with the
natural stock; but now it is become weak through the flesh; that is,
through the degeneracy and depravity of human nature, Romans 8:3. It is
strong enough to command, and to bind heavy burdens on the shoulders

of those who are not in Christ—but it affords no strength to bear them.
The sap, that was once in the root, is now gone: the law, like a merciless
creditor, apprehends Adam's heirs, saying to each, "Pay what you owe;"
when, alas! his effects are riotously spent.
(3.) All pains and cost are lost on the tree, whose life is gone. In vain do
men labor to get fruit on the branches, when there is no sap in the root.
The gardener's pains are lost: ministers lose their labor on the branches
of the old stock, while they continue on it. Many sermons are preached to
no purpose; because there is no life to give sensation. Sleeping men may
be awakened; but the dead cannot be raised without a miracle; even so
the dead sinner must remain, if he be not restored to life by a miracle of
grace.
The influences of heaven are lost on such a tree: in vain does the rain fall
upon it; in vain is it laid open to the winter cold and frosts. The Lord of
the vineyard digs about many a dead soul—but it is not bettered. "Bruise
the fool in a mortar, his folly will not depart." Though he meets with
many crosses—yet he retains his lusts: let him be laid on a sick bed, he
will lie there like a sick beast, groaning under his pain—but not mourning
for, nor turning from, his sin. Let death itself stare him in the face, he will
presumptuously maintain his hope. Sometimes there are common
operations of the divine Spirit performed on him: he is sent home with a
trembling heart, and with arrows of conviction sticking in his soul; but at
length he prevails against these things, and becomes as secure as ever.
Summer and winter are alike to the branches on the dead stock. When
others about them are budding, blossoming, and bringing forth fruit,
there is no change on them: the dead stock has no growing time at all.
Perhaps it may be difficult to know, in the winter, what trees are dead,
and what are alive; but the spring plainly discovers it. There are some
seasons wherein there is little life to be perceived, even among saints; yet
times of reviving come at length. But even when "the vine flourishes, and
the pomegranates bud forth," when saving grace is discovering itself by
its lively actings wherever it is, the branches on the old stock are still
withered. When the dry bones are coming together, bone to bone among
saints, the sinner's bones are still lying about the grave's mouth. They are
trees that cumber the ground, ready to be cut down; and will be cut down

for the fire, if God in mercy does not prevent it—by cutting them off from
that stock, and engrafting them into another.
3. Our natural stock is a KILLING stock. If the stock dies, how can
the branches live? If the sap is gone from the root and heart, the branches
must needs wither. "In Adam all die," 1 Cor. 15:22. The root died in
Paradise, and all the branches in it, and with it. The root is poisoned, and
from thence the branches are infected; "death is in the pot;" and all that
taste of the pottage, are killed.
Know then, that every natural man is a branch of a killing stock. Our
natural root not only gives us no life—but it has a killing power, reaching
to all the branches thereof. There are four things which the first Adam
conveys to all his branches, and they are abiding in, and lying on, such of
them as are not engrafted in Christ.
(1.) A corrupt nature. He sinned, and his nature was thereby corrupted
and depraved; and this corruption is conveyed to all his posterity. He was
infected, and the contagion spread itself over all his descendents.
(2.) Guilt, that is, an obligation to punishment, Romans 5:12, "By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed
upon all men, for all have sinned." The threatenings of the law, as cords
of death, are twisted about the branches of the old stock, to draw them
over the hedge into the fire. And until they be cut off from this stock by
the pruning-knife, the sword of vengeance hangs over their heads, to cut
them down.
(3.) This killing stock transmits the curse into the branches. The stock, as
the stock (for I speak not of Adam in his personal and private capacity),
being cursed, so are the branches, Gal. 3:10, "For as many as are of the
works of the law, are under the curse." The curse affects the whole man,
and all that belongs to him, everything he possesses; and works three
ways.
[1.] As poison, infecting; thus their blessings are cursed, Mal. 2:2.
Whatever the man enjoys, it can do him no good—but evil, being thus
poisoned by the curse. His prosperity in the world destroys him, Proverbs

1:32. The ministry of the gospel is a savor of death unto death to him, 2
Cor. 2:16. His seeming attainments in religion are cursed to him; his
knowledge serves but to puff him up, and his duties to keep him back
from Christ.
[2.] It works as a moth, consuming and wasting by little and little, Hos.
5:12, "Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth." There is a worm at
the root, consuming them by degrees. Thus the curse pursued Saul, until
it wormed him out of all his enjoyments, and out of the very show he had
of religion. Sometimes they decay like the fat of lambs, and melt away as
the snow in the sunshine.
[3.] It acts as a lion rampant, Hos. 5:14, "I will be unto Ephraim as a lion."
The Lord "rains on them snares fire and brimstone, and a horrible
tempest," in such a manner, that they are hurried away with the stream.
He tears their enjoyments from them in his wrath, pursues them with
terrors, rends their souls from their bodies, and throws the dead branch
into the fire. Thus the curse devours like fire, which none can quench.
(4.) This killing stock transmits death to the branches upon it. Adam took
the poisonous cup, and drank it off: this occasioned death to himself and
us. We came into the world spiritually dead, thereby exposed to eternal
death, and absolutely liable to temporal death. This root is to us like the
Scythian river, which, they say, brings forth little bladders every day, out
of which come certain small flies, that are bred in the morning, winged at
noon, and dead at night: a very lively emblem of our mortal state.
Now, sirs, is it not absolutely necessary to be broken off from this our
natural stock? What will our fair leaves of a profession, or our fruits of
duties, avail—if we be still branches of the degenerate, dead, and killing
stock? But, alas! of the many questions among us, few are taken up about
these, "Whether am I broken off from the old stock, or not? Am I
engrafted in Christ, or not?" Ah! why all this waste of time? Why is there
so much noise about religion among many, who can give no good account
of their having laid a good foundation, being mere strangers to
experimental religion? I fear, if God does not in mercy undermine the
religion of many of us, and let us see that we have none at all, our root
will be found rottenness, and our blossom go up as dust, in a dying hour.

Therefore, let us look to our state, that we be not found fools in our latter
end.
II. Let us now view the SUPERNATURAL stock, into which the
branches cut off from the natural stock are engrafted. Jesus Christ is
sometimes called "The Branch," Zech. 3:8. So he is in respect of his
human nature, being a branch, and the top branch, of the house of David.
Sometimes he is called a Root, Isaiah 11:10. We have both together, Rev.
21:16, "I am the root and the offspring of David;" David's root as God, and
his offspring as man. The text tells us, that he is the vine, that is, he, as a
Mediator, is the vine stock, whereof believers are the branches. As the sap
comes from the earth into the root and stock, and from thence is diffused
into the branches; so, by Christ as Mediator, divine life is conveyed from
the fountain, unto those who are united to him by faith, John 6:57, "As
the living Father has sent me, and I live by the Father; so, he who eats
me, even he shall live by me." By Christ as Mediator, not as God only, as
some have asserted; nor yet as man only, as the papists generally hold:
but as Mediator, God and man, Acts 20:28, "The church of God, which he
has purchased with his own blood." Heb. 9:14, "Christ, who, through the
eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God."
The divine and human natures have their distinct actings—yet a joint
operation, in his discharging the office of Mediator. This is illustrated by
the similitude of a fiery sword, which at once cuts and burns: cutting it
burns, and burning it cuts; the steel cuts, and the fire burns. Therefore
Christ, God-man, is the stock, whereof believers are the branches: and
they are united to a whole Christ. They are united to him in his human
nature, as being "members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones,"
Eph. 5:30. And they are united to him in his divine nature; for so the
apostle speaks of this union, Col. 1:27, "Christ in you, the hope of glory."
Those who are Christ's have the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8:9; and by him
they are united to the Father, and to the Holy Spirit; 1 John 4:15,
"Whoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him,
and he in God." Faith, the bond of this union, receives a whole Christ,
God-man, and so unites us to him as such.
Behold here, O believers, your high privilege. You were once branches of

a degenerate stock, even as others: but you have, by grace, become
branches of the true vine, John 15:1. You are cut out of a dead and killing
stock, and engrafted in the last Adam, who was made a quickening spirit,
1 Cor. 15:45. Your loss by the first Adam is made up, with great
advantage, by your union with the second. Adam, at his best estate, was
but a shrub, in comparison with Christ the tree of life. He was but a
servant; Christ is the Son, the Heir, and Lord of all things, "the Lord from
heaven." It cannot be denied, that grace was shown in the first covenant:
but it is as far exceeded by the grace of the second covenant, as the
twilight is by the light of the mid-day.

III. What BRANCHES are taken out of the natural stock, and
grafted into this vine? Answer: These are the elect, and no others.
They, and they alone, are grafted into Christ; and consequently, none but
they are cut off from the killing stock. For them alone he intercedes, "That
they may be one in him and his Father," John 17:9-23. Faith, the bond of
this union, is given to none else; it is the faith of God's elect, Tit. 1:1. The
Lord passes by many branches growing on the natural stock, and cuts off
only here one, and there one, and grafts them into the true vine,
according as His sovereign love has determined. Often does he pitch upon
the most unlikely branch, leaving the top boughs; passing by the mighty
and the noble, and calling the weak, base, and despised, 1 Cor. 1:26, 27.
Yes, he often leaves the lovely and smooth, and takes the broken and
knotty; "and such were some of you—but you are washed," etc., 1 Cor.
6:11.
If we inquire, "Why so?" we find no other reason, but because they were
chosen in him, Eph. 1:4; "predestinated to the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ," ver. 5. Thus are they gathered together in Christ, while the
rest are left growing on their natural stock, to be afterwards bound up in
bundles for the fire. Therefore, to whoever the Gospel may come in vain,
it will have a blessed effect on God's elect, Acts 13:48, "as many as were
ordained to eternal life, believed." Where the Lord has many people, the
gospel will have much success, sooner or later. Such as are to be saved,
will be added to the mystical body of Christ.

IV. I am now to show HOW the branches are cut off from the
natural stock, the first Adam, and grafted into the true vine,
the Lord Jesus Christ. Thanks to the Farmer, not to the branch, which
is cut off from its natural stock, and grafted into a new one. The sinner, in
his coming off from the first stock, is passive, and neither can nor will
come off from it of his own accord—but clings to it, until almighty power
makes him to fall off, John 6:44, "No man can come unto me, except the
Father, who has sent me, draw him." And chapter 5:40, "You will not
come to me, that you might have life." The engrafted branches are "God's
husbandry," 1 Cor. 3:9, "The planting of the Lord," Isaiah 61:3. The
ordinary means he makes use of, in this work, is the ministry of the word,
1 Cor. 3:9, "We are laborers together with God." But the efficacy
thereof is wholly from him, whatever the minister's parts or
piety is, ver. 7, "Neither is he who plants anything, neither he who
waters; but God that gives the increase." The apostles preached to the
Jews—yet the body of that people remained in infidelity, Romans 10:16,
"Who has believed our report?" Yes, Christ himself, who spoke as never
man spoke, says concerning the success of his own ministry, "I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for nothing," Isaiah 49:4. The
branches may be hacked by the preaching of the word; but the stroke will
never go through—until it is carried home by the omnipotent arm.
However, God's ordinary way is, "by the foolishness of preaching to save
those who believe," 1 Cor. 1:21.
The cutting of the branch from the natural stock, is performed by the
pruning knife of the law, in the hand of the Spirit of God, Gal. 2:19, "For I,
through the law, am dead to the law." It is by the bond of the covenant of
works, as I said before, that we are knit to our natural stock: therefore, as
a wife, unwilling to be put away, pleads and hangs by the marriage tie; so
do men by the covenant of works. They hold by it, like the man who held
the ship with his hands; and when one hand was cut off, held it with the
other; and when both were cut off, held it with his teeth. This will appear
from a distinct view of the Lord's works on men, in bringing them off
from the old stock; which I offer in the following particulars:
1. When the Spirit of the Lord comes to deal with a person, to bring him

to Christ, he finds him in Laodicea's case, in a sound sleep of security,
dreaming of heaven and the favor of God, though full of sin against the
Holy One of Israel, Rev. 3:17, "You don't know, that you are wretched,
and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." Therefore, he darts in
some beams of light into the dark soul; and lets the man see that he is a
lost man, if he does not become a new man, and betake himself to a new
course of life. Thus, by the Spirit of the Lord, acting as a spirit of bondage,
there is a criminal court erected in the man's bosom; where he is
arraigned, accused, and condemned for breaking the law of God,
"convicted of sin and judgment," John 16:8. And now he can no longer
sleep securely in his former course of life. This is the first stroke which
the branch gets, in order to cutting off.
2. Hereupon the man forsakes his former profane courses, his lying,
swearing, Sabbath-breaking, stealing, and such like practices; though
they are dear to him as right eyes, he will rather forsake them than ruin
his soul. The ship is likely to sink, and therefore he throws his goods
overboard, that he himself may not perish. Now he begins to bless
himself in his heart, and looks joyfully on his evidences for heaven;
thinking himself a better servant to God than many others, Luke 18:11,
"God, I thank you, I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers," etc.
But he soon gets another stroke with the axe of the law, showing him that
it is only he who does what is written in the law, who can be saved by it;
and that his negative holiness is too scanty a covering from the storm of
God's wrath. Thus, although his sins of commission only were heavy on
him before, his sins of omission now crowd into his thoughts, attended
with a train of law curses and vengeance. And each of the ten
commandments discharges thunder-claps of wrath against him for his
omission of required duties.
3. Upon this he turns to a positively holy course of life. He not only is not
profane—but he performs religious duties: he prays, seeks the knowledge
of the principles of religion, strictly observes the Lord's day, and, like
Herod, does many things, and hears sermons gladly. In one word, there is
a great conformity, in his outward conversation, to the letter of both
tables of the law. There is a mighty change in the man, which his

neighbors cannot miss taking notice of. Hence he is cheerfully admitted
by the godly into their society, as a praying person; and can confer with
them about religious matters, yes, and about soul exercise, which some
are not acquainted with; and their good opinion of him confirms his good
opinion of himself. This step in religion is fatal to many, who never get
beyond it.
But here the Lord gives the elect branch a farther stroke. Conscience flies
in the man's face, for some wrong steps in his conversation, the neglect of
some duty, or commission of some sin, which is a blot in his
conversation; and then the flaming sword of the law appears again over
his head, and the curse rings in his ears, for that he "continues not in all
things written in the law, to do them," Gal. 3:10.
4. On this account, he is obliged to seek another remedy for his disease.
He goes to God, confesses his sin, seeks the pardon of it, promising to
watch against it for the time to come; and so finds case, and thinks he
may very well take it, seeing the scripture says, "if we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins," 1 John 1:9; not considering that
he grasps at a privilege, which is only theirs who are grafted into Christ,
and under the covenant of grace, and which the branches yet growing on
the old stock cannot plead. And here sometimes there are formal and
express vows made against such and such sins, and binding to such and
such duties. Thus many go on all their days, knowing no other
religion, than to perform duties, and to confess, and pray for
pardon of that wherein they fail, promising themselves eternal
happiness, though they are utter strangers to Christ.
Here many elect ones have been cast down wounded, and many
reprobrates have been slain, while the wounds of neither of them have
been deep enough to cut them off from their natural stock. But the Spirit
of the Lord gives yet a deeper stroke to the branch which is to be cut off,
showing him, that, as yet, he is but an outside saint, and discovering to
him the filthy lusts lodged in his heart, which he took no notice of before,
Romans 7:9, "When the commandment came, sin revived, and I died."
Then he sees his heart to be full of sinful lusts, covetousness, pride,
malice, filthiness and the like. Now, as soon as the door of the chambers
of his imagery is thus opened to him, and he sees what they do there in

the dark, his outside religion is blown up as insufficient; and he learns a
new lesson in religion, namely, "That he is not a Jew, who is one
outwardly," Romans 2:28.
5. Upon this he goes farther, even to inside religion; sets to work more
vigorously than ever, mourns over the evils of his heart, and strives to
keep down the weeds which he finds growing in that neglected garden.
He labors to curb his pride and passion, and to banish impurities of
thought; prays more fervently, hears attentively, and strives to get his
heart affected in every religious duty he performs; and thus he comes to
think himself, not only an outside—but an inside Christian. Wonder not
at this—for there is nothing in it beyond the power of nature, or what one
may attain to under a vigorous influence of the covenant of works;
therefore, another yet deeper stroke is given!
The law charges home on the man's conscience, that he was a
transgressor from the womb; that he came into the world a guilty
creature; and that in the time of his ignorance, and even since his eyes
were opened, he has been guilty of many actual sins, either altogether
overlooked by him or not sufficiently mourned over; for spiritual sores,
not healed by the blood of Christ—but skinned over some other way, so as
to be easily irritated, and soon to break out again; therefore, the law takes
him by the throat, saying, "Pay what you owe!"
6. Then the sinner says in his heart, "Have patience with me, and I will
pay you all;" and so falls to work to pacify an offended God, and to atone
for those sins. He renews his repentance, such as it is; bears patiently the
afflictions laid upon him; yes, he afflicts himself, denies himself the use of
his lawful comforts, sighs deeply, mourns bitterly, cries with tears for a
pardon, until he has wrought up his heart to a conceit of having obtained
it: having thus done penance for what is past, he resolves to be a good
servant to God, and to hold on in outward and inward obedience, for the
time to come.
But the stroke must go nearer the heart yet, before the branch falls off.
The Lord discovers to him, in the glass of the law, how he sins in all he
does, even when he does the best he can; and therefore the dreadful
sound returns to his ears, Gal. 3:10, "Cursed is everyone who continues

not in all things," etc. "When you fasted and mourned," says the Lord,
"did you at all fast unto me, even to me?" Will muddy water make clean
clothes? Will you satisfy for one sin with another? Did not your thoughts
wander in such a duty? Were not your affections flat in another? Did not
your heart give a sinful look to such an idol? And did it not rise in a fit of
impatience under such an affliction? "Should I accept this of your hands?
Cursed be the deceiver, who sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing," Mal.
1:13, 14. And thus he becomes so far broken off, that he sees he is not able
to satisfy the demands of the law.
7. Hence, like a broken man, who finds he is not able to pay all his debt,
he goes about to deal with his creditor. And, being in pursuit of ease and
comfort, he does what he can to fulfill the law; and wherein he fails, he
trusts that God will accept the will for the deed. Thus doing his duty, and
having a will to do better, he cheats himself into persuasion of the
goodness of his state: and hereby thousands are ruined.
But the elect get another stroke, which loosens their hold in this case. The
doctrine of the law is borne in on their consciences, demonstrating to
them, that exact and perfect obedience is required by it, under pain of the
curse; and that it is doing, and not wishing to do—which will avail.
Wishing to do better will not answer the law's demands; and therefore the
curse sounds again, "Cursed is everyone that continues not – to do them;"
that is, actually to do them. In vain is wishing then.
8. Being broken off from all hopes of fulfilling the law, he falls to
borrowing. He sees that all he can do to obey the law, and all his desires
to be and to do better—will not save his soul: therefore, he goes to Christ,
entreating, that His righteousness may make up what is lacking in his
own, and cover all the defects of his doings and sufferings; that so God,
for Christ's sake, may accept them, and thereupon be reconciled. Thus
doing what he can to fulfill the law, and looking to Christ to make up all
his defects, he comes at length to sleep securely again. Many people are
ruined this way. This was the error of the Galatians, which Paul, in his
epistle to them, disputes against. But the Spirit of God breaks off the
sinner from this hold also, by bringing home to his conscience that great
truth, Gal. 3:12, "The law is not of faith—but the man who does them,
shall live in them." There is no mixing of the law and faith in this

business; the sinner must hold by one of them, and let the other go. The
way of the law, and the way of faith, are so far different, that it is not
possible for a sinner to walk in the one, unless he comes off from the
other: and if he be for doing, he must do all alone; Christ will not do a
part for him, if he does not all. A garment pieced up of sundry sorts of
righteousness, is not a garment fit for the court of heaven. Thus the man
is like one in a dream, who thought he was eating—but being awakened
by a stroke, behold his soul is faint; his heart sinks in him like a stone,
while he finds that he can neither bear his burden himself alone, nor can
he get help under it.
9. What can he do who must needs pay, and yet has not enough of his
own to bring him out of debt; nor can borrow so much, and is ashamed to
beg? What can such a one do, I say—but sell himself, as the man under
the law, who had become poor? Lev. 25:47. Therefore, the sinner, beat off
from so many holds, attempts to make a bargain with Christ, and to sell
himself to the Son of God, if I may so speak, solemnly promising and
vowing, that he will be a servant to Christ, as long as he lives, if he will
save his soul. And here, the sinner often makes a personal covenant with
Christ, resigning himself to him on these terms; yes, and takes the
sacrament, to make the bargain sure. Hereupon the man's great care is—
how to obey Christ, keep his commandments, and so fulfill his bargain. In
this the soul finds a false, unsound peace, for a while; until the Spirit of
the Lord gives another stroke, to cut off the man from this refuge of lies
likewise. And that happens in this manner: when he fails of the duties he
engaged to perform, and falls again into the sin he covenanted against, it
is powerfully carried home on his conscience, that his covenant is broken;
so all his comfort goes, and terrors afresh seize on his soul, as one who
has broken covenant with Christ. Commonly the man to help himself,
renews his covenant—but breaks it again as before. And how is it possible
it should be otherwise, seeing he is still upon the old stock? Thus the
work of many, all their days, as to their souls, is nothing but a making and
breaking such covenants, over and over again.
Objection. Some perhaps will say, "Who lives, and sins not? Who is there
that fails not of the duties he has engaged to? If you reject this way as
unsound, who then can be saved?"

Answer. True believers will be saved, namely, all who do by faith take
hold of God's covenant. But this kind of covenant is men's own covenant,
devised of their own heart; not God's covenant, revealed in the gospel of
his grace: and the making of it is nothing else but the making of a
covenant of works with Christ, confounding the law and the Gospel; a
covenant God will never subscribe to, though we should sign it with our
heart's blood. Romans 4:14, 16, "For if those who are of the law be heirs,
faith is made void, and the promise made of no effect. Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all
the seed." Chapter 11:6, "And if by grace, then is it no more of works,
otherwise grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then is it no more
grace, otherwise work is no more work."
God's covenant is everlasting; once in and never out of it again; and the
mercies of it are sure mercies, Isaiah 55:3. But that covenant of yours is a
tottering covenant, never sure—but broken every day. It is a mere servile
covenant, giving Christ service for salvation; but God's covenant is a filial
covenant, in which the sinner takes Christ, and his salvation freely
offered, and so becomes a son, John 1:12, "But as many as received him,
to them gave he power to become the sons of God:" and being become a
son, he serves his Father, not that the inheritance may become his—but
because it is his, through Jesus Christ. See Gal. 4:24, and onward. To
enter into that false covenant, is to buy from Christ with money; but to
take hold of God's covenant, is to buy of him without money and without
price, Isaiah 55:1, that is to say, to beg of him. In that covenant men work
for life; in God's covenant they come to Christ for life, and work from life.
When a person under that covenant fails in his duty, all is gone; the
covenant must be made over again. But under God's covenant, although
the man fails in his duty, and for his failure falls under the discipline of
the covenant, and lies under the weight of it, until such time as he has
recourse anew to the blood of Christ for pardon, and renew his
repentance; yet all that he trusted to, for life and salvation, namely, the
righteousness of Christ, still stands entire, and the covenant remains
firm. See Romans 7:24, 25; and chapter 8:1.
Now, though some men spend their lives in making and breaking such
covenants of their own, the terror on the breaking of them becoming

weaker and weaker, by degrees, until at last it creates them little or no
uneasiness; yet the man, in whom the good work is carried on, until it be
accomplished in cutting him off from the old stock, finds these covenants
to be as rotten cords, broken at every touch; and the terror of God being
thereupon redoubled on his spirit, and the waters at every turn getting in
unto his very soul, he is obliged to cease from catching hold of such
covenants and to seek help some other way.
10. Therefore, the man comes at length to beg at Christ's door for mercy;
but yet he is a proud beggar, standing on his personal worth. For, as the
papists have many mediators to plead for them, so the branches of the old
stock have always something to produce, which they think may commend
them to Christ, and engage him to take their cause in hand. They cannot
think of coming to the spiritual market, without money in their hand.
They are like people who have once had an estate of their own—but are
reduced to extreme poverty, and forced to beg. When they come to beg,
they still remember their former character; and though they have lost
their substance—yet they retain much of their former spirit: therefore,
they cannot think that they ought to be treated as ordinary beggars—but
deserve a particular regard; and, if that be not given them, their spirits
rise against him to whom they address themselves for a supply. Thus God
gives the unhumbled sinner many common mercies, and shuts him not
up in the pit according to his deserving; but all this is nothing in his eyes.
He must be set down at the children's table, otherwise he reckons himself
hardly dealt with, and wronged: for he is not yet brought so low, as to
think God may be justified when he speaks against him, when he judges
him according to his real demerit, Psalm 51:4.
He thinks, perhaps, that, even before he was enlightened, he was better
than many others; he considers his reformation of life—his repentance;
the grief and tears which his sin has cost him—his earnest desires after
Christ, his prayers and wrestlings for mercy; and uses all these now as
bribes for mercy, laying no small weight upon them in his addresses to
the throne of grace. But here the Spirit of the Lord shoots his arrows
quickly into the man's heart, whereby his confidence in these things is
sunk and destroyed; and, instead of thinking himself better than many—
he is made to see himself worse than any. The faults in his reformation of

life are discovered; his repentance appears to him no better than the
repentance of Judas; his tears like Esau's, and his desires after Christ to
be selfish and loathsome, like those who sought Christ because of the
loaves, John 6:26. His answer from God seems now to be, "Away, proud
beggar, How shall I put you among the children?" He seems to look
sternly on him, for his slighting of Jesus Christ by unbelief, which is a sin
he scarcely discerned before. But now at length he beholds it in its
crimson colors, and is pierced to the heart, as with a thousand darts,
while he sees how he has been going on blindly, sinning against the
remedy of sin, and, in the whole course of his life, trampling on the blood
of the Son of God. And now he is, in his own eyes, the miserable object of
law vengeance, yes, and gospel vengeance too.
11. The man being thus far humbled, will no more plead, "he is worthy for
whom Christ should do this thing;" but, on the contrary, looks on himself
as unworthy of Christ, and unworthy of the favor of God. We may
compare him, in this case, to the young man who followed Christ, having
a linen cloth cast about his naked body; who, when "the men laid hold on
him," "left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked," Mark 14:51, 52.
Even so the man had been following Christ, in the thin and cold garment
of his own personal worthiness: but by it, even by it, which he so much
trusted to, the law catches hold of him, to make him prisoner; and then
he is hesitant to leave it, and flees away naked; yet not to Christ—but
from him. If you now tell him he is welcome to Christ, if he will come to
him; he is apt to say, Can such a vile and unworthy wretch as I, be
welcome to the holy Jesus? If a plaster be applied to his wounded soul, it
will not stick. He says, "depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord,"
Luke 5:8. No man needs speak to him of his repentance, for his comfort;
he can quickly espy such faults in it as makes it worthless: nor of his
tears; for he is assured they have never come into the Lord's bottle. He
disputes himself away from Christ; and concludes, now that he has been
such a slighter of Christ, and is such an unholy and vile creature, that he
cannot, he will not, he ought not to come to Christ; and that he must
either be in better case, or else he will never believe.
Hence he now makes the strongest efforts to amend what was amiss in
his way before: he prays more earnestly than ever, mourns more bitterly,

strives against sin in heart and life more vigorously, and watches more
diligently, if by any means he may at length be fit to come to Christ. One
would think the man is well humbled now: but, ah! deep pride lurks
under the veil of this seeming humility; like a branch of the old stock, he
adheres still, and will not submit to the righteousness of God, Romans
10:3. He will not come to the market of free grace, without money. He is
bidden to the marriage of the King's Son, where the bridegroom himself
furnishes all the guests with wedding garments, stripping them of their
own: but he will not come, because he needs a wedding garment;
although he is very busy in making one ready.
This is sad work; and therefore he must have a deeper stroke yet, else he
is ruined. This stroke is given him with the axe of the law, in its irritating
power. Thus the law, girding the soul with cords of death, and holding it
in with the rigorous commands of obedience, under the pain of the curse;
and God, in his holy and wise conduct, withdrawing his restraining grace,
corruption is irritated, lusts become violent; and the more they are
striven against, the more they rage, like a furious horse checked with the
bit. Then corruptions set up their heads, which he never saw in himself
before. Here oft-times, atheism, blasphemy, and, in one word, horrible
things concerning God, terrible thoughts concerning the faith, arise in his
bosom; so that his heart in a very hell within him. Thus, while he is
sweeping the house of his heart, not yet watered with gospel grace, those
corruptions which lay quiet before, in neglected corners, fly up and down
in it like dust. He is as one who is mending the bank of a river, and while
he is repairing breaches in it, and strengthening every part of it, a mighty
flood comes down, and overturns his works, and drives all away before it,
both that which was newly laid, and what was laid before. Read Romans
7:8-13. This is a stroke which goes to the heart: and by it, his hope of
making himself more fit to come to Christ, is cut off.
12. Now the time is come, when the man, between hope and despair,
resolves to go to Christ as he is; and therefore, like a dying man,
stretching himself just before his breath goes out, he rallies the broken
forces of his soul, tries to believe, and in some sort lays hold on Jesus
Christ. And now the branch hangs on the old stock by one single tack of a
natural faith, produced by the natural vigor of one's own spirit, under a

most pressing necessity, Psalm 78:34, 35, "When he slew them, then they
sought him, and they returned and inquired early after God. And they
remembered that God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer."
Hos. 8:2, "Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know you." But the Lord,
never failing to perfect his work, fetches yet another stroke, whereby the
branch falls quite off. The Spirit of God convincingly discovers to the
sinner his utter inability to do anything that is good, and so he dies,
Romans 7:9. That voice powerfully strikes through his soul, "How can you
believe?" John 5:44. You can no more believe, than you can reach up your
hand to heaven, and bring Christ down from thence. Thus at length he
sees, that he can neither help himself by working, nor by believing; and
having no more to hang by on the old stock, he therefore falls off. While
he is distressed thus, seeing himself likely to be swept away with the flood
of God's wrath, and yet unable so much as to stretch forth a hand to lay
hold of a twig of the tree of life, growing on the bank of the river, he is
taken up, and engrafted in the true vine, the Lord Jesus Christ giving him
the Spirit of faith.
By what has been said upon this head, I design not to rack or distress
tender consciences; for though there are but few such at this day—yet
God forbid that I should offend any of Christ's little ones. But, alas! a
dead sleep is fallen upon this generation, they will not be awakened, let us
go ever so near to the quick: therefore, I fear that there is another sort of
awakening abiding this sermon-proof generation, which shall make the
ears of those who hear it tingle. However, I would not have this to be
looked upon as the sovereign God's stinted method of breaking off
sinners from the old stock. But this I maintain as a certain truth, that all
who are in Christ have been broken off from all these several confidences;
and that they who were never broken off from them, are yet in their
natural stock. Nevertheless, if the house be pulled down, and the old
foundation razed, it is much the same whether it was taken down stone
by stone, or whether it was undermined, and all fell down together.
Now it is that the branch is engrafted in Jesus Christ. And as the law, in
the hand of the Spirit of God, was the instrument to cut off the branch
from the natural stock; so the Gospel, in the hand of the same Spirit, is
the instrument used for engrafting it into the supernatural stock, 1 John

1:3; "That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you
also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ." See Isaiah 61:1-3. The Gospel is
the silver cord let down from heaven, to draw perishing sinners to land.
And though the preaching of the law prepares the way of the Lord; yet it
is in the word of the Gospel that Christ and a sinner meet. Now, as in the
natural grafting, the branch being taken up is put into the stock, and
being put into it, becomes one with it, so that they are united; even so is
the spiritual engrafting, Christ apprehends the sinner, and the sinner,
being apprehended of Christ, apprehends him, and so they become one,
Phil. 3:12.
First, Christ apprehends the sinner by his Spirit, and draws him to
himself, 1 Cor. 12:13, "For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one
body." The same Spirit which is in the Mediator himself, he
communicates to his elect in due time, never to depart from them—but to
abide in them as a principle of life. The soul is now in the hands of the
Lord of life, and possessed by the Spirit of life; how can it then but live?
The man gets a ravishing sight of Christ's excellence in the mirror of the
gospel: he sees him a full, suitable, and willing Savior; and gets a heart to
take him for and instead of all. The Spirit of faith furnishes him feet to
come to Christ, and hands to receive him. What by nature he could not
do, by grace he can, the Holy Spirit working in him the work of faith with
power.
Secondly, The sinner, thus apprehended, apprehends Christ by faith, and
is one with the blessed stock, Eph. 3:17, "That Christ may dwell in your
hearts by faith." The soul that before tried many ways of escape—but all
in vain, now looks with the eye of faith, which proves the healing look. As
Aaron's rod, laid up in the tabernacle, budded, and brought forth buds,
Numb. 17:8; so the dead breach, apprehended by the Lord of life, put
into, and bound up with the glorious quickening stock, by the Spirit of life
buds forth in actual believing on Jesus Christ, whereby this union is
completed. "We, having the same Spirit of faith – believe," 2 Cor. 4:13.
Thus the stock and the graft are united, Christ and the Christian are
married, faith being the soul's consent to the spiritual marriage covenant,
which as it is proposed in the gospel to mankind-sinners indefinitely, so it

is demonstrated, attested, and brought home to the man in particular, by
the Holy Spirit: and so he, being joined to the Lord, is one Spirit with
him. Hereby a believer lives in and for Christ, and Christ lives in and for
the believer, Gal. 2:20, "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless, I live;
yet not I—but Christ lives in me." Hos. 3:3, "You shall not be for another
man, so will I also be for you." The bonds, then, of this blessed union are
—the Spirit on Christ's part, and faith on the believer's part.
Now both the souls and bodies of believers are united to Christ. "He who
is joined to the Lord is one Spirit," 1 Cor. 6:17. The very bodies of
believers have this honor put upon them, that they are "the temple of the
Holy Spirit," ver. 19, and "the members of Christ," ver. 15. When they
sleep in the dust, they sleep in Jesus, 1 Thess. 4:14; and it is in virtue of
this union they shall be raised up out of the dust again, Romans 8:11, "He
shall quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit who dwells in you." In
token of this mystical union, the church of believers is called by the name
of her Head and Husband, 1 Cor. 12:12, "For as the body is one, and has
many members – so also is Christ."
USE. From what is said, we may draw the following inferences:
1. The preaching of the law is most necessary. He who would engraft,
must needs use the pruning-knife. Sinners have many contrivances to
keep them from Christ; many things by which they keep their hold of the
natural stock; therefore, they have need to be closely pursued, and
hunted out of their skulking holes, and refuges of lies.
2. Yet it is the Gospel that crowns the work: "The law makes nothing
perfect." The law lays open the wound—but it is the Gospel that heals it.
The law "strips a man, wounds him and leaves him half dead:" the Gospel
"binds up his wounds, pouring in wine and oil," to heal them. By the law
we are broken off—but it is by the Gospel we are taken up and implanted
in Christ.
3. "If any man has not the Spirit of Christ he is none of his," Romans 8:9.
We are told of a monster in nature, having two bodies differently
animated, as appeared from contrary affections at one and the same time;
but so united, that they were served with the self-same legs. Even so,

however men may cleave to Christ, "call themselves of the holy city, and
stay themselves upon the God of Israel," Isa 48:2, and may be bound up
as branches in him, John 15:2, by the outward ties of sacraments; yet if
the Spirit that dwells in Christ, dwell not in them, they are not one with
him. There is a great difference between adhesion and engrafting. The ivy
clasps and twists itself about the oak—but it is not one with it, for it still
grows on its own root: so, to allude to Isaiah 4:1, many professors "take
hold" of Christ, "and eat their own bread, and wear their own apparel,
only they are called by his name." They stay themselves upon him—but
grow upon their own root: they take them to support their hopes—but
their delights are elsewhere.
4. The union between Christ and his mystical members is firm and
indissoluble. Were it so that the believer only apprehended Christ—but
Christ not apprehended him, we could promise little as the stability of
such a union; it might quickly be dissolved: but as the believer
apprehends Christ by faith—so Christ apprehends him by his Spirit—and
none shall pluck him out of his hand. Did the child only keep hold of the
nurse, it might at length grow weary, and let go its hold, and so fall away:
but if the nurse has her arms about the child, it is in no hazard of falling
away, even though it be not actually holding by her. So, whatever sinful
intermissions may happen in the exercise of faith; yet the union remains
sure, by reason of the constant indwelling of the Spirit. Blessed Jesus!
"All his saints are in your hand," Deut. 33:3. It is observed by some that
the word Abba, is the same whether you read it forward or backward:
whatever the believer's case be, the Lord is still to him, Abba, Father.
5. They have an unsafe hold of Christ, whom he has not apprehended by
his Spirit. There are many half marriages here, where the soul
apprehends Christ—but is not apprehended of him. Hence, many fall
away, and never rise again; they let go their hold of Christ; and when that
is gone, all is gone. These are "the branches in Christ that bear not fruit,
which the farmer takes away," John 15:2.
Question. How can that be?
Answer. These branches are set in the stock by a profession, or an
unsound hypocritical faith. They are bound up with it, in the external use

of the sacraments; but the stock and they are never knit: therefore, they
cannot bear fruit. And they need not be cut off, nor broken off; they are
by the Farmer only taken away; or, as the word primarily signifies, lifted
up, and so taken away, because there is nothing to hold them: they are,
indeed, bound up with the stock—but were never united to it.
Question. How shall I know if I am apprehended of Christ?
Answer. You may be satisfied in this inquiry, if you consider and apply
these two things:
(1.) When Christ apprehends a man by his Spirit, he is so drawn, that he
comes away to Christ, with his whole heart: for true believing is believing
with all the heart, Acts 8:37. Our Lord's followers are like those who
followed Saul at first, men whose hearts God has touched, 1 Sam. 10:26.
When the Spirit pours in overcoming grace, they pour out their hearts
like water before him, Psalm 62:8. They flow unto him like a river, Isaiah
2:2, "All nations shall flow unto it," namely, to the "mountain of the
Lord's house." It denotes not only the abundance of converts—but the
disposition of their souls in coming to Christ; they come heartily and
freely, as drawn with loving-kindness, Jer. 31:3; "Your people shall be
willing in the day of your power," Psalm 110:3, that is, free, ready, openhearted, giving themselves to you as free-will offering. When the
bridegroom has the bride's heart, it is a right marriage: but some give
their hand to Christ, whodo not give not their heart. Those who
are only driven to Christ by terror, will surely leave him again when that
terror is gone. Terror may break a heart of stone—but the pieces into
which it is broken still continue to be stone; terrors cannot soften it into a
heart of flesh. Yet terrors may begin the work which love crowns. The
strong wind, and the earthquake, and the fire going before; the still small
voice, in which the Lord is, may come after them. When the blessed Jesus
is seeking sinners to match with him, they are bold and perverse: they
will not speak with him, until he has wounded them, made them captives,
and bound them with the cords of death. When this is done, then it is that
he comes to them, and wins their hearts.
The Lord tells us, Hos. 2:16-20, that chosen Israel shall be married unto
himself. But how will the bride's consent be won? Why, in the first place,

he will bring her into the wilderness, as he did the people when he
brought them out of Egypt, ver. 14. There she will be hardly dealt with,
scorched with thirst, and bitten by serpents: and then he will speak
comfortably to her; or, as the expression is, he will speak unto her heart.
The sinner is first driven, and then drawn unto Christ. It is with the soul
as with Noah's dove, she was forced back again to the ark, because she
could find nothing else to rest upon: but when she returned, she would
have rested on the outside of it, if Noah had not "put forth his hand and
pulled her in," Gen. 8:9. The Lord sends his avenger of blood in pursuit of
the criminal, who with a sad heart leaves his own city, and with tears in
his eyes parts with his old acquaintances, because he dare not stay with
them, and he flees for his life to the city of refuge. This is not all his
choice, it is forced work; necessity has no law. But when he comes to the
gates, and sees the beauty of the place, the excellency and loveliness of it
charm him; and then he enters it with heart and good-will, saying, "This
is my rest, and here I will stay;" and, as one said in another case, "I had
perished, unless I had perished."
(2.) When Christ apprehends a soul, the heart is disengaged from, and
turned against sin. As in cutting off the branch from the old stock, the
great idol self is brought down, the man is powerfully taught to deny
himself; so, in apprehending the sinner by the Spirit, that union is
dissolved which was between the man and his lusts, while he was in the
flesh, as the apostle expresses it, Romans 7:5. His heart is loosened from
them, though formerly as dear to him as the members of his body; as his
eyes, legs, or arms; and, instead of taking pleasure in them as before, he
longs to be rid of them. When the Lord Jesus comes to a soul, in the day
of converting grace, he finds it like Jerusalem, in the day of her nativity,
Ezek. 16:4, drawing its fulsome nourishment and satisfaction from its
lusts: but he cuts off this communication, that he may impart to the soul
his own consolations, and give it rest in himself. And thus the Lord
wounds the head and heart of sin, and the soul comes to him, saying,
"Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and things wherein there is
no profit," Jer. 16:19.
V. The BENEFITS flowing to true believers from their union

with Christ. The chief of the particular benefits which believers have by
it, are justification, peace, adoption, sanctification, growth in grace,
fruitfulness in good works, acceptance of these works, establishment in
the state of grace, support and a special conduct of providence about
them. As for communion with Christ, it is such a benefit, as being the
immediate consequence of union with him, comprehends all the rest as
mediate ones. For as the branch, immediately upon its union with the
stock, has communion with the stock in all that is in it; so the believer,
uniting with Christ, has communion with him; in which he launches forth
into an ocean of happiness, is led into a paradise of pleasures, and has a
saving interest in the treasure hid in the field of the Gospel—the
unsearchable riches of Christ. As soon as the believer is united to Christ,
Christ himself, in whom all fullness dwells, is his, Cant. 3:16, "My beloved
is mine, and I am his." And "how shall he not with him freely give us all
things?" Romans 8:32. "Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours," 1 Cor. 3:22. This communion with Christ is the great
comprehensive blessing necessarily flowing from our union with him. Let
us now consider the particular benefits flowing from it before mentioned.
1. The first particular benefit that a sinner has by his union with Christ, is
JUSTIFICATION; for, being united to Christ, he has communion
with him in his righteousness, 1 Cor. 1:30, "But of him are you in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom and righteousness." He
stands no more condemned—but justified before God, as being in Christ,
Romans 8:1, "There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are
in Christ Jesus." The branches hereof are, pardon of sin, and personal
acceptance.
(1.) His sins are pardoned, the guilt of them is removed. The
bond obliging him to pay his debt is cancelled. God the Father takes the
pen, dips it in the blood of his Son, crosses off the sinner's accounts, and
blots them out of his debt-book. The sinner outside of Christ is bound
over to the wrath of God; he is under an obligation in law to go to the
prison of hell, and there to lie until he has paid the utmost farthing. This
arises from the terrible sanction with which the law is guarded, which is
no less than death, Gen. 2:17. So that the sinner, passing the bounds

assigned him, is as Shimei in another case, a man of death, 1 Kings 2:42.
But now, being united to Christ, God says, "Deliver him from going down
to the pit; I have found a ransom!" Job 33:24. The sentence of
condemnation is reversed, the believer is absolved, and set beyond the
reach of the condemning law. His sins, which were set before the Lord,
Psalm 90:8, so that they could not be hidden—God now takes and casts
them all behind his back, Isaiah 38:17. Yes, he casts them into the depths
of the sea, Micah 7:19. What falls into a brook may be retrieved—but what
is cast into the sea cannot be recovered. But there are some shallow
places in the sea; true—but their sins are not cast in there—but into the
depths of the sea; and the depths of the sea are devouring depths, from
whence they shall never come forth again. But what if they do not sink?
He will cast them in with force, so that they shall go to the bottom, and
sink as lead in the mighty waters of the Redeemer's blood.
They are not only forgiven—but forgotten, Jer. 31:34, "I will forgive their
iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more." And though their aftersins do in themselves deserve eternal wrath, and do actually make them
liable to temporal strokes, and fatherly chastisements, according to the
tenor of the covenant of grace, Psalm 89:30-33—yet they can never be
actually liable to eternal wrath, or the curse of the law; for they are dead
to the law in Christ, Romans 7:4. They can never fall away from their
union with Christ; neither can they be in Christ, and yet under
condemnation at the same time, Romans 8:1, "There is therefore now no
condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus." This is an inference
drawn from that doctrine of the believer's being dead to the law, set forth
by the apostle, chapter 7:1-6; as is clear from the second, third, and fourth
verses of this eighth chapter. In this respect the justified man is the
blessed man, unto whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, Psalm 32:2; as
one who has no design to charge a debt on another, sets it not down in his
account-book.
(2.) The believer is accepted as righteous in God's sight, 2 Cor. 5:21. For
he is "found in Christ, not having his own righteousness—but that which
is through faith of Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith,"
Phil. 3:9. He could never be accepted by God, as righteous, upon the
account of his own righteousness; because, at best, it is but imperfect:

and all righteousness, properly so called, which can abide a trial before
the throne of God, is perfect. The very name of it implies perfection: for
unless a work is perfectly conformable to the law, it is not right—but
wrong; and so cannot make a man righteous before God, whose judgment
is according to truth. Yet if justice demand a righteousness of one that is
in Christ, upon which he may be accounted righteous before the Lord,
"Surely shall" such a "one say, In the Lord have I righteousness," Isaiah
45:24. The law is fulfilled, its commands are obeyed, its sanction is
satisfied. The believer's surety has paid the debt. It was exacted, and he
answered for it.
Thus the person united to Christ is justified. You may conceive of the
whole proceeding herein, in this manner. The avenger of blood pursuing
the criminal; Christ, as the Savior of lost sinners, does by the Spirit
apprehend him, and draw him to himself; and he, by faith, lays hold on
Christ: so the Lord our righteousness, and the unrighteous creature,
unite. From this union with Christ results a communion with him in his
unsearchable riches, and consequently in his righteousness, that white
raiment which he has for clothing of the naked, Rev. 3:18. Thus the
righteousness of Christ becomes his; and because it is by his
unquestionable title, it is imputed to him; it is reckoned his in the
judgment of God, which is always according to truth. And so the believing
sinner, having a righteousness which fully answers the demands of the
law, he is pardoned and accepted as righteous. See Isaiah 45:22-24;
Romans 3:24; and chapter 5:1.
Now he is a free man. Who shall lay anything to the charge of those whom
God justifies? Can justice lay anything to their charge? No; for it is
satisfied. Can the law? No; for it has obtained all its demands on them in
Jesus Christ, Gal. 2:20, "I am crucified with Christ." What can the law
require more, after it has wounded their head, poured in wrath in full
measure into their soul, and out of their life, and brought it into the dust
of death, by doing all this to Jesus Christ, who is their head, Eph. 1:22;
their soul, Acts 2:25-27; and their life, Col. 3:4? What is become of the
sinner's own handwriting, which would prove the debt upon him? Christ
has blotted it out, Col. 2:14. But it may be, justice may get its eye upon it
again. No; he took it out of the way. But O, that it had been torn in pieces!

may the sinner say. Yes, so it is; the nails that pierced Christ's hands and
feet are driven through it; he nailed it. But what if the torn in pieces be
put together again? They cannot be; for he nailed it to his cross, and his
cross was buried with him, and will never rise again, seeing Christ dies no
more. Where is the face-covering that was upon the condemned man?
Christ has destroyed it, Isaiah 25:7. Where is death, that stood before the
sinner with a grim face, and an open mouth, ready to devour him? Christ
has swallowd it up in victory, ver. 8. Glory, glory, glory to him that thus
"loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood."
2. The second benefit flowing from the same spring of union with Christ,
and coming by the way of justification, is PEACE; peace with God, and
peace of conscience, according to the measure of the sense the justified
have of their peace with God, Romans 5:1, "Therefore being justified by
faith, we have peace with God." Chapter 14:17, "For the kingdom of God is
not food and drink—but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy
Spirit." Whereas God was their enemy before, now he is reconciled to
them in Christ: they are in a covenant of peace with him; and, as
Abraham was, so are they the friends of God. He is well pleased with
them in his beloved Son. His word, which spoke terror to them formerly,
now speaks peace, if they rightly understand the language. And there is
love in all dispensations towards them, which makes all work together for
their good.
Their CONSCIENCES are purged of that guilt and filthiness which lay
upon them: his conscience-purifying blood streams through their souls,
by virtue of their union with him, Heb. 9:14, "How much more shall the
blood of Christ – purge your conscience from dead works to serve the
living God?" The bonds laid on their consciences by the Spirit of God,
acting as the Spirit of bondage, are taken off, never more to be laid on,
Romans 8:15, "For you have not received the Spirit of bondage again to
fear." Hereby the conscience is quieted, as soon as the soul becomes
conscious of the application of that blood; which falls out sooner or later,
according to the measure of faith, and as the only wise God sees meet to
time it.
Unbelievers may have troubled consciences, which they may get quieted
again: but, alas! their consciences become peaceable before they become

pure; so their peace is but the seed of greater horror and confusion.
Carelessness may give ease for a while to a sick conscience; men
neglecting its wounds, they skin-over again of their accord, before the
impure matter is removed. Many bury their guilt in the grave of a poor
memory: conscience smarts a little; at length the man forgets his sin,
and there is an end of it; but that is only an ease before death. Business,
or the affairs of life, often give ease in this case. When Cain is banished
from the presence of the Lord, he falls a-building of cities. When the evil
spirit came upon Saul, he calls not for his Bible, nor for the priests to
converse with him about his case; but for music, to play it away. So many,
when their consciences begin to be uneasy, they fill their heads and hands
with business, to divert themselves, and to regain ease at any rate. Yes,
some will sin contrary to their convictions, and so do get some ease to
their consciences, as Hazael gave ease to his master by stifling him.
Again, the performance of duties may give some ease to disquieted
consciences; and this is all which legal professors have recourse to for
quieting their consciences. When conscience is wounded they will pray,
confess, mourn, and resolve to do so no more: and so they become whole
again—without an application of the blood of Christ by faith.
But they whose consciences are rightly quieted, come for peace and
purification to the blood of sprinkling. Sin leaves a sting behind it, which
one time or other will create them no little pain.
Elihu shows us both the case and cure, Job 33. Behold the case which a
man may be in, whom God has thoughts of love to. He darts convictions
into his conscience; and makes them stick so fast, that he cannot rid
himself of them, ver. 16, "He opens the ears of men, and seals their
instruction." His very body sickens, ver. 19, "He is chastened also with
pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain " He
loses his appetite, ver. 20, "His life abhors bread, and his soul dainty
food." His body pines away, so that there is nothing on him but skin and
bone," ver. 21, "His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and
his bones that were not seen stick out." Though he is not prepared for
death, he has no hope of life, ver. 22, "His soul draws near unto the grave,
and," which is the height of his misery, "his life to the destroyers;" he is
looking every moment when devils, these destroyers, Rev. 9:11, these

murderers, or manslayers, John 8:44, will come and carry away his soul
to hell. O, dreadful case! Is there any hope for such? Yes, there is hope.
God will "keep back his soul from the pit," Job 33:18, although he brings
him forward to the brink of it.
Now, see how the sick man is cured. The physician's art cannot prevail
here: the disease lies more inward than his medicines can reach. It is soul
trouble which has brought the body into this disorder; and therefore, the
remedies must be applied to the sick man's soul and conscience. The
physician for this case must be a spiritual Physician; the remedies must
be spiritual—a righteousness, a ransom, an atonement. Upon the
application of these, the soul is cured, the conscience is quieted and the
body recovers, ver. 23-26, "If there be a messenger with him, an
interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness:
then he is gracious unto him, and says, 'Deliver him from going down into
the pit, I have found a ransom!' His flesh shall be fresher than a child's,
he shall return to the days of his youth. He shall pray unto God, and he
shall be favorable unto him, and he shall see his face with joy."
The proper physician for this patient is a messenger, an interpreter, ver.
23, that is, as some expositors, not without ground, understand it, the
great physician, Jesus Christ, whom Job had called his Redeemer,
chapter 19:25. He is a messenger, the "messenger of the covenant of
peace," Mal. 3:1, who comes seasonably to the sick man. He is an
interpreter, the great interpreter of God's counsels of love to sinners, Job
33:23, "One among a thousand," even "the chief among ten thousand,"
Cant. 5:10. "One chosen out of the people," Psalm 89:19. One to whom
"the Lord has given the tongue of the learned – to speak a word in season
to him that is weary," Isaiah 50:4. It is he who is with him, by his Spirit,
now, to "convince him of righteousness," John 16:8, as he was with him
before, to "convince him of sin and of judgment." His work now is to
show unto him his uprightness, or his righteousness, that is, the
interpreter Christ's righteousness; which is the only righteousness,
arising from the paying of a ransom, and upon which a sinner is delivered
from going down to the pit, ver. 24. Thus Christ is said to declare God's
name, Psalm 22:22, and to preach righteousness, Psalm 40:9. The phrase
is remarkable: it is not to show unto the man—but unto man, his

righteousness: which not obscurely intimates, that he is more than a man,
who shows or declares this righteousness. Compare Amos 4:13, "He who
forms the mountains, creates the wind, and reveals his thoughts to man,
he who turns dawn to darkness, and treads the high places of the earth—
the Lord God Almighty is his name." There seems to be in it a sweet
allusion to the first declaration of this righteousness unto man, or, as the
word is, unto Adam, after the fall, while he lay under terror from
apprehensions of the wrath of God; which declaration was made by the
messenger, the interpreter, namely, the eternal Word, the Son of God,
called, the voice of the Lord God, Gen. 3:8, and by him appearing,
probably, in human shape.
Now, while he, by his Spirit, is the preacher of righteousness to the man,
it is supposed that the man lays hold on the offered righteousness;
whereupon the ransom is applied to him, and he is delivered from going
down to the pit; for God has a ransom for him. This is intimated to him
by the words, "Deliver him," Job 33:24. So his conscience being purified
by the blood of atonement, is pacified, and sweetly quieted. "He shall
pray unto God – and see his face with joy," which before he beheld with
horror, ver. 26; that is in New Testament language, "Having a high priest
over the house of God," he shall "draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith, having his heart sprinkled from an evil conscience,"
Heb. 10:21, 22. But then, what becomes of the body, the weak and weary
flesh? Why, "his flesh shall be fresher than a child's, he shall return to the
days of his youth," ver. 25. Yes, "All his bones," which were chastened
with strong pain, ver. 19, "shall say, Lord, who is like unto you?" Psalm
35:10.
3. A third benefit flowing from union with Christ is ADOPTION.
Believers, being united to Christ, become children of God, and members
of the family of heaven. By their union with him, who is the Son of God by
nature, they become the sons of God by grace, John 1:12. As when a
branch is cut off from one tree, and grafted in the branch of another, the
engrafted branch, by means of its union with the adopting branch, is
made a branch of the same stock with that into which it is engrafted: so
sinners, being engrafted into Jesus Christ, whose name is the Branch, his
Father is their Father, his God their God, John 20:17. And thus they,

who are by nature children of the devil, become the children of
God. They have the Spirit of adoption, Romans 8:15, namely, the Spirit
of his Son, which brings them to God, as children to a Father; to pour out
their complaints in his bosom, and to seek necessary supplies, Gal. 4:6,
"Because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father." Under all their weaknesses, they have
fatherly pity and compassion shown them, Psalm 103:13, "Like as a father
pities his children; so the Lord pities those who fear him."
"In a desert land he found him, in a barren and howling waste. He
shielded him and cared for him; he guarded him as the apple of his eye."
Deuteronomy 32:10. Whoever pursues them, they have a refuge, Proverbs
14:26, "His children shall have a place of refuge." In a time of common
calamity, they have chambers of protection, where they may be hid until
the indignation is over and past, Isaiah 26:20. And he is not only their
refuge for protection—but their portion for provision, in that refuge;
Psalm 142:5, "You are my refuge, and my portion in the land of the
living." They are provided for, for eternity, Heb. 11:16, "He has prepared
for them a city." And what he sees they have need of for time, they shall
not lack. "So do not worry, saying, 'What shall we eat?' or 'What shall we
drink?' or 'What shall we wear?' For the pagans run after all these things,
and your heavenly Father knows that you need them." Matthew 6:31-32.
Seasonable correction is likewise their privilege as sons: so they are not
allowed to pass with their faults, as others who are not children—but
servants of the family, who at length will be turned out of doors for their
miscarriages, Heb. 12:7, "If you endure chastening, God deals with you as
with sons; for what son is he whom the father chastens not?"
They are heirs of, and shall inherit the promises, Heb. 6:12. Nay, they are
heirs of God, who himself is the portion of their inheritance, Psalm 16:5,
"and joint-heirs with Christ," Romans 8:17. And because they are the
children of the great King, and heirs of glory, they have angels for their
attendants, who are "sent forth to minister to those who shall be heirs of
salvation," Heb. 1:14.
4. A fourth benefit is SANCTIFICATION, 1 Cor. 1:30, "But of him are
you in Christ Jesus, who is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and

sanctification." Being united to Christ, they partake of his Spirit, who is
the Spirit of holiness. There is a fullness of the Spirit in Christ, and it is
not like the fullness of a vessel, which only retains what is poured into it;
but it is the fullness of a fountain for diffusion and communication, which
is always sending forth its waters, and yet is always full.
The Spirit of Christ, that spiritual sap, which is in the stock, and from
thence is communicated to the branches, is the Spirit of grace, Zech.
12:10. And where the Spirit of grace dwells, there will be found a
confluence of all graces. Holiness is not one grace only—but all
the graces of the Spirit; it is a constellation of graces; it is all
the graces in their seed and root. And as the sap conveyed from the
stock into the branch goes through it, and through every part of it; so the
Spirit of Christ sanctifies the whole man. The poison of sin was diffused
through the whole spirit, soul, and body of the man; and sanctifying grace
pursues it into every corner, 1 Thess. 5:23. Every part of the man is
sanctified, though no part is perfectly sanctified. The truth we are
sanctified by, is not held in the head, as in a prison—but runs, with its
sanctifying influences, through heart and life.
There are indeed some graces, in every believer, which appear as topbranches above the rest: as meekness in Moses, patience in Job; but
seeing there is in every child of God, a holy principle going along with
the holy law, in all the parts thereof, loving and approving of it – as it
appears from their universal respect to the commands of God – it is
evident that they are endowed with all the graces of the Spirit; because
there cannot be less in the effect, than there was in the cause.
Now, this sanctifying Spirit, whereof believers partake, is unto them,
(1.) A spirit of MORTIFICATION: "through the Spirit they mortify the
deeds of the body," Romans 8:13. Sin is crucified in them, Gal. 5:24. They
are planted together, namely, with Christ in the likeness of his death,
which was a lingering death, Romans 6:6. Sin in the saint, though not
quite dead—yet is dying. If it were dead, it would be taken down from the
cross, and buried out of his sight: but it hangs there as yet, working and
struggling under its mortal wounds. As, when a tree has got such a stroke
as reaches the heart of it, all the leaves and branches begin to fade and

decay: so, where the sanctifying Spirit comes, and breaks the power of
sin, there is a gradual ceasing from it, and dying to it, in the whole man;
so that he "no longer lives in the flesh to the lusts of men." He does not
make sin his trade and business; it is not his great design to seek himself,
and to satisfy his corrupt inclinations: but he is seeking for Immanuel's
land, and is walking in the highway to it, the way which is called the way
of holiness; though the wind from hell, which was on his back before,
blows now full in his face, makes his traveling uneasy, and often drives
him off the highway.
(2.) This Spirit is a Spirit of VIVIFICATION to them; for he is the Spirit
of life, and makes them live unto righteousness, Ezek. 36:27, "And I will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes." Those
who have been "planted together," with Christ, "in the likeness of his
death, shall be also in the likeness of his resurrection," Romans 6:5. At
Christ's resurrection, when his soul was reunited with his body, every
member of that blessed body was enabled again to perform the actions of
life: so the soul, being influenced by the sanctifying Spirit of Christ, is
enabled more and more to perform all the actions of spiritual life. And as
the whole of the law, and not some scraps of it only, is written on the holy
heart; so believers are enabled to transcribe that law, in their
conversation. Although they cannot write one line of it without
blots—yet God, for Christ's sake, accepts of the performance, in
point of sanctification; they being disciples to his own Son, and led by
his own Spirit.
This sanctified Spirit, communicated by the Lord Jesus to his members,
is the spiritual nourishment the branches have from the stock into
which they are engrafted; whereby the life of grace, given them in
regeneration, is preserved, continued, and actuated. It is the nourishment
whereby the new creature lives, and is nourished up towards perfection.
Spiritual life needs to be fed, and must have supply of nourishment: and
believers derive the same from Christ their head, whom the Father has
appointed the head of influence to all his members, Col. 2:19, "And not
holding the head, from which all the body, by joints and bands, having
nourishment ministered, or supplied," etc. Now this supply is "the supply
of the Spirit of Jesus Christ," Phil. 1:19. The saints feed richly, "eating

Christ's flesh, and drinking his blood," for their spiritual nourishment:
yet our Lord himself teaches us, that "it is the Spirit who quickens," John
6:63, even that Spirit who dwells in his blessed body.
The human nature is united to the divine nature, in the person of the Son;
and so, like the bowl in Zachariah's candlestick, chapter 4, lies at the
fountain-head, as the glorious means of conveyance of influences from
the fountain of Deity. He receives not the Spirit by measure—but ever has
a fullness of the Spirit, by reason of that personal union. Hence believers,
being united to the man Christ, as the seven lamps to the bowl, by their
seven pipes, Zech. 4:2, his flesh is to them food indeed, and his blood
drink indeed: for, feeding on that blessed body, that is, effectually
applying Christ to their souls by faith, they partake more and more of that
Spirit, who dwells therein, to their spiritual nourishment.
The holiness of God can never admit of an immediate union with the
sinful creature, nor, consequently, an immediate communion with it: yet
the creature could not live the life of grace without communion with the
fountain of life. Therefore, that the honor of God's holiness and the
salvation of sinners might jointly be provided for, the second person of
the glorious trinity took into a personal union with himself a sinless
human nature; that so this holy, harmless, and undefiled humanity,
might immediately receive a fullness of the Spirit, of which he might
communicate to his members, by his divine power and efficacy.
Suppose there were a tree, with its root in the earth, and its branches
reaching to heaven; the vast distance between the root and the branches
would not interrupt the communication between the root and the top
branch: even so, the distance between the man Christ, who is in heaven,
and his members, who are on earth, cannot hinder the communication
between them. What though the parts of mystical Christ, namely the head
and the members, are not adjoining, as joined together in the way of
corporal union; the union is not therefore the less real and effectual. Yes,
our Lord himself shows us, that though we eat his flesh in a corporeal and
carnal manner—yet it would profit nothing, John 6:63; we would not be
one whit the holier thereby. But the members of Christ on earth are
united to their head in heaven, by the invisible bond of the self-same
Spirit dwelling in both; in him as the head, and in them as the members.

The wheels in Ezekiel's vision were not adjoining to the living creatures—
yet were united to them by an invisible bond of one Spirit in both; so that,
"when the living creatures went, the wheels went with them, and when
the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted
up," Ezek. 1:19; "for," says the prophet, "the Spirit of the living creature
was in the wheels," ver. 20.