PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 11
Difficulties and Objections


The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 11. Difficulties and Objections.

11. Difficulties and Objections

135

tions made in a carping 1 and contentious spirit, but we are desirous of meeting fairly the difficulties experienced by those who are anxious to obtain a fuller knowledge of the truth. Not
that we deem ourselves able to give a satisfactory and final answer to every question that
might be asked; like the reader, the writer knows but in part and sees through a glass “darkly”
(1Co 13:12). All that we can do is to examine these difficulties in the light we now have, in dependence upon the Spirit of God, that we may follow on to know the Lord better.

B. Has God Decreed Everything? (chapter 1)
We propose now to retrace our steps and pursue the same order of thought as that followed
up to this point. As a part of our “definition” of God’s sovereignty we affirmed:
To say that God is sovereign is to declare that He is the Almighty, the possessor of all
power in heaven and earth, so that none can defeat His counsels, thwart His purpose, or
resist His will...The sovereignty of the God of Scripture is absolute, irresistible, infinite.
To put it now in its strongest form, we insist that God does as He pleases, only as He pleases, always as He pleases; that whatever takes place in time is but the outworking of that which
He decreed in eternity. In proof of this assertion we appeal to the following Scriptures. “But
our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath pleased” (Psa 115:3). “For the
LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and
who shall turn it back?” (Isa 14:27). “And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of
the earth: and none can stay his hand or say unto him, What doest thou?” (Dan 4:35). “For of
him, and through him, and to him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever. Amen” (Rom
11:36).
The above declarations are so plain and positive that any comments of ours upon them
would simply be darkening counsel by words without knowledge (Job 38:2). Such express
statements as those just quoted are so sweeping and so dogmatic that all controversy concerning the subject of which they treat ought forever to be at an end. Yet, rather than receive them
at their face value, every device of carnal ingenuity is resorted to, so as to neutralize their
force.
1. Matthew 6:10
For example, it has been asked: If what we see in the world today is but the outworking of
God’s eternal purpose, if God’s counsel is now being accomplished, then why did our Lord
teach His disciples to pray, “Your will be done on earth as it is in heaven” (Mat 6:10)? Is it not
a clear implication from these words that God’s will is not now being done on earth? The answer is very simple. The emphatic word in the above clause is “as.” God’s will is being done on
earth today; if it is not, then our earth is not subject to God’s rule—and if it is not subject to
His rule, then He is not, as Scripture proclaims Him to be, “the Lord of all the earth” (Jos
3:13). But God’s will is not being done on earth as it is in heaven. How is God’s will “done in
heaven”?—consciously and joyfully. How is it “done on earth”?—for the most part, unconsciously and sullenly. In heaven, the angels perform the bidding of their Creator intelligently
and gladly; but on earth, the unsaved among men accomplish His will blindly and in ignorance. As we have said in earlier pages, when Judas betrayed the Lord Jesus and when Pilate
1

carping – finding fault in a disagreeable way.

136

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

sentenced Him to be crucified, they had no conscious intentions of fulfilling God’s decrees—
yet, nevertheless, unknown to themselves, they did do so!
2. Genesis 6:6
But again, it has been objected: If everything that happens on earth is the fulfilling of the
Almighty’s pleasure, if God has foreordained—before the foundation of the world—everything
that comes to pass in human history, then why do we read in Genesis 6:6, “It repented the
LORD that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart”? Does not this language intimate that the antediluvians had followed a course that their Maker had not marked
out for them, and that, in view of the fact they had “corrupted” their way upon the earth, the
Lord regretted that He had ever brought such a creature into existence? Ere drawing such a
conclusion, let us note what is involved in such an inference. If the words “It repented the
Lord that he had made man” are regarded in an absolute sense, then God’s omniscience would
be denied, for in such a case the course followed by man must have been un-foreseen by God
in the day that He created him. Therefore, it must be evident to every reverent soul that this
language bears some other meaning. We submit that the words “It repented the Lord” is an
accommodation to our finite intelligence, and in saying this we are not seeking to escape a difficulty or cut a knot, 2 but are advancing an interpretation that we shall seek to show is in perfect accord with the general trend of Scripture.
The Word of God is addressed to men, and therefore it speaks the language of men. Because
we cannot rise to God’s level, He, in grace, comes down to ours and converses with us in our
own speech. The apostle Paul tells us of how he was “caught up into paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not possible [margin] to utter” (2Co 12:4). Those on earth could
3
not understand the vernacular of heaven. The finite cannot comprehend the infinite, hence
the Almighty deigns to couch His revelation in terms we may understand. It is for this reason
the Bible contains many anthropomorphisms—i.e, representations of God in the form of man.
God is Spirit, yet the Scriptures speak of Him as having eyes, ears, nostrils, breath, hands, etc.,
which is surely an accommodation of terms brought down to the level of human comprehension.
Again, we read in Genesis 18:20-21, “And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous, I will go down now, and see whether
they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come up unto me; and if not, I
will know.” Now, manifestly, this is an anthropologism—God speaking in human language.
God knew the conditions that prevailed in Sodom, and His eyes had witnessed its fearful sins,
yet He is pleased to use terms here that are taken from our own vocabulary.
Again, in Genesis 22:12 we read, “And he [God] said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything unto him: for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not
withheld thy son, thine only son, from me.” Here again, God is speaking in the language of
men, for He “knew” before He tested Abraham exactly how the patriarch would act. So too the

2

cut a knot – figurative: find a less than optimum solution to a problem; to unbind something that is bound
with a rope by cutting the rope with a knife—thus destroying the rope, rather than by untying the knot in
the rope.
3
vernacular – native speech or language of a particular place.

11. Difficulties and Objections

137

expression of God’s “rising up early,” so often in Jeremiah (7:13 etc.), is manifestly an accommodation of terms.
Once more: in the parable of the vineyard, Christ Himself represents its owner as saying,
“Then said the Lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son: it may be
they will reverence him when they see him” (Luk 20:13); and yet it is certain that God knew
perfectly well that the “husbandman” of the vineyard (the Jews) would not “reverence his son,”
but, instead, would “despise and reject” Him, as His own Word had declared!
In the same way, we understand the words of Genesis 6:6—“It repented the LORD that he
had made man on the earth”—as an accommodation of terms to human comprehension. This
verse does not teach that God was confronted with an unforeseen contingency and therefore
regretted that He had made man, but it expresses the abhorrence of a holy God at the awful
wickedness and corruption into which man had fallen. Should there be any doubt remaining
in the minds of our readers as to the legitimacy and soundness of our interpretation, a direct
appeal to Scripture should instantly and entirely remove it: “The Strength of Israel [a divine
title] will not lie nor repent: for he is not a man, that he should repent” (1Sa 15:29)! “Every
good and perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning” (Jam 1:17)!
Careful attention to what we have said above will throw light on numerous other passages
that, if we ignore their figurative character and fail to note that God applies to Himself human
modes of expression, will be obscure and perplexing. Having commented at such length upon
Genesis 6:6, there will be no need to give such a detailed exposition of other passages that belong to the same class. Yet, for the benefit of those of our readers who may be anxious for us to
examine several other Scriptures, we turn to one or two more.
3. Matthew 23:37
One Scripture that we often find cited in order to overthrow the teaching advanced in this
book is our Lord’s lament over Jerusalem: “O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!”
(Mat 23:37). The question is asked, Do not these words show that the Saviour acknowledged
the defeat of His mission, that as a people the Jews resisted all His gracious overtures toward
them? In replying to this question, it should first be pointed out that our Lord is here referring not so much to His own mission, as He is upbraiding the Jews for having in all ages rejected His grace—this is clear from His reference to the “prophets.” The Old Testament bears
full witness of how graciously and patiently Jehovah dealt with His people; and with what extreme obstinancy, from first to last, they refused to be “gathered” unto Him; and how in the
end He abandoned them to follow their own devices. Yet, as the same Scriptures declare, the
counsel of God was not frustrated by their wickedness, for it had been foretold (and therefore,
decreed) by Him; see, for example, 1 Kings 8:33.
Matthew 23:37 may well be compared with Isaiah 65:2, where the Lord says, “I have spread
out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way that was not good,
after their own thoughts.” But, it may be asked, Did God seek to do that which was in opposition to His own eternal purpose? In words borrowed from Calvin, we reply,

138

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Though to our apprehension the will of God is manifold and various, yet He does not in
Himself will things at variance with each other, but astonishes our faculties with His
various and “manifold” wisdom (Eph 3:10), according to the expression of Paul, till we
shall be enabled to understand that He mysteriously wills what now seems contrary to
His will.
As a further illustration of the same principle, we would refer the reader to Isaiah 5:1-4.
Now will I sing to my well beloved a song of my beloved touching his vineyard. My well
beloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill: And he fenced it, and gathered out the
stones thereof, and planted it with the choicest vine and built a tower in the midst of it,
and also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and
it brought forth wild grapes. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah,
judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. What could have been done more to my
vineyard, that I have not done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, it brought forth wild grapes?
Is it not plain from this language that God reckoned Himself to have done enough for Israel
to warrant an expectation—speaking after the manner of men—of better returns? Yet, is it not
equally evident when Jehovah says here “He looked that it should bring forth grapes,” that He
is accommodating Himself to a form of finite expression? And so also, when He says “What
could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it?,” we need to take note
that in the previous enumeration of what He had done—the “fencing,” etc.—He refers only to
external privileges, means, and opportunities, which had been bestowed upon Israel—for, of
course, He could even then have taken away from them their stony heart and given them a
new heart, even a heart of flesh, had He so pleased.
Perhaps we should link Matthew 23:37, Christ’s lament over Jerusalem, with His tears over
4
the city recorded in Luke 19:41: “He beheld the city, and wept over it.” In the verses that immediately follow we learn what it was that occasioned His tears: “Saying, if thou hadst known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are
hid from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side”—it was the prospect of
the fearful judgment that Christ knew was impending. But did those tears make manifest a
disappointed God? Nay, verily. Instead, they displayed a perfect man. The Man Christ Jesus was
no emotionless stoic, but One filled with compassion (Mat 14:14, etc.). Those tears expressed
the sinless sympathies of His real and pure humanity. Had He not “wept,” He had been less
than human. Those “tears” were one of many proofs that “in all things it behoved him to be
made like unto his brethren” (Heb 2:17).

C. Does God Love Everybody? (chapter 2)
1. The problem
In chapter one, we have affirmed that God is sovereign in the exercise of His love, and in
saying this we are fully aware that many will strongly resent the statement, and that, furthermore, what we have now to say will probably meet with more criticism than anything else ad4

This sentence original read: Perhaps we should link up with Christ’s lament over Jerusalem in Matthew
23:37, His tears over the city recorded in Luke 19:41: “He beheld the city, and wept over it.”

11. Difficulties and Objections

139

vanced in this book. Nevertheless, we must be true to our convictions of what we believe to be
the teaching of Holy Scripture, and we can only ask our readers to examine diligently in the
light of God’s Word what we here submit to their attention.
One of the most popular beliefs of the day is that God loves everybody, and the very fact that
it is so popular with all classes ought to be enough to arouse the suspicions of those who are
subject to the Word of Truth. God’s love toward all His creatures is the fundamental and favorite tenet of Universalists, Unitarians, Theosophists, Christian Scientists, Spiritualists, Russellites, etc. No matter how a man may live—in open defiance of heaven, with no concern
whatever for his soul’s eternal interests, still less for God’s glory, dying, perhaps with an oath
on his lips—notwithstanding, God loves him, we are told. So widely has this dogma been proclaimed, and so comforting is it to the heart that is at enmity with God, we have little hope of
convincing many of their error.
That God loves everybody is, we may say, quite a modern belief. The writings of the church
fathers, the Reformers, or the Puritans, will (we believe) be searched in vain for any such con5
6
cept. Perhaps the late D. L. Moody —captivated by Drummond’s The Greatest Thing in the
World—did more than anyone else in the last century to popularize this concept.
It has been customary to say God loves the sinner, though He hates his sin. 7 But that is a
meaningless distinction. What is there in a sinner but sin? Is it not true that his “whole head is
sick” and his “whole heart faint,” and that “From the sole of the foot even unto the head there
is no soundness” in him? (Isa 1:5-6). Is it true that God loves the one who is despising and rejecting His blessed Son? God is light as well as Love (1Jo 1:5; 4:8), and therefore His love must
be a holy love. To tell the Christ-rejecter that God loves him is to cauterize 8 his conscience as
well as to afford him a sense of security in his sins.
The fact is, the love of God is a truth for the saints only, and to present it to the enemies of
God is to take the children’s bread and cast it to the dogs. With the exception of John 3:16, not
once in the four Gospels do we read of the Lord Jesus, the perfect teacher, telling sinners that
God loved them! In the book of Acts, which records the evangelistic labors and messages of the
apostles, God’s love is never referred to at all! But when we come to the epistles, which are addressed to the saints, we have a full presentation of this precious truth—God’s love for His
own. Let us seek to rightly divide the Word of God, and then we shall not be found taking
truths that are addressed to believers and mis-applying them to unbelievers.
That which sinners need to have brought before them is the ineffable holiness, the exacting
righteousness, the inflexible justice, and the terrible wrath of God. Risking the danger of being
misunderstood, let us say—and we wish we could say it to every evangelist and preacher in the
country—there is far too much presenting of Christ to sinners today (by those sound in the
5

D. L. Moody (1837-1899) – American evangelist and publisher, who founded the Moody Church, the
Moody Bible Institute, and Moody Publishers in Chicago, Illinois. He held large evangelistic campaigns in
the USA and Great Britain.
6
Henry Drummond (1851-1897) – Scottish evangelist, writer, and lecturer; educated at Edinburgh University. Drummond entered the Free Church of Scotland and assisted in the evangelizing mission of D. L.
Moody.
7
Romans 5:8 is addressed to saints, and the “we” are the same ones as those spoken of in 8:29-30.—A.W.P.
8
cauterize – to burn a part of the body in order to seal off circulation for curative purposes; thus, to seal off
and render ineffective for its intended purpose.

140

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

faith), and far too little showing sinners their need of Christ, i.e., their absolutely ruined and
lost condition, their imminent and awful danger of suffering the wrath to come, the fearful
guilt resting upon them in the sight of God. To present Christ to those who have never been
shown their need of Him, seems to us to be guilty of casting pearls before swine (Mat 7:6). 9
2. Many Scriptures
If it be true that God loves every member of the human family, then why did our Lord tell
His disciples, “He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me:
and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father...If a man love me, he will keep my words:
and my Father will love him” (Joh 14:21, 23)? Why say, “he that loveth me shall be loved of my
Father,” if the Father loves everybody? The same limitation is found in Proverbs 8:17: “I love
them that love me.” Again, we read, “Thou hatest all workers of iniquity”—not merely the
works of iniquity. Here then is a flat repudiation of present teaching that God hates sin but
loves the sinner; Scripture says, “Thou hatest all workers of iniquity” (Psa 5:5)! “God is angry
with the wicked every day” (Psa 7:11). “He that believeth not on the Son shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abideth on him”—not “shall abide,” but even now “abideth on him” (Joh
3:36). Can God “love” the one on whom His “wrath” abides?
Again, is it not evident that the words “the love of God which is in Christ Jesus” (Rom 8:39)
marks a limitation, both in the sphere and objects of His love? Again, is it not plain from the
words, “Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated ” (Rom 9:13), that God does not love everybody? Again, it is written, “For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son
whom he receiveth” (Heb 12:6). Does not this verse teach that God’s love is restricted to the
members of His own family? If He loves all men without exception, then the distinction and limitation here mentioned is quite meaningless. Finally, we would ask, Is it conceivable that God
will love the damned in the Lake of Fire? Yet, if He loves them now, He will do so then, seeing
that His love knows no change—He is without “variableness, neither shadow of turning” (Jas
1:17)!
3. John 3:16
Turning now to John 3:16, it should be evident from the passages just quoted that this verse
will not bear the construction usually put upon it. “God so loved the world ”—many suppose
that this means the entire human race. But “the entire human race” includes all mankind
from Adam till the close of earth’s history: it reaches backward as well as forward!
Consider, then, the history of mankind before Christ was born. Unnumbered millions lived
and died before the Saviour came to the earth, lived here “having no hope and without God in
the world,” and therefore passed out into an eternity of woe. If God “loved” them, where is the
slightest proof thereof ? Scripture declares, “Who [God] in times past [from the tower of Babel
till after Pentecost] suffered all nations to walk in their own ways” (Act 14:16). Scripture declares that “even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, God gave them over to
9

Concerning the rich young ruler of whom it is said Christ “loved him” (Mar 10:21), we fully believe that he
was one of God’s elect, and was “saved” sometime after his interview with our Lord. Should it be said this
is an arbitrary assumption and assertion that lacks anything in the Gospel record to substantiate it, we reply,
It is written, “Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out,” and this man certainly did “come” to Him.
Compare the case of Nicodemus. He, too, came to Christ, yet there is nothing in John 3 that intimates he was
a saved man when the interview closed; nevertheless, we know from his later life that he was not “cast out”
(Joh 7:50; 19:39).—A.W.P.

11. Difficulties and Objections

141

a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient” (Rom 1:28). To Israel God
said, “You only have I known of all the families of the earth” (Amo 3:2). In view of these plain
passages, who will be so foolish as to insist that God, in the past, loved all mankind!
The same applies with equal force to the future. Read through the book of Revelation, noting especially chapters 8 to 19, where we have described the judgments that will be poured out
from heaven on this earth. Read of the fearful woes, the frightful plagues, the vials of God’s
wrath that shall be emptied on the wicked. Finally, read the twentieth chapter of the Revelation, the Great White Throne judgment, and see if you can discover there the slightest trace of
love.
But the objector comes back to John 3:16 and says, “World means world.” True, but we have
shown that “the world” does not mean the whole human family. The fact is that “the world” is
used in a general way. When the brethren of Christ said, “Show thyself to the world” (Joh 7:4),
did they mean “shew thyself to all mankind ”? When the Pharisees said, “Behold, the world is
gone after him” (Joh 12:19), did they mean that “all the human family” were flocking after
Him? When the apostle wrote, “Your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world” (Rom
1:8), did he mean that the faith of the saints at Rome was the subject of conversation by every
man, woman, and child on earth? When Revelation 13:3 informs us that “all the world wondered after the beast,” are we to understand that there will be no exceptions? These, and other
passages that might be quoted, show that the term the world often has a relative rather than
an absolute force.
Now, the first thing to note in connection with John 3:16 is that our Lord was there speaking to Nicodemus, a man who believed that God’s mercies were confined to his own nation.
Christ there announced that God’s love in giving His Son had a larger object in view, that it
flowed beyond the boundary of Palestine, reaching out to “regions beyond.” In other words,
this was Christ’s announcement that God had a purpose of grace toward Gentiles as well as
Jews. “God so loved the world,” then, signifies God’s love is international in its scope. But does
this mean that God loves every individual among the Gentiles? Not necessarily, for as we have
seen, the term world is general rather than specific, relative rather than absolute. The term
world in itself is not conclusive. To ascertain who are the objects of God’s love, other passages
where His love is mentioned must be consulted.
In 2 Peter 2:5, we read of “the world of the ungodly.” If then, there is a world of the ungodly, there must also be a world of the godly. It is the latter who are in view in the passages we
shall now briefly consider. “For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and
giveth life unto the world” (Joh 6:33). Now mark it well, Christ did not say, “offereth life unto
the world,” but “giveth.” What is the difference between the two terms? This: a thing that is
“offered” may be refused, but a thing “given” necessarily implies its acceptance. If it is not ac10
cepted, it is not “given,” it is simply proffered. Here, then, is a Scripture that positively states
Christ giveth life (spiritual, eternal life) “unto the world.” Now, He does not give eternal life to
the “world of the ungodly,” for they will not have it, they do not want it. Hence, we are obliged
to understand the reference in John 6:33 as being to “the world of the godly,” i.e., God’s own
people.

10

proffered – offered for acceptance.

142

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

One more: in 2 Corinthians 5:19 we read, “To wit that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself.” What is meant by this is clearly defined in the words immediately following, “not imputing their trespasses unto them.” Here again “the world” cannot mean “the
world of the ungodly,” for their trespasses are imputed to them, as the judgment of the Great
White Throne will yet show (Rev 20:11). But 2 Corinthians 5:19 plainly teaches there is a
“world” that is “reconciled,” reconciled unto God because their trespasses are not reckoned to
their account, having been borne by their Substitute. Who then are they? Only one answer is
fairly possible: the “world” of God’s people!
In like manner, the “world” in John 3:16 must, in the final analysis, refer to the world of
God’s people. “Must,” we say, for there is no other alternative solution. It cannot mean the
whole human race, for one half of the race was already in hell when Christ came to earth. It is
unfair to insist that it means every human being now living, for every other passage in the
New Testament where God’s love is mentioned limits it to His own people—search and see!
The objects of God’s love in John 3:16 are precisely the same as the objects of Christ’s love in
John 13:1: “Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come,
that he should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved his own which were in
the world, he loved them unto the end.” We may admit that our interpretation of John 3:16 is
no novel one invented by us, but one almost uniformly given by the Reformers and Puritans,
and many others since then.

D. The Sovereignty of God in Salvation (chapter 3)
Coming now to chapter three, The Sovereignty of God in Salvation, innumerable are the
questions that might be raised here. It is strange, yet it is true, that many who acknowledge
the sovereign rule of God over material things will cavil and quibble when we insist that God is
also sovereign in the spiritual realm. But their quarrel is with God and not with us. We have
given Scripture in support of everything advanced in these pages, and, if that will not satisfy
our readers, it is idle for us to seek to convince them. What we write now is designed for those
who do bow to the authority of Holy Writ, and for their benefit we propose to examine several
other Scriptures that have purposely been held for this chapter.
1. Only a limited number elected
“The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men
count slackness; but is longsuffering to us-ward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance.”—2 Peter 3:9
Perhaps the one passage that has presented the greatest difficulty to those who have seen
that passage after passage in Holy Writ plainly teaches the election of a limited number unto
salvation, is 2 Peter 3:9: “not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.”
The first thing to be said upon the above passage is that, like all other Scripture, it must be
understood and interpreted in the light of its context. What we have quoted in the preceding
paragraph is only part of the verse, and the last part of it at that! Surely it must be allowed by
all that the first half of the verse needs to be taken into consideration. In order to establish
what these words are supposed by many to mean, viz., that the words any and all are to be re-

11. Difficulties and Objections

143

ceived without any qualification, it must be shown that the context is referring to the whole
human race! If this cannot be shown, if there is no premise to justify this, then the conclusion
also must be unwarranted. Let us then ponder the first part of the verse.
“The Lord is not slack concerning his promise.” Note “promise” in the singular number,
not “promises.” What promise is in view? The promise of salvation? Where, in all Scripture,
has God ever promised to save the whole human race! Where indeed? No, the “promise” here
referred to is not about salvation. What then is it? The context tells us.
“Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming?” (vv. 3-4). The context then refers to
God’s promise to send back His beloved Son. But many long centuries have passed and this
promise has not yet been fulfilled. True, but long as the delay may seem to us, the interval is
short in the reckoning of God. As the proof of this we are reminded “But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day” (v. 8). In God’s reckoning of time, less than two days have yet passed since He
promised to send back Christ!
But more, the delay in the Father sending back His beloved Son is not only due to no
“slackness” on His part, but it is also occasioned by His “longsuffering.” His longsuffering to
whom? The verse we are now considering tells us: “but is longsuffering to us-ward.” And
whom are the “us-ward,” the human race or God’s own people? In the light of the context, this
is not an open question upon which each of us is free to form an opinion: the Holy Spirit has
defined it. The opening verse of the chapter says, “This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you.” And again, the verse immediately preceding declares, “But, beloved, be not ignorant of
this one thing etc.,” (v. 8). The “us-ward,” then, are the “beloved” of God. They to whom this
epistle is addressed are “them that have obtained [not “exercised,” but “obtained” as God’s sovereign gift] like precious faith with us through the righteousness of God and our Saviour Jesus
Christ” (2Pe 1:1). Therefore we say there is no room for a doubt, a quibble, or an argument:
the “us-ward” are the elect of God.
Let us now quote the verse as a whole:
The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; but is
longsuffering to us-ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.
Could anything be clearer? The “any” that God is not willing should perish, are the “us-ward”
to whom God is “longsuffering,” the “beloved” of the previous verses. 2 Peter 3:9 means, then,
that God will not send back His Son until “the fullness of the Gentiles be come in” (Rom
11:25). God will not send back Christ till that “people” whom He is now taking out of the Gentiles (Act 15:14) are gathered in. God will not send back His Son till the body of Christ is complete, and that will not be till the ones whom He has elected to be saved in this dispensation
shall have been brought to Him. Thank God for His “longsuffering to us-ward.” Had Christ
come back twenty years ago, the writer had been left behind to perish in His sins. But that
could not be, so God graciously delayed the Second Coming. For the same reason He is still
delaying His Advent. His decreed purpose is that all His elect will come to repentance, and repent they shall. The present interval of grace will not end until the last of the “other sheep” of
John 10:16 are safely folded—then will Christ return.

144

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

2. God’s irresistible power in salvation
In expounding the sovereignty of God the Spirit in salvation, we have shown that His power
is irresistible: that by His gracious operations upon and within them, He “compels” God’s elect
to come to Christ (Luk 14:23). The sovereignty of the Holy Spirit is set forth not only in John
3:8—where we are told, “The wind bloweth where it listeth...so is every one that is born of the
Spirit”—but is affirmed in other passages as well. In 1 Corinthians 12:11 we read, “But all
these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will.” And
again, we read in Acts 16:6-7, “Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia and the region of
Galatia, and were forbidden of the Holy Spirit to preach the word in Asia, after they were come
to Mysia, they assayed to go into Bithynia: but the Spirit suffered them not.” Thus we see how
the Holy Spirit interposed His imperial will in opposition to the determination of the apostles.
But it is objected, against the assertion that the will and power of the Holy Spirit are irresistible, that here are two passages, one in the Old Testament and the other in the New, that
appear to militate against such a conclusion. God said of old, “My spirit shall not always strive
with man” (Gen 6:3), and to the Jews, Stephen declared, “Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in
heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the
prophets have not your fathers persecuted?” (Act 7:51-52). If, then, the Jews “resisted” the Holy Spirit, how can we say His power is irresistible? The answer is found in Nehemiah 9:30,
“Many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedest against them by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear.” It was the external operations of the Spirit that Israel “resisted.” It was the Spirit speaking by and through the prophets to which they “would not give
ear.” It was not anything that the Holy Spirit wrought in them that they “resisted,” but the
motives presented to them by the inspired messages of the prophets.
Perhaps it will help the reader to catch our thought better if we compare Matthew 11:20-24,
“Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were done, because
they repented not. Woe unto thee Chorazin,” etc. Our Lord here pronounces woe upon these
cities for their failure to repent because of the “mighty works” (miracles) that He had done in
their sight, and not because of any internal operations of His grace!
The same is true of Genesis 6:3. By comparing 1 Peter 3:18-20, it will be seen that it was by
and through Noah that God’s Spirit “strove” with the antediluvians. The distinction noted
above was ably summarized by Andrew Fuller (another writer long deceased, from whom our
moderns might learn much) thus:
There are two kinds of influences by which God works on the minds of men. First, that
which is common and which is effected by the ordinary use of motives presented to the
mind for consideration. Secondly, that which is special and supernatural. The one contains nothing mysterious, anymore than the influence of our words and actions on each
other; the other is such a mystery that we know nothing of it but by its effects—the
former ought to be effectual; the latter is so.
The work of the Holy Spirit upon or towards men is always “resisted” by them; His work
within is always successful. What saith the Scriptures? This: “he which hath begun a good
work in you will perform [finish] it” (Phi 1:6).

11. Difficulties and Objections

145

3. Preaching the gospel to every creature
The next question to be considered is, Why preach the gospel to every creature? If God the
Father has predestined only a limited number to be saved, if God the Son died to effect the salvation of only those given to Him by the Father, and if God the Spirit is seeking to quicken
none save God’s elect, then what is the use of giving the gospel to the world at large, and
where is the propriety of telling sinners that “whosoever believeth in him [Christ] should not
perish but have everlasting life” (Joh 3:16)?
a. The nature of the gospel
First, it is of great importance that we should be clear upon the nature of the gospel itself.
The gospel is God’s good news concerning Christ and not concerning sinners: “Paul a servant
of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, separated unto the gospel of God...Concerning his son,
Jesus Christ our Lord” (Rom 1:1, 3).
God would have proclaimed 11 far and wide the amazing fact that His own blessed Son “became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross” (Phi 2:8). A universal testimony must
be borne to the matchless worth of the Person and work of Christ. Note the word witness in
Matthew 24:14. The gospel is God’s “witness” unto the perfections of His Son. Mark the words
of the apostle: “For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in
them that perish” (2Co 2:15)!
Concerning the character and contents of the gospel, the utmost confusion prevails today.
The gospel is not an “offer” to be bandied around by evangelical peddlers. The gospel is no
mere invitation, but a proclamation, a proclamation concerning Christ—[which is] true,
whether men believe it or not. No man is asked to believe that Christ died for him in particular. The gospel, in brief, is this: Christ died for sinners, you are a sinner, believe in Christ and
you shall be saved. In the gospel, God simply announces the terms upon which men may be
12
saved (namely, repentance and faith) and, indiscriminately, all are commanded to fulfill
them.
b. Preaching the gospel to all nations
Second, repentance and remission of sins are to be preached in the name of the Lord Jesus
“among all the nations” (Luk 24:47), because God’s elect are “scattered abroad” (Joh 11:52)
among all nations, and it is by the preaching and hearing of the gospel that they are called out
of the world. The gospel is the means that God uses in the saving of His own chosen ones. By
nature God’s elect are children of wrath “even as others”; they are lost sinners needing a Saviour, and apart from Christ there is no salvation for them. Hence, the gospel must be believed
by them before they can rejoice in the knowledge of sins forgiven. The gospel is God’s winnow13
14
15
ing fan: it separates the chaff from the wheat, and gathers the latter into His garner (Mat
3:12).

11

would have proclaimed – i.e., God will have the gospel proclaimed.
indiscriminately – i.e., both the elect and non-elect.
13
winnowing fan – large surface waved to create a current of air, to separate chaff or other lighter refuse matter from grain.
14
chaff – husks of grain; hence, that which is unprofitable; here, the non-elect.
15
garner – granary; a building where grain is stored; here: the Church.
12

146

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

c. God’s other purposes
Third, it is to be noted that God has other purposes in the preaching of the gospel than the
salvation of His own elect. The world exists for the elect’s sake, yet others have the benefit of
it. So the Word is preached for the elect’s sake, yet others have the benefit of an external call.
The sun shines though blind men see it not. The rain falls upon rocky mountains and waste
deserts as well as on the fruitful valleys; so also, God suffers the gospel to fall on the ears of the
non-elect. The power of the gospel is one of God’s agencies for holding in check the wickedness of the world. Many who are never saved by it are reformed, their lusts are bridled, and
they are restrained from becoming worse. Moreover, the preaching of the gospel to the non16
elect is made an admirable test of their characters. It exhibits the inveteracy of their sin; it
demonstrates that their hearts are at enmity against God; it justifies the declaration of Christ
that “men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil” (Joh 3:19).
d. God’s command
Finally, it is sufficient for us to know that we are bidden to preach the gospel to every creature. It is not for us to reason about the consistency between this and the fact that “few are
chosen”; it is for us to obey. It is a simple matter to ask questions relating to the ways of God
that no finite mind can fully fathom. 17 We too might turn and remind the objector that our
Lord declared, “Verily I say unto you, all sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy
Ghost hath never forgiveness” (Mar 3:28-29)—and there can be no doubt whatever but that
certain of the Jews were guilty of this very sin (see Mat 12:24, etc.) and hence their destruction
was inevitable. Yet, notwithstanding, scarcely two months later, He commanded His disciples
to preach the gospel to every creature. When the objector can show us the consistency of these
two things—the fact that certain of the Jews had committed the sin for which there is never
forgiveness, and the fact that to them the gospel was to be preached—we will undertake to
furnish a more satisfactory solution than the one given above to the harmony between an universal proclamation of the gospel and a limitation of its saving power to those only that God
has predestined to be conformed to the image of His Son.
Once more, we say, it is not for us to reason about the gospel; it is our business to preach it.
When God ordered Abraham to offer up his son as a burnt-offering (Gen 22:2), he might have
objected that this command was inconsistent with His promise, “In Isaac shall thy seed be
called” (Gen 21:12). But instead of arguing, he obeyed, and left God to harmonize His promise
and His precept. Jeremiah might have argued that God had bade him to do that which was altogether unreasonable, when He said, “Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them;
but they will not hearken to thee; thou shalt also call unto them; but they will not answer
thee” (Jer 7:27); but instead, the prophet obeyed. Ezekiel, too, might have complained that the
Lord was asking of him a hard thing when He said,
Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of Israel, and speak with my words unto them.
For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an hard language, but to the
house of Israel; Not to many people of a strange speech and of a hard language, whose
words thou canst not understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have
hearkened unto thee. But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will
16
17

inveteracy – that which is settled as a habit.
fathom – to penetrate to the bottom of; understand thoroughly.

11. Difficulties and Objections

147

not hearken unto me; for all the house of Israel are impudent and hard hearted (Eze 3:47).
But, 0 my soul, if truth so bright
Should dazzle and confound thy sight,
Yet still His written Word obey,
And wait the great decisive day—Watts. 18
It has been well said,
The gospel has lost none of its ancient power. It is, as much today as when it was first
preached, “the power of God unto salvation” (Rom 1:16). It needs no pity, no help, and
no handmaid. It can overcome all obstacles and break down all barriers. No human device need be tried to prepare the sinner to receive it, for if God has sent it, no power can
19
hinder it; and if He has not sent it, no power can make it effectual (Dr. Bullinger).
This chapter might be extended indefinitely, but it is already too long, so a word or two
more must suffice. A number of other questions will be dealt with in the pages yet to follow,
and those that we fail to touch upon, the reader must take to the Lord Himself, Who has said,
“If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all liberally, and upbraideth not”
(Jam 1:5). 

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

1. What is the key point 20 for each of the following?
a. Psalm 115:3
b. Isaiah 14:27
c. Daniel 4:35
2. Is God’s will being done on earth as it is in heaven? Why or why not?
3. Why do some Scriptures say, “It repented the Lord…” (Gen 6:6)?
4. Does God love everybody? Why or why not?
5. What can result from telling those in rebellion against God that He loves them?
6. Did God love all men in the past? Why? Will He do so in the future? Why? What does this
mean for today?
7. What is the meaning of world in John 3:16? Why?

18

Isaac Watts (1674-1748) – English Noncomformist pastor, essayist, and hymnwriter. Born in Southampton,
England.
19
Ethelbert William Bullinger (1837-1913) – Anglican clergyman, biblical scholar, and ultradispensationalist
theologian; born in Canterbury, Kent, England.
20
See chapter 2 “Questions” for clarification regarding what is a key point.

148

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

8. In light of God’s election of only some to be saved, should the gospel be preached to everyone? Why or why not?

12
THE VALUE OF THIS DOCTRINE
“All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect,
thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.”—2 Timothy 3:16-17

A. Introduction
“Doctrine” means “teaching,” and it is by doctrine or teaching that the great realities of God
and of our relation to Him—of Christ, the Spirit, salvation, grace, glory—are made known to
us. It is by doctrine (through the power of the Spirit) that believers are nourished and edified;
and where doctrine is neglected, growth in grace and effective witnessing for Christ necessarily cease. How sad, then, that doctrine is now decried as “unpractical” when, in fact, doctrine is
the very base of the practical life. There is an inseparable connection between belief and practice: “As he thinketh in his heart, so is he” (Pro 23:7). The relation between divine truth and
Christian character is that of cause to effect: “And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall
make you free” (Joh 8:32)—free from ignorance, free from prejudice, free from error, free
from the wiles of Satan, free from the power of evil. If the truth is not “known,” then such
freedom will not be enjoyed. Observe the order of mention in the passage with which we have
opened. All Scripture is profitable, first, for “doctrine”! The same order is observed throughout
the epistles, particularly in the great doctrinal treatises of the apostle Paul. Read the epistle of
Romans and it will be found that there is not a single admonition in the first five chapters. In
the epistle of Ephesians, there are no exhortations till the fourth chapter is reached. The order
is first doctrinal exposition, and then admonition or exhortation for the regulation of the daily
walk.
The substitution of so-called “practical” preaching for the doctrinal exposition that it has
supplanted is the root cause of many of the evil maladies that now afflict the Church of God.
The reason why there is so little depth, so little intelligence, 1 so little grasp of the fundamental
verities 2 of Christianity, is because so few believers have been established in the faith through
hearing it expounded and through their own personal study of the doctrines of grace. While
their soul is unestablished in the doctrine of the divine inspiration of the Scriptures—their
full and verbal inspiration—there can be no firm foundation for faith to rest upon. While the
soul is ignorant of the doctrine of justification, there can be no real and intelligent assurance
of its acceptance in the beloved. While the soul is unacquainted with the teaching of the Word
1
2

intelligence – good understanding.
verities – statements, principles, or beliefs that are true, especially enduring truth.

150

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

upon sanctification, it is open to receive all the crudities and errors of the perfectionists or
“holiness” people. While the soul knows not what Scripture has to say upon the doctrine of the
new birth, there can be no proper grasp of the two natures 3 in the believer, and ignorance here
inevitably results in the loss of peace and joy. And so we might go on right through the list of
Christian doctrine. It is ignorance of doctrine that has rendered the professing church helpless
to cope with the rising tide of infidelity.
It is ignorance of doctrine that is mainly responsible for thousands of professing Christians
being captivated by the numerous false “isms” 4 of the day. It is because the time has now arrived when the bulk of our churches “will not endure sound doctrine” (2Ti 4:3), that they so
readily receive false doctrines. Of course, it is true that doctrine, like anything else in Scripture, may be studied from a merely cold intellectual viewpoint, and thus approached, doctrinal
teaching and doctrinal study will leave the heart untouched, and will naturally be “dry” and
profitless. But doctrine properly received, doctrine studied with an exercised heart, will ever
lead into a deeper knowledge of God and of the unsearchable riches of Christ.
5
The doctrine of God’s sovereignty, then, is no mere metaphysical dogma that is devoid of
practical value, but is one that is calculated to produce a powerful effect upon Christian character and the daily walk. The doctrine of God’s sovereignty lies at the foundation of Christian
theology, and in importance is perhaps second only to the divine inspiration of the Scriptures.
It is the center of gravity in the system of Christian truth, the sun around which all the lesser
orbs are grouped. It is the golden milestone to which every highway of knowledge leads and
from which they all radiate. It is the cord upon which all other doctrines are strung like so
many pearls, holding them in place and giving them unity. It is the plumb-line 6 by which every
creed needs to be measured, the balance in which every human dogma must be weighed. It is
designed as the sheet-anchor 7 for our souls amid the storms of life. The doctrine of God’s sovereignty is a divine cordial to refresh our spirits.
It is designed and adapted to mold the affections of the heart and to give a right direction to
conduct. It produces gratitude in prosperity and patience in adversity. It affords comfort for
the present and a sense of security respecting the unknown future. It is, and it does, all and
much more than we have just said, because it ascribes to God—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—
the glory that is His due, and places the creature in his proper place before Him: in the dust!
3

two natures – the old sin nature that hates God and loves sin, and the new nature of the new heart that
loves God and hates sin. There are several theological views regarding the regenerate believer, as having:
1) one new nature, the “old man” being “dead” (Rom 6:6-8), and our struggle with sin stemming from our
weakness (lack of maturity) in this body;
2) two natures, the struggle with sin stemming from the battle between the two natures, the flesh and the
spirit (this is the view of the author); or
3) one new nature, where the old nature is dead but its habits remain; our struggle with sin stemming from
fleshly appetites not yet mortified (Col 3:5; Gal 5:17).
4
“isms” – shortened form of many movement names that end in “ism”: easy-believism, antinomianism, perfectionism, etc.
5
metaphysical – highly abstract or difficult to understand.
6
plumb-line – string with a weight on the end, used in construction to get a perfectly vertical line. Used here
metaphorically to describe a rule or standard by which something is to be measured or judged.
7
sheet-anchor – a ship’s largest anchor, used only in an emergency; hence, that on which one’s reliance rests
when all else has failed.

12. The Value of This Doctrine

151

We shall now consider the value of the doctrine in detail.

B. Veneration of the Divine Character
It deepens our veneration of the divine character. The doctrine of God’s sovereignty as it is
unfolded in the Scriptures affords an exalted view of the divine perfections. It maintains His
creatorial 8 rights. It insists that “to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all
things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him”
(1Co 8:6). It declares that His rights are those of the “potter” (Jer 18:1-6; Rom 9:21), who
forms and fashions the clay into vessels of whatever type and for whatever use he may please.
Its testimony is, “Thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created”
(Rev 4:11). It argues that none has any right to “reply” against God, and that the only becoming attitude for the creature to take is one of reverent submission before Him. Thus the apprehension of the absolute supremacy of God is of great practical importance, for unless we have
a proper regard to His high sovereignty, He will never be honored in our thoughts of Him, nor
will He have His proper place in our hearts and lives.
9
It exhibits the inscrutableness of His wisdom. It shows that while God is immaculate in His
holiness, He has permitted evil to enter His fair creation; that while He is the possessor of all
power, He has allowed the devil to wage war against Him for six thousand years at least; that
while He is the perfect embodiment of love, He spared not His own Son; that while He is the
God of all grace, multitudes will be tormented for ever and ever in the Lake of Fire. High mysteries are these. Scripture does not deny them, but acknowledges their existence: “O the depth
of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding out!” (Rom 11:33).
It makes known the irreversibleness of His will. “Known unto God are all his works from
the beginning of the world” (Act 15:18). From the beginning, God purposed to glorify Himself
“in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end” (Eph 3:21). To this
end, He created the world and formed man. His all-wise plan was not defeated when man fell,
for in the Lamb, “slain from the foundation of the world” (Rev 13:8), we behold the Fall anticipated. Nor will God’s purpose be thwarted by the wickedness of men since the Fall, as is clear
from the words of the psalmist, “Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of
wrath shalt thou restrain” (Psa 76:10). Because God is the Almighty, His will cannot be withstood.
His purposes originated in eternity, and are carried forward without change to eternity.
They extend to all His works, and control all events. He “worketh all things after the
counsel of his own will” (Eph 1:11) (Dr. Rice).
Neither man nor devil can successfully resist Him, therefore is it written, “The Lord reigneth;
let the people tremble” (Psa 99:1).
It magnifies His grace. Grace is unmerited favor, and because grace is shown to the undeserving and hell-deserving, to those who have no claim upon God, therefore is grace free and
can be manifested toward the chief of sinners. But because grace is exercised toward those who
are destitute of worthiness or merit, grace is sovereign; that is to say, God bestows grace upon
8
9

creatorial – pertaining to the Creator of all creation, the One Who made everything out of nothing.
inscrutableness – mystery; impossibility to be understood.

152

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

whom He pleases. Divine sovereignty has ordained that some shall be cast into the Lake of Fire
to show that all deserved such a doom; but grace comes in like a dragnet 10 and draws out from
a lost humanity a people for God’s name, to be throughout all eternity the monuments of His
inscrutable favor. Sovereign grace reveals God breaking down the opposition of the human
heart, subduing the enmity of the carnal mind, and bringing us to love Him because He first
loved us (1Jo 4:19).

C. Foundation of True Religion
It is the solid foundation of all true religion. This naturally follows from what we have said
above under the first head. If the doctrine of divine sovereignty alone gives God His rightful
place, then it is also true that it alone can supply a firm base for practical religion to build upon. There can be no progress in divine things until there is the personal recognition that God
is supreme, that He is to be feared and revered, and He is to be owned and served as Lord. We
read the Scriptures in vain unless we come to them earnestly desiring a better knowledge of
God’s will for us: any other motive is selfish and utterly inadequate and unworthy. Every prayer we send up to God is but carnal presumption unless it be offered “according to his will” (1Jo
5:14); anything short of this is to ask “amiss” that we might consume upon our own lusts the
thing requested (Jam 4:3)! Every service we engage in is but a “dead work” unless it be done
for the glory of God (Heb 9:14). Experimental 11 religion consists mainly in the perception and
performance of the divine will, performance both active and passive. We are predestinated to
be “conformed to the image of God’s Son” (Rom 12:1-2), Whose meat it ever was to do the will
of the One that sent Him (Joh 4:34), and the measure in which each saint is becoming “conformed” practically, in his daily life, is largely determined by his response to our Lord’s word,
“Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart” (Mat 11:29).

D. Repudiation of Salvation by Works
It repudiates the heresy of salvation by works. “There is a way which seemeth right unto a
man, but the end thereof are the ways of death” (Pro 14:12). The way that “seemeth right” and
that ends in “death,” death eternal, is salvation by human effort and merit. The belief in salvation by works is one that is common to human nature. It may not always assume the grosser
form of Popish penances, or even of Protestant “repentance,” i.e., sorrowing for sin, which is
never the meaning of repentance in Scripture—anything that gives man a place at all is but a
variety of the same evil genus. 12
To say, as alas! many preachers are saying, “God is willing to do His part if you will do
yours,” is a wretched and excuseless denial of the gospel of His grace. To declare that “God
helps those who help themselves” is to repudiate one of the most precious truths taught in the
Bible, and in the Bible alone: namely, that God helps those who are unable to help themselves,
who have tried again and again only to fail. To say that the sinner’s salvation turns upon the
action of his own will, is another form of the God-dishonoring dogma of salvation by human
efforts. In the final analysis, any movement of the will is a work: it is something from me,
10

dragnet – net to be drawn along the bottom of a river or pond to catch everything in its path; thus, anything that is inescapable and effective for its purposes.
11
Experimental – practical; manifest in experience.
12
genus – a particular kind, sort, class.

12. The Value of This Doctrine

153

something that I do. But the doctrine of God’s sovereignty lays the axe at the root of this evil
by declaring, “It is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of God that sheweth
mercy” (Rom 9:16).
Does someone say, Such a doctrine will drive sinners to despair. The reply is, Be it so; it is
just such despair the writer longs to see prevail. It is not until the sinner despairs of any help
from himself that he will ever fall into the arms of sovereign mercy; but if once the Holy Spirit
convicts him that there is no help in himself, then he will recognize that he is lost, and will
cry, “God be merciful to me a sinner” (Luk 18:13)—and such a cry will be heard. If the author
may be allowed to bear personal witness, he has found during the course of his ministry that
the sermons he has preached on human depravity—the sinner’s helplessness to do anything
himself, and the salvation of the soul turning upon the sovereign mercy of God—have been
those most owned and blessed in the salvation of the lost. We repeat, then, a sense of utter
helplessness is the first prerequisite to any sound conversion. There is no salvation for any
soul until it looks away from itself, looks to something, yea, to Someone, outside of itself.

E. Humility to the Creature
This doctrine of the absolute sovereignty of God is deeply humbling to the creature. It is a
great battering-ram against human pride, and in this it is in sharp contrast from the “doctrines of men” (Col 2:22). The spirit of our age is essentially that of boasting and glorying in
the flesh. The achievements of man, his development and progress, his greatness and selfsufficiency, are the shrine at which the world worships today. But the truth of God’s sovereignty, with all its corollaries, removes every ground for human boasting and instills the spirit
of humility in its stead. It declares that salvation is of the Lord (Jon 2:9)—of the Lord in its
origination, in its operation, and in its consummation. It insists that the Lord has to apply as
well as supply, that He has to complete as well as begin, His saving work in our souls—that He
has not only to reclaim but to maintain and sustain us to the end. It teaches that salvation is
by grace through faith, and that all our works (before conversion), good as well as evil, count
for nothing toward salvation. It tells us we are “born…not of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God” (Joh 1:13). And all this is most humbling to the heart of man, who
wants to contribute something to the price of his redemption and do that which will afford
ground for boasting and self-satisfaction.
But if this doctrine humbles us, it results in praise to God. If, in the light of God’s sovereignty, we have seen our own worthlessness and helplessness, we shall indeed cry with the
psalmist “All my springs are in thee” (Psa 87:7). If by nature we were “children of wrath” (Eph
2:3), and by practice rebels against the divine government and justly exposed to the “curse” of
the Law (Gal 3:13), and if God was under no obligation to rescue us from the fiery indignation
and yet, notwithstanding, He delivered up His well-beloved Son for us all (Rom 8:32); then
how such grace and love will melt our hearts, how the apprehension of it will cause us to say
in adoring gratitude, “Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory, for thy
mercy, and for thy truth’s sake” (Psa 115:1). How readily shall each of us acknowledge “By the
grace of God I am what I am” (1Co 15:10)! With what wondering praise shall we exclaim—
Why was I made to hear His voice,
And enter while there’s room,

154

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

When thousands make a wretched choice,
And rather starve than come?
‘Twas the same love that spread the feast,
That sweetly forced us in;
Else we had still refused to taste
13
And perished in our sin.—Watts

F. Absolute Security
It affords a sense of absolute security. God is infinite in power, and therefore it is impossible
to withstand His will or resist the outworking of His decrees. Such a statement as that is well
calculated to fill the sinner with alarm, but from the saint it evokes naught but praise. Let us
add a word and see what a difference it makes: My God is infinite in power!—then I “will not
fear: what can man do unto me?” (Psa 118:6). My God is infinite in power, then “what time I
am afraid I will trust in thee” (Psa 56:3). My God is infinite in power, then I will both lay me
down in peace and sleep, “for thou, LORD, only makest me dwell in safety” (Psa 4:8). Right
down the ages this has been the source of the saints’ confidence. Was not this the assurance of
Moses when, in his parting words to Israel, he said “There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun [Israel], who rideth upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. The
eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms” (Deu 33:26-27)? Was it not
this sense of security that caused the psalmist, moved by the Holy Spirit, to write the following?
He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow of
the Almighty. I will say to the LORD, he is my refuge and my fortress: my God; in him
will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou
trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by
night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day; Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday. A thousand shall fall at thy side,
and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee. Because thou hast
made the Lord, which is my refuge, even the most High thy habitation; There shall no
evil befall thee [instead, all things will work together for good (Rom 8:28)], neither shall
any plague come nigh thy dwelling (Psa 91:1-7, 9-10).
Death and plagues around me fly,
Till He bid, I cannot die;
Not a single shaft can hit,
Till the God of love sees fit.
Oh the preciousness of this truth! Here am I, a poor, helpless, senseless “sheep,” yet am I
secure in the hand of Christ. And why am I secure there? None can pluck me thence because
the hand that holds me is that of the Son of God, and all power in heaven and earth is His!
Again, I have no strength of my own: the world, the flesh, and the devil are arrayed against me,
so I commit myself into the care and keeping of the Lord, and say with the apostle, “I know
13

Isaac Watts, from the hymn “How Sweet and Awful Is the Place,” 1707.

12. The Value of This Doctrine

155

whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed
unto him against that day” (2Ti 1:12). And what is the ground of my confidence? How do I
know that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto Him? I know it because God is
almighty, the King of kings and Lord of lords.

G. Comfort in Sorrow
It supplies comfort in sorrow. The doctrine of God’s sovereignty is one that is full of consolation and imparts great peace to the Christian. The sovereignty of God is a foundation that
nothing can shake and is more firm than the heavens and earth. How blessed to know there is
no corner of the universe that is out of His reach! As said the psalmist,
Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend
up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take
the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall
thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely the darkness shall
cover me; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from
thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee
(Psa 139:7-12).
How blessed it is to know that God’s strong hand is upon everyone and everything! How
blessed to know that not a sparrow falleth to the ground without His notice (Mat 10:29)! How
blessed to know that our very afflictions come not by chance, nor from the devil, but are ordained and ordered by God: “That no man should be moved by these afflictions: for yourselves
know that we are appointed thereunto” (1Th 3:3)!
But our God is not only infinite in power. He is infinite in wisdom and goodness, too. And
herein is the preciousness of this truth: God wills only that which is good, and His will is irreversible and irresistible! God is too wise to err and too loving to cause His child a needless
tear. Therefore, if God be perfect wisdom and perfect goodness, how blessed is the assurance
that everything is in His hand and molded by His will according to His eternal purpose! “Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him, What doest thou?” (Job
9:12). Yet, how comforting to learn that it is “He,” and not the devil, Who “taketh away” our
loved ones! Ah! what peace for our poor frail hearts to be told that the number of our days is
with Him (Job 7:1; 14:5); that disease and death are His messengers and always march under
His orders; that it is the Lord Who gives and the Lord Who takes away!

H. Spirit of Sweet Resignation
It begets a spirit of sweet resignation. To bow before the sovereign will of God is one of the
great secrets of peace and happiness. There can be no real submission with contentment until
we are broken in spirit, that is, until we are willing and glad for the Lord to have His way with
us. Not that we are insisting upon a spirit of fatalistic acquiescence; far from it. The saints are
exhorted to “prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God” (Rom 12:2).
We touched upon this subject of resignation to God’s will in the chapter upon our attitude
toward God’s sovereignty, and there, in addition to the supreme pattern, we cited the examples
of Eli and Job. We would now supplement their cases with further examples. What a word is
that in Leviticus 10:3, “And Aaron held his peace.” Look at the circumstances:

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

156

And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of them his censer, and put fire
therein, and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded them not. And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, and
they died before the Lord...And Aaron held his peace (Lev 10:1-3).
Two of the high priest’s sons were slain, slain by a visitation of divine judgment, and they were
probably intoxicated at the time. Moreover, this trial came upon Aaron suddenly, without anything to prepare him for it—yet he “held his peace.” Precious exemplification of the power of
God’s all-sufficient grace!
Consider now an utterance that fell from the lips of David:
And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city: if I shall find favor
in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and shew me both it, and his habitation.
But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him (2Sa 15:25-26).
Here, too, the circumstances that confronted the speaker were exceedingly trying to the human heart. David was sore pressed with sorrow. His own son was driving him from the throne
and seeking his very life. Whether he would ever see Jerusalem and the Tabernacle again, he
knew not. But he was so yielded up to God, he was so fully assured that His will was best, that
even though it meant the loss of the throne and the loss of his life, he was content for Him to
have His way—“let him do to me as seemeth him good.”
There is no need to multiply examples, but a reflection upon the last case will be in place. If
amid the shadows of the Old Testament dispensation, David was content for the Lord to have
His way, now that the heart of God has been fully revealed at the cross, how much more ought
we to delight in the execution of His will! Surely we shall have no hesitation in saying—
Ill that He blesses is our good, And unblest good is ill,
And all is right that seems most wrong, If it be His sweet will.

I. Evoking Praise
It evokes a song of praise. It could not be otherwise. Why should I, who am by nature no different from the careless and godless throngs all around, have been chosen in Christ before the
foundation of the world, and now blest with all spiritual blessings in the heavenlies in Him
(Eph 1:3-4)! Why was I, that once was an alien and a rebel, singled out for such wondrous favors! Ah! that is something I cannot fathom. Such grace, such love, “passeth knowledge” (Eph
3:19). But if my mind is unable to discern a reason, my heart can express its gratitude in praise
and adoration.
But not only should I be grateful to God for His grace toward me in the past, His present
dealings will fill me with thanksgiving. What is the force of that word, “Rejoice in the Lord alway” (Phi 4:4)? Mark, it is not “Rejoice in the Saviour,” but we are to “Rejoice in the Lord” as
“Lord,” as the Master of every circumstance. Need we remind the reader that when the apostle
penned these words, he was himself a prisoner in the hands of the Roman government. A long
course of affliction and suffering lay behind him. Perils on land and perils on sea, hunger and
thirst, scourging and stoning, had all been experienced. He had been persecuted by those within the church as well as by those without: the very ones who ought to have stood by him had
forsaken him. And still he writes, “Rejoice in the Lord alway”! What was the secret of his peace

12. The Value of This Doctrine

157

and happiness? Ah! had not this same apostle written, “And we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose”
(Rom 8:28)?
But how did he, and how do we, “know” that all things work together for good? The answer
is: because all things are under the control of and are being regulated by the Supreme Sovereign, and because He has naught but thoughts of love toward His own, then “all things” are so
ordered by Him that they are made to minister to our ultimate good. It is for this cause we are
to give “thanks always for all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ” (Eph 5:20). Yes, give thanks for “all things” for, as it has been well said, “Our disappointments are but His appointments.” To the one who delights in the sovereignty of God, the
clouds not only have a “silver lining,” but they are silver all through, the darkness only serving
to offset the light.
Ye fearful saints fresh courage take,
The clouds ye so much dread,
Are big with mercy and shall break,
In blessings o’er your head.

J. Guarantee of Final Triumph
It guarantees the final triumph of good over evil. Ever since the day that Cain slew Abel, the
conflict on earth between good and evil has been a sore problem to the saints. In every age the
righteous have been hated and persecuted, whilst the unrighteous have appeared to defy God
with impunity. The Lord’s people, for the most part, have been poor in this world’s good,
whereas the wicked in their temporal prosperity have flourished like the green bay tree. As one
looks around and beholds the oppression of believers and the earthly success of unbelievers,
and notes how few are the former and how numerous the latter; as he sees the apparent defeat
of the right and the triumphing of might and the wrong; as he hears the roar of battle, the
cries of the wounded, and the lamentations of the bereaved; as he discovers that almost everything down here is in confusion, chaos, and ruins—it seems as though Satan were getting the
better of the conflict. But as one looks above, instead of around, there is plainly visible to the
eye of faith a throne, a throne unaffected by the storms of earth, a throne that is “set,” stable,
and secure—and upon it is seated One Whose name is the Almighty, and Who “worketh all
things after the counsel of his own will” (Eph 1:11). This then is our confidence: God is on the
throne. The helm is in His hand and, being almighty, His purpose cannot fail, for “He is in one
mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul desireth, even that he doeth” (Job 23:13).
Though God’s governing hand is invisible to the eye of sense, it is real to faith (2Co 5:7)—that
faith which rests with sure confidence upon His Word—and therefore is assured He cannot
fail.
What follows below is from the pen of our brother, Mr. A. C. Gaebelein. 14
There can be no failure with God. “God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the Son
of man, that he should repent: hath he said and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken,
and shall he not make it good?” (Num 23:19). All will be accomplished. The promise
14

Arno Clemens Gaebelein (1861-1945) – American Methodist minister, prominent teacher, and conference
speaker. Gaebelein was a developer of the dispensationalist movement in its early days.

158

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

made to His own beloved people to come for them, and take them from hence to glory,
will not fail. He will surely come and gather them in His own presence. The solemn
words spoken to the nations of the earth by the different prophets will also not fail.
“Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the earth hear, and all that
is therein; the world, and all things that come forth of it. For the indignation of the
LORD is upon all nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed
them, he hath delivered them to the slaughter” (Isa 34:1-2). Nor will that day fail in
which “the lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be
bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be exalted” (Isa 2:11). The day in which He is
manifested, when His glory shall cover the heavens and His feet will stand again upon
this earth, will surely come. His kingdom will not fail, nor all the promised events connected with the end of the age and the consummation.
In these dark and trying times, how well it is to remember that He is on the throne, the
throne that cannot be shaken, and that He will not fail in doing all He has spoken and
promised. “Seek ye out of the book of the LORD, and read: No one of these shall fail”
(Isa 34:16). In believing, blessed anticipation, we can look on to the glory-time when His
Word and His will is accomplished—when through the coming of the Prince of Peace,
righteousness and peace comes at last. And while we wait for the supreme and blessed
moment when His promise to us is accomplished, we trust Him, walking in His fellowship—and daily find afresh that He does not fail to sustain and keep us in all our ways.

K. Provision of a Resting-Place for the Heart
It provides a resting-place for the heart. Much that might have been said here already has
been anticipated under previous heads. The One seated upon the throne of heaven, the One
Who is Governor over the nations and Who has ordained and now regulates all events, is infinite not only in power, but in wisdom and goodness as well. He Who is Lord over all creation
is the One that was “manifest in the flesh” (1Ti 3:16). Ah! here is a theme no human pen can
do justice to. The glory of God consists not merely in that He is Highest, but in that, being
high, He stooped in lowly love to bear the burden of His own sinful creatures, for it is written,
“God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself ” (2Co 5:19). The church of God was
purchased “with his own blood” (Act 20:28). It is upon the gracious self-humiliation of the
King Himself that His kingdom is established. O wondrous cross! By it, He Who suffered upon
it has become not the Lord of our destinies (He was that before), but the Lord of our hearts.
Therefore, it is not in abject terror that we bow before the Supreme Sovereign, but in adoring
worship we cry, “Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing” (Rev 5:12).
Here then is the refutation of the wicked charge that this doctrine is a horrible calumny
upon God, and dangerous to expound to His people. Can a doctrine be “horrible” and “dangerous” that gives God His true place, that maintains His rights, that magnifies His grace, that
ascribes all glory to Him and removes every ground of boasting from the creature? Can a doctrine be “horrible” and “dangerous” that affords the saints a sense of security in danger, that
supplies them comfort in sorrow, that begets patience within them in adversity, that evokes
from them praise at all times? Can a doctrine be “horrible” and “dangerous” that assures us of
the certain triumph of good over evil, and that provides a sure resting-place for our hearts—

12. The Value of This Doctrine

159

and that place [being] the perfections of the Sovereign Himself ? No; a thousand times, no! Instead of being “horrible and dangerous,” this doctrine of the sovereignty of God is glorious and
edifying, and a due apprehension of it will but serve to make us exclaim with Moses, “Who is
like unto thee, O LORD, among the gods? who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders?” (Exo 15:11). 

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

1. Explain the doctrine of God’s sovereignty using metaphors.
2. What is shown by our holy God allowing evil in the world?
3. a. Describe the spirit of our age?
b. How does the doctrine of God’s sovereignty counter this?
4. How is the doctrine of God’s sovereignty a comfort?

13
CONCLUSION
“Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent
reigneth.”—Revelation 19:6

A. Overview
1. Balance of truth
In our foreword to the second edition, we acknowledge the need for preserving the balance
of truth. Two things are beyond dispute: God is sovereign, man is responsible. In this book we
have sought to expound the former; in our other works we have frequently pressed the latter.
That there is real danger of over-emphasizing the one and ignoring the other, we readily admit;
yea, history furnishes numerous examples of cases of each. To emphasize the sovereignty of God
without also maintaining the accountability of the creature tends to fatalism; to be so concerned
in maintaining the responsibility of man as to lose sight of the sovereignty of God, is to exalt the
creature and dishonor the Creator.
Almost all doctrinal error is really truth perverted, truth wrongfully divided, truth disproportionately held and taught. The fairest face on earth, with the most comely features, would
soon become ugly and unsightly if one member continued growing while the others remained
undeveloped. Beauty is, primarily, a matter of proportion. Thus it is with the Word of God; its
beauty and blessedness are best perceived when its manifold wisdom is exhibited in its true
proportions. Here is where so many have failed in the past. A single phase of God’s truth has so
impressed this man or that, he has concentrated his attention upon it, almost to the exclusion
of everything else. Some portion of God’s Word has been made a “pet doctrine,” and often this
has become the distinctive badge of some party. 1 But it is the duty of each servant of God to
“declare all the counsel of God” (Act 20:27).
It is true that in the degenerate days in which our lot is cast, when on every side man is exalted and “superman” has become a common expression, there is real need for a special emphasis upon the glorious fact of God’s supremacy—the more so where this is expressly denied.
Yet even here much wisdom is required, lest our zeal should not be “according to knowledge”
(Rom 10:2). The words “meat in due season” should ever be before the servant of God (Mat
24:45). What is needed, primarily, by one congregation, may not be specifically needed by another. If called to labor where Arminian preachers have preceded, then the neglected truth of
God’s sovereignty should be expounded, though with caution and care lest too much “strong
meat” be given to “babes.” The example of Christ in John 16:12, “I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now,” must be borne in mind. On the other hand, if I am
1

party – like-minded group of people based on favorite issues.

13. Conclusion

161

called to take charge of a distinctly Calvinistic pulpit, then the truth of human responsibility
(in its many aspects) may be profitably set forth. What the preacher needs to give out is not
what his people most like to hear, but what they most need, i.e., those aspects of truth they are
least familiar with or least exhibiting in their walk.
To carry into actual practice what we have inculcated 2 above will, most probably, lay the
preacher open to the charge of being a turncoat. 3 But what matters that if he has his Master’s
approval? He is not called upon to be “consistent” with himself nor with any rules drawn up by
man; his business is to be consistent with Holy Writ. And in Scripture, each part or aspect of
truth is balanced by another aspect of truth. There are two sides to everything, even to the character of God, for He is “light” (1Jo 1:5) as well as “love” (1Jo 4:8), and therefore are we called upon to “Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God” (Rom 11:22). To be all the time
preaching on the one to the exclusion of the other caricatures the divine character.
When the Son of God became incarnate, He came here in “the form of a servant” (Phi 2:7);
nevertheless, in the manger He was “Christ the Lord” (Luk 2:11)! All things are possible with
God (Mat 19:26), yet God “cannot lie” (Ti 1:2). Scripture says, “Bear ye one another’s burdens”
(Gal 6:2), yet the same chapter insists “every man shall bear his own burden” (Gal 6:5). We are
enjoined to take “no thought for the morrow” (Mat 6:34), yet “if any provide not for his own,
and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel”
(1Ti 5:8). No sheep of Christ’s can perish (Joh 10:28-29), yet the Christian is bidden to make
his “calling and election sure” (2Pe 1:10). And so we might go on multiplying illustrations.
These things are not contradictions but complementaries: the one “balances the other.” Thus,
the Scriptures set forth both the sovereignty of God and the responsibility of man. So, too,
should every servant of God, and that in their proper proportion. But we return now to a few
closing reflections upon our present theme.
2. The error in our age
And Jehoshaphat stood in the congregation of Judah and Jerusalem, in the house of the
LORD, before the new court, and said, O LORD God of our fathers, art not thou God in
heaven? and rulest not thou over all the kingdoms of the heathen? and in thine hand is
there not power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee? (2Ch 20:5-6).
Yes, the Lord is God, ruling in supreme majesty and might. Yet in our day, a day of boasted
enlightenment and progress, this is denied on every hand. A materialistic science and atheistic
philosophy have bowed God out of His own world, and everything is regulated, forsooth, 4 by
(impersonal) laws of nature. So in human affairs: at best God is a far-distant spectator, and a
helpless one at that. [Men say things like the following:] “God could not help the launching of
the dreadful war, 5 and though He longed to put a stop to it, He was unable to do so”—and this
in the face of 1 Chronicles 5:22 and 2 Chronicles 24:24! Having endowed man with “free agency,” God is obliged to let man make his own choice and go his own way, and He cannot interfere with him, or otherwise his moral responsibility would be destroyed!

2

inculcated – taught or impressed by frequent repetitions or admonitions.
turncoat – one who changes his principles; a renegade.
4
forsooth – (lamentably) in truth, in fact, indeed.
5
dreadful war – World War I.
3

162

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Such are the popular beliefs of the day. One is not surprised to find these sentiments emanating from German theologians, but how sad that they should be taught in many of our seminaries, echoed from many of our pulpits, and accepted by many of the rank and file of
professing Christians.
One of the most flagrant sins of our age is that of irreverence: the failure to ascribe the glory that is due the august majesty of God. Men limit the power and activities of the Lord in
their degrading concepts of His being and character. Originally, man was made in the image
and likeness of God, but today we are asked to believe in a god made in the image and likeness
of man. The Creator is reduced to the level of the creature: His omniscience is called into
question, His omnipotencey is no longer believed in, and His absolute sovereignty is flatly denied. Men claim to be the architects of their own fortunes and the determiners of their own
destiny. They know not that their lives are at the disposal of the divine Despot. They know not
they have no more power to thwart His secret decrees than a worm has to resist the tread of an
elephant. They know not that “The LORD hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his
kingdom ruleth over all ” (Psa 103:19).
In the foregoing pages we have sought to repudiate such paganistic views as the abovementioned, and have endeavored to show from Scripture that God is God on the throne, and
that so far from the recent war being an evidence that the helm had slipped out of His hand, it
was a sure proof that He still lives and reigns and is now bringing to pass that which He had
fore-determined and fore-announced (Mat 24:6-8 etc.). That the carnal mind is enmity against
God, that the unregenerate man is a rebel against the divine government, that the sinner has
no concern for the glory of his Maker and little or no respect for His revealed will, is freely
granted. But, nevertheless, behind the scenes God is ruling and over-ruling, fulfilling His
eternal purpose—not only in spite of but also by means of those who are His enemies.
3. What saith the Scriptures?
How earnestly are the claims of man contended for against the claims of God! Has not man
power and knowledge, but what of it? Has God no will, or power, or knowledge? Suppose
man’s will conflicts with God’s, then what? Turn to the Scripture of truth for answer. Men had
a will on the plains of Shinar and determined to build a tower whose top should reach unto
heaven, but what came of their purpose? Pharaoh had a will when He hardened his heart and
Pharaoh refused to allow Jehovah’s people to go and worship Him in the wilderness, but what
came of his rebellion? Balak had a will when he hired Balaam to come and curse the Hebrews,
but of what avail was it? The Canaanites had a will when they determined to prevent Israel occupying the land of Canaan, but how far did they succeed? Saul had a will when he hurled his
javelin at David, but it entered the wall instead! Jonah had a will when he refused to go and
preach to the Ninevites, but what came of it? Nebuchadnezzar had a will when he thought to
destroy the three Hebrew children, but God had a will too, and the fire did not harm them.
Herod had a will when he sought to slay the child Jesus, and, had there been no living, reigning
God, his evil desire would have been effected; but in daring to pit his puny will against the irresistible will of the Almighty, his efforts came to nought. Yes, my reader, and you, too, had a will
when you formed your plans without first seeking counsel of the Lord, therefore did He overturn
them! “There are many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless the counsel of the LORD, that
shall stand” (Pro 19:21).

13. Conclusion

163

a. Revelation 17:17
What a demonstration of the irresistible sovereignty of God is furnished by that wonderful
statement found in Revelation 17:17, “For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to
agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled.” The
fulfillment of any single prophecy is but the sovereignty of God in operation. It is the demonstration that what He has decreed He is able also to perform. It is proof that none can withstand the execution of His counsel or prevent the accomplishment of His pleasure. It is
evidence that God inclines men to fulfill that which He has ordained and perform that which
He has foredetermined. If God were not absolute sovereign then divine prophecy would be valueless, for in such case no guarantee would be left that what He had predicted would surely
come to pass.
“For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, until the words of God shall be fulfilled” (Rev 17:17). We cannot do better than
quote here the excellent comments of our esteemed friend, Mr. Walter Scott, 6 upon this verse.
God works unseen, but not the less truly, in all the political changes of the day. The astute statesman, the clever diplomatist, is simply an agent in the Lord’s hands. He knows
it not. Self-will and motives of policy may influence to action, but God is steadily working toward an end: to exhibit the heavenly and earthly glories of His Son. Thus, instead
of kings and statesmen thwarting God’s purpose, they unconsciously forward it. God is
not indifferent, but is behind the scenes of human action. The doings of the future ten
kings in relation to Babylon and the Beast—the ecclesiastical and secular powers—are
not only under the direct control of God, but all is done in fulfillment of His words.
b. Micah 4:11-13
Closely connected with Revelation 17:17 is that which is brought before us in Micah 4:1112: “Now also many nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her be defiled, and let our
eye look upon Zion. But they know not the thoughts of the LORD, neither understand they his
counsel: for he shall gather them as sheaves into the floor.” This is another remarkable statement, inspired of God, and three things in it deserve special notice. First, a day is coming
when “many nations” shall “gather against” Israel with the express purpose of humiliating her.
Second, quite unconsciously to themselves—for they “understand not” His counsel—they are
“gathered” together by God, for He “shall gather them.” Third, God gathers these “many nations” against Israel in order that the daughter of Zion may “beat them in pieces” (v. 13). Here
then is another instance that demonstrates a) God’s absolute control of the nations, b) His
power to fulfill His secret counsel or decrees through and by them, and c) His inclining men
to perform His pleasure, though it be performed blindly and unwittingly by them.
c. John 19:9-11
Once more. What a word was that of the Lord Jesus as He stood before Pilate! Who can depict the scene! There was the Roman official, and there also was the Servant of Jehovah standing before him. Said Pilate, “Whence art thou?” And we read “Jesus gave him no answer.” Then
said Pilate unto Him, “Speakest thou not unto me? Knowest thou not that I have power to
6

Walter Scott (1796-1861) – from Exposition of the Revelation of Jesus Christ. Scottish American teacher and
evangelist; born in Moffatt, Scotland; studied at the University of Edinburgh; moved to New York and
then Pittsburgh, where he joined a small Baptist congregation; influenced by James and Robert Haldane.

164

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

crucify thee, and have power to release thee?” (Joh 19:10). Ah! that is what Pilate thought.
That is what many another has thought. He was merely voicing the common conviction of the
human heart, the heart that leaves God out of its reckoning. But hear the Lord Jesus as He
corrects Pilate, and at the same time repudiates the proud boasting of men in general: “thou
couldest have no power against me, except it were given thee from above” (Joh 19:11). How
sweeping is this assertion! Man, even though he be a prominent official in the most influential
empire of his day, has no power except that which is given him from above—no power even to
do that which is evil, i.e., carry out his own evil designs, unless God empowers him so that His
purpose may be forwarded. It was God Who gave Pilate the power to sentence to death His
well-beloved Son!
And how this rebukes the sophistries and reasonings of men who argue that God does nothing more than permit evil! Why, go right back to the very first words spoken by the Lord God
to man after the Fall and hear Him saying, “I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed” (Gen 3:15)! Bare permission of sin does not cover all the
facts that are revealed in Scripture touching this mystery. As Calvin succinctly remarked, “But
what reason shall we assign for His permitting it, but because it is His will?” 7
At the close of chapter eleven we promised to give attention to one or two other difficulties
that were not examined at that time. To them we now turn. 1) If God has not only predetermined the salvation of His own, but has also foreordained the good works that they are to walk
in (Eph 2:10), then what incentive remains for us to strive after practical godliness? 2) If God
has fixed the number of those who are to be saved, and the others are vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction, then what encouragement have we to preach the gospel to the lost? Let us take up
these questions in the order of mention.

B. God’s Sovereignty and the Believer’s Growth in Grace
If God has foreordained everything that comes to pass, of what avail is it for us to “exercise”
ourselves “unto godliness” (1Ti 4:7)? If God has before ordained the good works in which we
are to walk (Eph 2:10), then why should we be “careful to maintain good works” (Ti 3:8)? This
only raises once more the problem of human responsibility. Really, it should be enough for us
to reply: God has bidden us do so. Nowhere does Scripture inculcate or encourage a spirit of
fatalistic indifference. Contentment with our present attainments is expressly disallowed. The
word to every believer is “Press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus” (Phi 3:14). This was the apostle’s aim, and it should be ours. Instead of hindering
the development of Christian character, a proper apprehension and appreciation of God’s sovereignty will forward it. Just as the sinner’s despair of any help from himself is the first prerequisite of a sound conversion, so the loss of all confidence in himself is the first essential in
the believer’s growth in grace; and just as the sinner despairing of help from himself will cast
him into the arms of sovereign mercy, so the Christian, conscious of his own frailty, will turn
unto the Lord for power. It is when we are weak, we are strong (2Co 12:10); that is to say,
there must be consciousness of our weakness before we shall turn to the Lord for help. While
the Christian allows the thought that he is sufficient in himself, while he imagines that by
7

The Banner of Truth British edition, 1961, omitted the chapter 13 text to this point. That edition included
“certain minor revisions,” with the permission of Mrs. Pink, in order to increase “the contemporary value
of the book.” This Chapel Library edition uses the original third edition of 1929 without those revisions.

13. Conclusion

165

mere force of will he shall resist temptation, while he has any confidence in the flesh, then,
like Peter who boasted that though all forsook the Lord yet should not he, so we shall certainly
fail and fall. Apart from Christ we can do nothing (Joh 15:5). The promise of God is, “He giveth
power to the faint; and to them that have no might [of their own] he increaseth strength” (Isa
40:29).
The question now before us is of great practical importance, and we are deeply anxious to
express ourselves clearly and simply. The secret of development of Christian character is the
realization of our own powerlessness, acknowledged powerlessness, and the consequent turning unto the Lord for help. The plain fact is that, of ourselves, we cannot do this or make ourselves do it. “Be careful for nothing [in nothing be anxious]” (Phi 4:6)—but who can avoid and
prevent anxiety when things go wrong? “Awake to righteousness and sin not” (1Co 15:34)—
but who can help sinning? These are merely examples selected at random from scores of others. Does then God mock us by bidding us do what He knows we are unable to do? The answer
of Augustine (354-430) to this question is the best we have met with: “God gives commands we
cannot perform, that we may know what we ought to request from Him.” A consciousness of
our powerlessness should cast us upon Him Who has all power. Here then is where a vision
and view of God’s sovereignty helps, for it reveals His sufficiency and shows us our insufficiency.

C. God’s Sovereignty and Christian Service
If God has determined before the foundation of the world the precise number of those who
shall be saved, then why should we concern ourselves about the eternal destiny of those with
whom we come into contact? What place is left for zeal in Christian service? Will not the doctrine of God’s sovereignty, and its corollary of predestination, discourage the Lord’s servants
from faithfulness in evangelism? No; instead of discouraging His servants, a recognition of
God’s sovereignty is most encouraging to them. Here is one, for example, who is called upon
to do the work of an evangelist, and he goes forth believing in the freedom of the will and in
the sinner’s own ability to come to Christ. He preaches the gospel as faithfully and zealously as
he knows how, but he finds the vast majority of his hearers are utterly indifferent and have no
heart at all for Christ. He discovers that men are, for the most part, thoroughly wrapt up in
the things of the world, and that few have any concern about the world to come. He beseeches
men to be reconciled to God and pleads with them over their soul’s salvation. But it is of no
avail. He becomes thoroughly disheartened and asks himself, What is the use of it all? Shall he
quit, or had he better change his mission and message? If men will not respond to the gospel,
had he not better engage in that which is more popular and acceptable to the world? Why not
occupy himself with humanitarian efforts, with social uplift work, with the purity campaign?
Alas! that so many men who once preached the gospel are now engaged in these activities instead.
What then is God’s corrective for His discouraged servant? First, he needs to learn from
Scripture that God is not now seeking to convert the world, but that in this age, He is “taking
out of the Gentiles” a people for His name (Act 15:14). What then is God’s corrective for His
discouraged servant? This: a proper apprehension of God’s plan for this dispensation. Again,
what is God’s remedy for dejection at apparent failure in our labors? This: the assurance that
God’s purpose cannot fail, that God’s plans cannot miscarry, that God’s will must be done. Our

166

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

labors are not intended to bring about that which God has not decreed. Once more: what is
God’s word of cheer for the one who is thoroughly disheartened at the lack of response to his
appeals and the absence of fruit for his labors? This: that we are not responsible for results;
that is God’s side and God’s business. Paul may “plant,” and Apollos may “water,” but it is God
who “gave the increase” (1Co 3:6). Our business is to obey Christ and preach the gospel to every creature, to emphasize the “Whosoever believeth” and then to leave the sovereign operations of the Holy Spirit to apply the Word in quickening power to whom He wills, resting on
the sure promise of Jehovah:
For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and returneth not thither, but
watereth the earth, and maketh it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater: So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please [it may not
that which we please], and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it (Isa 55:10-11).
Was it not this assurance that sustained the beloved apostle when he declared, “Therefore
[see context] I endure all things for the elect’s sake” (2Ti 2:10)! Yea, is not this same lesson to
be learned from the blessed example of the Lord Jesus! When we read that He said to the people “Ye also have seen me, and believe not,” He fell back upon the sovereign pleasure of the
One Who sent Him, saying “All that the Father giveth me shall come to me, and him that
cometh to me I will in no wise cast out” (Joh 6:36-37). He knew that His labor would not be in
vain. He knew God’s Word would not return unto Him “void.” He knew that “God’s elect”
would come to Him and believe on Him. And this same assurance fills the soul of every servant
who intelligently rests upon the blessed truth of God’s sovereignty.
Ah, fellow Christian-worker, God has not sent us forth to draw “a bow at a venture” (1Ki
22:34). The success of the ministry that He has committed into our hands is not left contingent on the fickleness of the wills in those to whom we preach. How gloriously encouraging
and soul-sustaining are those words of our Lord’s, if we rest on them in simple faith: “And
other sheep I have [“have” mark you, not “will have”; “have” because given to Him by the Father before the foundation of the world], which are not of this fold [i.e. the Jewish fold then
existing]: them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice” (Joh 10:16). Not simply, “they
ought to hear my voice,” not simply “they may hear my voice,” not “they will if they are willing.” There is no “if,” no uncertainty about it. “They shall hear my voice” is His own positive,
unqualified, absolute promise.
Here then is where faith is to rest! Continue your quest, dear friend, after the “other sheep”
of Christ’s. Be not discouraged because the “goats” (Mat 25:32-33) heed not His voice as you
preach the gospel. Be faithful, be scriptural, be persevering, and Christ may use even you to be
His mouthpiece in calling some of His lost sheep unto Himself. “Therefore, my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord” (1Co 15:58).

D. Closing Reflections
It now remains for us to offer a few closing reflections, and our happy task is finished.

13. Conclusion

167

1. A merciful provision
God’s sovereign election of certain ones to salvation is a merciful provision. The sufficient
answer to all the wicked accusations that the doctrine of predestination is cruel, horrible, and
unjust, is that unless God had chosen certain ones to salvation, none would have been saved,
for “there is none that seeketh after God” (Rom 3:11). This is no mere inference of ours, but
the definite teaching of Holy Scripture. Attend closely to the words of the apostle in Romans 9,
where this theme is fully discussed: “Though the number of the children of Israel be as the
sand of the sea, a remnant shall be saved...And as Esaias [Isaiah] said before, Except the Lord of
Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrah” (Rom
9:27, 29). The teaching of this passage is unmistakable: but for divine interference Israel would
have become as Sodom and Gomorrah. Had God left Israel alone, human depravity would have
run its course to its own tragic end. But God left Israel a “remnant” or “seed.” Of old the cities
of the plain had been obliterated for their sin and none was left to survive them, and so it
would have been in Israel’s case had not God “left” or spared a remnant. Thus it is with the
human race: but for God’s sovereign grace in sparing a remnant, all of Adam’s descendants
had perished in their sins. Therefore, we say that God’s sovereign election of certain ones to
salvation is a merciful provision.
And, be it noted, in choosing the ones He did, God did no injustice to the others who were
passed by, for none had any right to salvation. Salvation is by grace, and the exercise of grace
is a matter of pure sovereignty—God might save all or none, many or few, one or ten thousand, just as He saw best. Should it be replied, But surely it were “best” to save all, the answer
would be: we are not capable of judging. We might have thought it “best” never to have created Satan, never to have allowed sin to enter the world, or having entered to have brought the
conflict between good and evil to an end long before now. Ah! God’s ways are not ours, and His
ways are “past finding out” (Rom 11:33).
God foreordains everything that comes to pass. His sovereign rule extends throughout the
entire universe and is over every creature, “For of him, and through him, and to him, are all
things” (Rom 11:36). God initiates all things, regulates all things, and all things are working
unto His eternal glory. “There is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in
him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him” (1Co 8:6). And again,
“According to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will”
(Eph 1:11). Surely if anything could be ascribed to chance it is the drawing of lots, and yet the
Word of God expressly declares, “The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is
of the LORD” (Pro 16:33)! 8
2. God’s wisdom vindicated
God’s wisdom in the government of our world shall yet be completely vindicated before all
created intelligences. God is no idle spectator looking on from a distant world at the happenings on our earth, but is Himself shaping everything to the ultimate promotion of His own
glory. Even now He is working out His eternal purpose, not only in spite of human and Satanic opposition, but by means of them. How wicked and futile have been all efforts to resist His
8

The author is not advocating the use of casting lots to discover the will of God, but simply that God does
control everything. For more on this, see Divine Guidance by B. A. Ramsbottom and How to Know the Will
of God by John Newton and John Piper, both available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.

168

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

will shall one day be as fully evident as when of old He overthrew the rebellious Pharaoh and
his hosts at the Red Sea.
It has been well said,
The end and object of all is the glory of God. It is perfectly, divinely true, that “God hath
ordained for His own glory whatsoever comes to pass.” In order to guard this from all
possibility of mistake, we have only to remember Who is this God, and what the glory
that He seeks. It is He Who is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of Him in
Whom divine love came seeking not her own, among us as one that serveth (Luk 22:27).
It is He Who, sufficient in Himself, can receive no real accession of glory from His creatures, but from Whom cometh down every good and every perfect gift, in Whom is no
variableness nor shadow of turning (Jam 1:17). Of His own alone can His creatures give
to Him.
The glory of such an one is found in the display of His own goodness, righteousness, holiness, truth; in manifesting Himself as in Christ, He has manifested Himself, and will
forever. The glory of this God is what of necessity all things must serve—adversaries
and evil as well as all else. He has ordained it; His power will insure it; and when all apparent clouds and obstructions are removed, then shall He rest—“rest in his love” forever (Zep 3:17), although eternity only will suffice for the apprehension of the
9
revelation. “God shall be all in all ” gives in six words the ineffable result.” (F. W. Grant
on “Atonement”; italics ours)
3. Exhortation
That what we have written gives but an incomplete and imperfect presentation of this most
important subject, we must sorrowfully confess. Nevertheless, if it results in a clearer apprehension of the majesty of God and His sovereign mercy, we shall be amply repaid for our labors.
If the reader has received blessing from the perusal of these pages, let him not fail to return
10
thanks to the Giver of every good and every perfect gift, ascribing all praise to His inimitable
and sovereign grace. 
The Lord, our God, is clothed with might,
The winds and waves obey His will;
He speaks, and in the shining height
The sun and rolling worlds stand still.
Rebel ye waves, and o’er the land
With threatening aspect foam and roar,
The Lord hath spoken His command
That breaks your rage upon the shore.
Ye winds of night, your force combine—
Without His holy high behest
You shall not in a mountain pine
Disturb the little swallow’s nest.
9

F. W. Grant (1834-1902) – British American theologian and writer; born in London; studied at King’s College School. He immigrated to Canada at age 21 and served in Anglican parish churches; then he immigrated to the USA, living in Brooklyn, New York, and then Plainfield, New Jersey.
10
inimitable – without compare; defying imitation; having no match or equal.

13. Conclusion
His voice sublime is heard afar;
In distant peals it fades and dies;
He binds the cyclone to His car
And sweeps the howling murky skies.
Great God! how infinite art Thou,
What weak and worthless worms are we,
Let all the race of creatures bow
And seek salvation now from Thee.
Eternity, with all its years
Stands ever-present to Thy view,
To Thee there’s nothing old appears
Great God! There can be nothing new.
Our lives through varied scenes are drawn,
And vexed with mean and trifling cares;
While Thine eternal thought moves on
11
Thy fixed and undisturbed affairs.

11

Hymn “The Lord Our God Is Clothed with Might” by Henry Kirke White (1785-1806), English poet.

169

170

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

“Alleluia: for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”
—Revelation 19:6

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

1. What results when man’s will conflicts with God’s?
2. What do we learn from Micah 4:11-13?
3. If God has before ordained everything, including our good works, then why should we strive
to walk in them?
4. When God passes by some for salvation, why is it no injustice?
5. Why is the doctrine of the sovereignty of God glorious?
