PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 13
The Mercy Of God — Of The Trinity


THE MERCY OF GOD
The next attribute is God's goodness or mercy. Mercy is the result
and effect of God's goodness, Ps. 33:5; Ps. 119:64. So then this is the
next attribute, God's goodness or mercy. The most learned of the
heathens thought they gave their God, Jupiter, two golden characters
when they styled him Good and Great; both these meet in God,
Goodness and Greatness,—majesty and mercy.
God is, 1. Essentially good in himself. And 2. Relatively good to us.
They are both put together, Ps. 119:68., "Thou art good, and doest

good." This relative goodness is nothing else but his mercy, which is
an innate propenseness in God to pity and succour such as are in
misery. Concerning God's mercy.
1st. I shall lay down these twelve positions: 1. It is the great design of
the scripture to represent God as merciful. This is a loadstone to
draw sinners to him, Exod. 34:6., "The Lord merciful, gracious, long
suffering, abundant in goodness," &c. Here are six expressions to set
forth God's mercy, and but one to set forth his justice: "who will by
no means clear the guilty," Ps. 57:10. "Thy mercy is great above the
heavens," Ps. 108:4. God is represented as a king, and a rainbow was
about his throne, Rev. 4:3. The rainbow was an emblem of mercy;
the scripture doth oftener represent God in his white robes of mercy,
than with his garments rolled in blood,—oftener with his golden
sceptre, than his iron rod.
2. God is more inclinable to mercy than wrath. Mercy is his darling
attribute, which he most delights in, Mic. 7:18. Mercy pleaseth him.
It is delightful to the mother, saith Chrysostom, to have her breasts
drawn: so it is to God, to have the breasts of his mercy drawn: Isa.
27:4., "Fury is not in me;" that is, I do not delight in it. Acts of
severity are rather forced from God, he doth not afflict willingly,
Lam. 3:33. The bee naturally gives honey, it stings only when it is
provoked; God doth not punish till he can bear no longer, Jer. 44:22.,
"So that the Lord could bear no longer, because of the evil of your
doings." Mercy is God's right hand that he is most used to; inflicting
of punishment is called God's 'strange work,' Isa. 28:21. He is not
used to it. And when the Lord would shave-off the pride of a nation,
he is said to 'hire a razor,' as if he had none of his own. Isa. 7:20., 'He
shall shave with a razor that is hired.' "He is slow to anger," Ps.
103:8.; "and ready to forgive," Ps. 86:5.

3. There is no condition, but we may spy mercy in it: when the
church was in captivity, she cries out, "It is of the Lord's mercies that
we are not consumed," Lam. 3:22. Geographers write of Syracuse in
Sicily, it is so situated, that the sun is never out of sight. In all
afflictions we may see some sun-shine of mercy. That outward and
inward troubles do not come together, is mercy.
4. Mercy sweetens all God's other attributes: God's holiness without
mercy, and his justice without mercy, were terrible. When the water
was bitter, and Israel could not drink, Moses cast a tree into the
waters, and then they were made sweet. How bitter and dreadful
were the other attributes of God, did not mercy sweeten them! Mercy
set God's power on work to help us; it makes his justice become our
friend; it shall avenge our quarrels.
5. God's mercy is one of the most orient pearls of his crown; it makes
his Godhead appear amiable and lovely. When Moses said to God, "I
beseech thee shew me thy glory;" the Lord answered him, "I will
make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will shew thee mercy,"
Exod. 33:19. God's mercy is his glory; his holiness makes him
illustrious; his mercy makes him propitious.
6. Even the worst taste of God's mercy; such as fight against God's
mercy, taste of it; the wicked have some crumbs from mercy's table;
"The Lord is good to all," Ps. 145:9. The sweet dew drops on the
thistle as well as the rose. The diocese where mercy visits is very
large; Pharaoh's head was crowned though his heart was hardened.
7. Mercy coming to us in a covenant is sweetest. It was mercy that
God would give Israel rain, and bread to the full, and peace, and
victory over their enemies, Lev. 26:4, 5, 6. But it was a greater mercy
that God would be their God, v. 12. To have health is a mercy; but to

have Christ and salvation is a greater mercy; this is like the diamond
in the ring, it casts a more sparkling lustre.
8. One act of mercy engageth God to another. Men argue thus: I have
shewn you kindness already, therefore trouble me no more; hut,
because God hath shewn mercy, he is more ready still to shew mercy;
his mercy in election, makes him justify, adopt, glorify; one act of
mercy engageth God to more. A parent's love to his child makes him
always giving.
9. All the mercy in the creature is derived from God, and is but a
drop of this ocean; the mercy and pity a mother hath to her child is
from God; he that puts the milk in her breast, puts the compassion in
her heart, therefore God is called, "The father of mercies," 2 Cor. 1:3.,
because he begets all the mercies in the world. If God hath put any
kindness into the creature, how much kindness is in him who is the
Father of mercy?
10. God's mercy, as it makes the saints happy, so it should make
them humble. Mercy is not the fruit of our goodness, but the fruit of
God's goodness. Mercy is an alms that God bestows; they have no
cause to be proud, that live upon the alms of God's mercy, Job 10:15.,
"If I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head." All my righteousness
is the effect of God's mercy, therefore I will be humble, and will not
lift up my head.
11. It is mercy stays the speedy execution of God's justice. Sinners
continually provoke God, and make his fury come up in his face,"
Ezek. 38:18. Whence is it God doth not presently arrest and
condemn them? It is not that God cannot do it, for he is armed with
omnipotence; but it is from God's mercy; mercy gets a reprieve for
the sinner, and stops the speedy process of justice. God would, by his
goodness, lead sinners to repentance.

12. It is dreadful to have mercy witness against one. It was sad with
Haman, when the queen herself accused him, Esth. 7:6. So will it,
when this queen of mercy shall stand up against a person and accuse
him. It is only mercy that saves sinner. Now, how sad to have mercy
become an enemy! If mercy be an accuser, who shall be our
advocate? The sinner never escapes hell, when mercy draws up the
indictment.
I might shew you several species or kinds of mercy: preventing
mercy, sparing mercy, supplying mercy, guiding mercy, accepting
mercy, healing mercy, quickening mercy, supporting mercy,
forgiving mercy, correcting mercy, comforting mercy, delivering
mercy, crowning mercy,—but I shall speak of the qualifications or
properties of God's mercy.
1st. God's mercy is free. To set up merit is to destroy mercy; nothing
can deserve mercy, because we are polluted in our blood; nor force it;
we may force God to punish us, not to love us, Hos. 14:4., "I will love
them freely." Every link in the chain of salvation is wrought and
interwoven with free grace. Election is free, Eph. 1:4; 5., "He hath
chosen us in him," "according to the good pleasure of his will."
Justification is free, Rom. 3:24., "Being justified freely by his grace."
Salvation is free, Titus 3:5., "According to his mercy he saved us." Say
not then, I am unworthy, for mercy is free; if God should shew mercy
only to such as are worthy, he would shew none at all.
2d. God's mercy is an overflowing mercy; it is infinite: Ps. 86:5.,
"Plenteous in mercy;" Eph. 2:4., "Rich in mercy," Ps. 51:1.,
"Multitude of thy mercies." The vial of wrath doth but drop, but the
fountain of mercy runs. The sun is not so full of light as God is of
mercy; God hath morning-mercies, Lam. 3:23., "They are new every
morning;" and night-mercies, Ps. 42:8, "In the night his song shall be

with me." God hath mercies under heaven, those we taste of; and in
heaven, those we hope for.
3d. God's mercy is eternal, Ps. 103:17., "The mercy of the Lord is
from everlasting to everlasting." It is repeated twenty-six times in
one psalm, "His mercy endureth for ever," Ps. 136. The souls of the
blessed shall be ever bathing themselves in this sweet and pleasant
ocean of God's mercy. God's anger to his children lasts but a while,
Ps. 103:17., "But his mercy lasts for ever." As long as he is God he will
be shewing mercy; as his mercy is overflowing, so everflowing.
Use 1st. Of Information. It shows us how we are to look upon God in
prayer,—not in his judgment-robes, but clothed with a rainbow full
of mercy and elemency. Add wings to prayer. When Jesus Christ
ascended up to heaven, that which made him go up thither with joy
was, "I go to my Father;" so that which should make our hearts
ascend with joy in prayer, is, "We are going to the Father of mercy,
who sits upon the throne of grace;" go with confidence in this mercy,
as when one goes to a fire, it is not doubtingly, perhaps it will warm
me, perhaps not.
Use 2d. Believe in his mercy, Ps. 52:8., "I will trust in the mercy of
God for ever." God's mercy is a fountain opened, let down the bucket
of faith, and you may drink of this fountain of salvation. What
greater encouragement to believe than God's mercy? God counts it
his glory to be scattering pardons; he is desirous that sinners should
touch the golden sceptre of his mercy and live. And this willingness
to shew mercy appears two ways:
1. By his entreating of sinners to come and lay hold on his mercy,
Rev. 22:17., "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely."
Mercy woos sinners,—it even kneels down to them. It were strange
for a prince to entreat a condemned man to accept a pardon. God

saith, Poor sinner, suffer me to love thee, be willing to let me save
thee.
2. By his joyfulness when sinners do lay hold on his mercy. What is
God the better whether we receive his mercy or not? What is the
fountain profited, that others drink of it? Yet, such is God's goodness,
that he rejoiceth at the salvation of sinners, and is glad when his
mercy is accepted of. When the prodigal son came home, how glad
was the father? and he makes a feast, to express his joy; this was but
a type or emblem, to shew how God rejoiceth when a poor sinner
comes in, and lays hold of his mercy. What an encouragement is here
to believe in God? He is a God of pardons, Neh. 9:17. Mercy pleaseth
him, Mic. 7:18. Nothing doth prejudice us but unbelief. Unbelief
stops the current of God's mercy from running; it shuts up God's
bowels, closeth the orifice of Christ's wounds, that no healing virtue
will come out, Mat. 13:58. "He could do no mighty works there,
because of their unbelief." Why dost thou not believe in God's mercy?
Is it thy sins discourage? God's mercy can pardon great sins, nay,
because they are great, Ps. 25:11. The sea covers great rocks as well as
lesser sands; some that had an hand in crucifying Christ found
mercy. As far as the heavens are above the earth, so far is God's
mercy above our sins, Isa. 55:9. What will tempt us to believe, if not
the mercy of God!
Use 3d. Of caution. Take heed of abusing this mercy of God! Suck not
poison out of the sweet flower of God's mercy! Do not think, that
because God is merciful, you may go on in sin; this is to make mercy
become your enemy. None might touch the ark but the priests, who
by their office were more holy; none may touch this ark of God's
mercy, but such as are resolved to be holy. To sin because mercy
abounds, is the devil's logic. He that sins because of mercy is like one
that wounds his head because he hath a plaster; he that sins because

of God's mercy, shall have judgment without mercy. Mercy abused
turns to fury, Deut. 29:19, 20., "If he bless himself, saying, I shall
have peace though I walk after the imaginations of my heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst, the Lord will not spare him, but the anger of
the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against that man." Nothing
sweeter than mercy, when it is improved,—nothing fiercer, when it is
abused; nothing colder than lead, when it is taken out of the mine,—
nothing more scalding than lead, when it is heated; nothing blunter
than iron, nothing sharper when it is whetted. Ps. 103:17., "The
mercy of the Lord is upon them that fear him." Mercy is not for them
that sin and fear not, but for them that fear and sin not. God's mercy
is an holy mercy; where it pardons it heals.
QUEST. What shall we do to be interested in God's mercy?
Ans. 1. Be sensible of your wants. See how you stand in need of
mercy, pardoning, saving mercy. See yourselves orphans: Hos. 14:3.,
"In thee the fatherless findeth mercy." God bestows the alms of
mercy only on such as are indigent. Be emptied of all opinion of selfworthiness. God pours the golden oil of mercy into empty vessels.
A. 2. Go to God for mercy, Ps. 51:1., "Have mercy upon me, O God!"
Put me not off with common mercy that reprobates may have; give
me not only alcorns but pearls; give me not only mercy to feed and
clothe me, but mercy to save me; give me the cream of thy mercies;
Lord, let me have mercy and loving-kindness! Ps. 103:4., "Who
crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies." Give me
such mercy as speaks thy electing love to my soul! O pray for mercy!
God hath treasures of mercy; prayer is the key that opens these
treasures; and in prayer, be sure to carry Christ in your arms; all the
mercy comes through Christ: 1 Sam. 7:9., "Samuel took a sucking
lamb;" carry the lamb Christ in your arms,—go in his name,—present

his merits,—say, "Lord, here is Christ's blood, which is the price of
my pardon! Lord, shew me mercy, because Christ hath purchased it!"
Though God may refuse us when we come for mercy in our own
name, yet not when we come in Christ's name: plead Christ's
satisfaction, and this is such an argument as God cannot deny.
Use 4th. It exhorts such as have found mercy, to three things: 1. To
be upon Gerizzim, the mount of blessing and praising. They have not
only heard the King of hear heaven is merciful, but they have found it
so; the honey-comb of God's mercy hath dropt upon them; when in
wants, mercy supplied them; when they were nigh unto death, mercy
raised them from the sick-bed; when covered with guilt, mercy
pardoned them, Ps. 103:1., "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is
within me, bless his holy name." O how should the vessels of mercy
run over with praise! 1 Tim. 1:13., "Who was before a persecutor, and
injurious; but I obtained mercy." I was bemiracled with mercy; as the
sea overflows and breaks down the banks, so the mercy of God, did
break down the banks of my sin, and mercy did sweetly flow into my
soul. You that have been monuments of God's mercy, should be
trumpets of praise; you that have tasted the Lord is gracious, tell
others what experiences you have had of God's mercy, that you may
encourage them to seek to him for mercy, Ps. 66:16, "I will declare
what God hath done for my soul;" when I found my heart dead, God's
Spirit did come upon me mightily, and the blowing of that wind
made the withering flowers of my grace revive. O tell others of God's
goodness, that you may set others a blessing him, and that you may
make God's praises live when you are dead!—2. To love God. Mercy
should be the attractive of love: Ps. 18:1., "I will love thee, O Lord, my
strength." The Hebrew word for love, signifies love out of the inward
bowels. God's justice may make us fear him, his mercy may make us
love him. If mercy will not produce love, what will? We are to love
God for giving us our food, much more for giving us grace; for

sparing mercy, much more for saving mercy. Sure that heart is made
of marble, which the mercy of God will not dissolve in love! "I would
hate my own soul, (saith St. Augustine) if I did not find it loving
God."—3. To imitate God in shewing mercy. God is the Father of
mercy; shew yourselves to be his children, by being like him. St.
Ambrose saith, "The sum and definition of religion is, Be rich in
works of mercy, be helpful to the bodies and souls of others. Scatter
your golden seeds; let the lamp of your profession be filled with the
oil of charity. Be merciful in giving and forgiving. 'Be ye merciful, as
your heavenly Father is merciful.' "

OF THE TRUTH OF GOD
The next attribute is God's truth, Deut. 32:4., "A God of truth, and
without iniquity; just and right is he;" Ps. 57:10., "For thy mercy is
great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds." A God of
truth, Ps. 86:15., "Plenteous in truth." God is the truth. He is true: 1.
In a physical sense; true in his being; he hath a real subsistence, and
gives a being to others. 2. He is true in a moral sense; he is true sine
errore, without errors; et sine fallacia, without deceit. God is prima
veritas,—the pattern and prototype of truth. There is nothing true
but what is in God, or comes from God. I shall now speak of God's
truth, as it is taken, from his veracity in making good his promises, 1
Kings 8:56., "There hath not failed one word of all his good promise."
The promise is God's bond, God's truth is the seal set to his bond.
This is the thing to be explicated and discussed, God's truth in
fulfilling his promises.
There are two things to be observed in the promises of God to
comfort us: 1. The power of God, whereby he is able to fulfil the

promise, God hath promised to subdue our corruption, Micah 7:19.,
"He will subdue our iniquities." O! saith a believer, my corruption is
so strong, that sure I shall never get the mastery of it. Thus Abraham
looked at God's power, Rom. 4:21., "Being fully persuaded that what
God had promised he was able also to perform." He believed, that
God, who could make a world, could make dry breasts give suck. This
is faith's support, there is nothing too hard for God. He that could
bring water out of a rock, is able to bring to pass his promises.—2.
The truth of God in the promises: God's truth is the seal set to the
promise. Tit. 1:2., "In hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie
hath promised." 'Eternal life,' there is the sweetness of the promise:
'God which cannot lie,' there is the certainty of it. Mercy makes the
promise, truth fulfils it. God's providences are uncertain, but his
promises are the 'sure mercies of David,' Acts 13:24.; "God is not a
man that he should repent," 1 Sam. 15:29. The word of a prince
cannot always be taken, but God's promise is inviolable. God's truth
is one of the richest jewels of his crown, and he hath pawned this
jewel in a promise, 2 Sam. 23:5., "Although my house be not so with
God, yet he hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in
all things and sure." Although my house be not so, that is, though I
fail much of that exact purity the Lord requires, yet he hath made
with me an everlasting covenant, that he will pardon, adopt, and
glorify me; and this covenant is ordered in all things sure: "The
elements shall melt with fervent heat;" but this covenant abides firm
and inviolable, being sealed with the truth of God; nay, God hath
added to his word, his oath, Heb. 6:17., wherein God pawns his
being, life, righteousness, to make good the promise. If as oft as we
break our vows with God, he should break promise with us, it would
be very sad; but his truth is engaged in his promise, therefore it is
like the law of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be altered. "We
are not (saith Chrysostom) to believe our senses so much, as we are
to believe the promises," &c. Our senses may fail us, but the promise

cannot, being built upon the truth of God; God will not deceive the
faith of his people, nay, he cannot; "God, who cannot lie, hath
promised;" he can as well part with his Deity, as his verity. God is
said to be abundant in truth Exod. 34:6. What is that? viz. If God
hath made a promise of mercy to his people, he will be so far from
coming short of his word, that he will be better than his word. God
often doth more than he hath said, never less. He is abundant in
truth.
1. The Lord may sometimes delay a promise, but he will not deny; he
may delay a promise, God's promise may lie a good while as seed
under ground, but at last it will spring up into a crop. God promised
to deliver Israel from the iron furnace, but this promise was above
four hundred years in travail before it brought forth. Simeon had a
promise that he should not depart hence, "till he had seen the Lord's
Christ," Luke 2:26., but it was a long time first, but a little before his
death, that he did see Christ. But though God delay the promise, he
will not deny. Having given his bond, in due time the money will be
paid in.
2. God may change his promise, but he will not break his promise.
Sometimes God doth change a temporal promise into a spiritual, Ps.
85:12., "The Lord shall give that which is good," perhaps this may not
be fulfilled in a temporal sense, but a spiritual. God may let a
Christian be cut short in temporals, but God makes it up in
spirituals. If he doth not increase the basket and the store, he gives
increase of faith, and inward peace; here he changeth his promise,
but he doth not break it, he gives that which is better. If a man
promiseth to pay me in farthings, and he pays me in a better coin, in
gold, he doth not break his promise? Ps. 89:33., "I will not suffer my
faithfulness to fail." In the Hebrew, it is to lie.

OBJ. 1. But how doth this consist with the truth of God? He saith, He
will have all to be saved, 1 Tim. 2:4., yet some perish.
Ans. St. Austin understands it, not of every individual person, but
some of all sorts shall be saved; as in the ark, God saved all the living
creatures, not every bird or fish were saved, for many perished in the
flood, but all, that is, some of every kind were saved, so God will have
all to be saved, that is, some of all nations.
OBJ. It is said, Christ died for all; "he is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world," John 1:29., how doth this consist with
God's truth, when some are vessels of wrath, Rom. 9:22."
Ans. 1. We must distinguish of world. The word is taken either in a
limited sense, for the world of the elect; or in a larger sense, for both
elect and reprobates. "Christ takes away the sins of the world," that
is, the world of the elect.
A. 2. We must distinguish of Christ's dying for the world. Christ died
sufficiently for all, not effectually. There is the value of Christ's blood,
and the virtue; Christ's blood hath value enough to redeem the whole
world, but the virtue of it is applied only to such as believe. Christ's
blood is meritorious for all, not efficacious. All are not saved, because
some put away salvation from them, Acts 13:46., and vilify Christ's
blood, counting it an unholy thing, Heb. 10:29.
Use 1st. Here is a great pillar for our faith, the truth of God. Were not
he a God of truth, how could we believe in him? Our faith were fancy;
but he is truth itself, and not a word which he hath spoken shall fall
to the ground. "Truth is the object of trust." The truth of God is an
unmoveable rock, we may venture our salvation here, Isa. 59:15.,
'Truth faileth:' truth on earth doth, but not truth in heaven. God can
as well cease to be God, as cease to be true. Hath God said, he will do

good to the soul that seeks him, Lam. 3:25., He will "give rest to the
weary?" Mat. 11:28. Here is a safe anchor-hold, he will not alter the
thing which is gone forth of his lips. The public faith of heaven is
engaged for believers: can we have better security? The whole earth
hangs upon the word of God's power, and shall not our faith hang
upon the word of God's truth? Where can we rest our faith but upon
God's faithfulness? There is nothing else we can believe in, but the
truth of God; we cannot trust in an arm of flesh, we cannot trust in
our own hearts, this is to build upon the quicksands, but the truth of
God is a golden pillar for faith to stay upon. God cannot deny
himself, 2 Tim. 2:13., "If we believe not, yet he abideth faithful: he
cannot deny himself." Not to believe God's veracity, is to affront God,
1 John 5:10., "He that believeth not God, hath made him a liar." A
person of honour cannot be more affronted or provoked, than when
he is not believed. He that denies God's truth, makes the promise no
better than a forged deed; and can there be a greater affront offered
to God?
Use 2d. Of terror to the wicked. God is a God of truth, and he is true
in his threatenings; the threatenings are a flying roll against sinners.
God hath threatened to "wound the hairy scalp of such a one as goeth
on still in his trespasses," Ps. 68:21. He hath threatened to judge
adulterers, Heb. 13:3. To be avenged upon the malicious, Ps. 10:14.,
"Thou beholdest mischief and spight, to requite it with thy hand:" To
"rain fire and brimstone" upon the sinner, Ps. 11:6. And God is as
true in his threatenings as his promises; God hath oft, to shew his
truth, executed his threatenings, and let his thunderbolts of
judgment fall upon sinners in this life; he struck Herod in the act of
his pride; he hath punished blasphemers: Olympius, an Arian
bishop, reproached and blasphemed the blessed Trinity, immediately
lightning fell down from heaven upon him, and consumed him. God

is as true in his threatenings as in his promises; let us fear the
threatening, that we may not feel it.
Use 3d. Is God a God of truth? let us be like God in truth. 1. We must
be true in our words. Pythagoras being asked what made men like
God? answered, "When they speak truth." It is the note of a man that
shall go to heaven, Ps. 15:2., "He that speaketh the truth in his heart."
Truth in words is opposed, (1.) To lying, Eph. 4:25., "Putting away
lying, speak every man truth to his neighbour." Lying is when one
speaks that for truth, which he knows to be false. A liar is most
opposite to the God of truth. There are (as Austin saith) two sorts of
lies: 1. An officious lie, when a man tells a lie for his profit; as, when a
tradesman saith his commodity cost him so much, when perhaps it
did not cost him half so much; he that will lie in his trade, shall lie in
hell. 2. A jesting lie: when a man tells a lie in sport, to make others
merry, he goes laughing to hell. When you tell a lie, you make
yourselves like the devil, John 8:44., "The devil is a liar," and the
father of it. He deceived our first parents by a lie. Some are so wicked
that they will not only speak an untruth, but will swear to it; nay,
they will wish a curse upon themselves, if that untruth be not true. As
I have read of a woman, one Anne Avarie, 1575, who being in a shop,
wished that she might sink if she had not paid for the wares she took;
she fell down speechless immediately, and died in the place. A liar is
not fit to live in a commonwealth. Lying takes away all society and
converse with men; how can you converse with him whom you
cannot believe what he saith? Lying shuts men out of heaven, Rev.
22:15., "Without are dogs, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie."
And as it is a great sin to tell a lie, so it is a worse sin to teach a lie,
Isa. 9:15., "The prophet that teacheth lies." He who broacheth error
teacheth lies; he spreads the plague; he not only damns himself, but
helps to damn others. (2.) Truth in words is opposed to dissembling.
The heart and tongue should go together, as the dial goes exactly

with the sun. To speak fair to one's face, and not to mean what one
speaks, is no better than a lie: Ps. 55:21., "The words of his mouth
were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart." Some have an
art at this, they can flatter and hate. Hierom, speaking of the Arians,
saith, "they pretended friendship, they kissed my hands, but plotted
mischief against me." Prov. 29:5., "A man that flattereth his
neighbour, spreadeth a net for his feet." Impia subdulci melle venena
latent,—falsehood in friendship is a lie. Counterfeiting of friendship
is worse than counterfeiting of money. This is contrary to God who is
a God of truth.
2. We must be true in our profession of religion. Let practice go along
with profession, Eph. 4:24., "Righteousness and true holiness."
Hypocrisy in religion is a lie; the hypocrite is like a face in a glass,
there is the show of a face, but no true face, so he makes show of
holiness, but hath no truth of it, it is but the face in the glass.
Ephraim pretended to be that which he was not; and what saith God
of him? Hos. 11:12., "Ephraim compasseth me about with lies." By a
lie in our words we deny the truth; by a lie in our profession we
disgrace it. Not to be what we profess to God, is telling a lie; and the
scripture makes it little better than blasphemy, Rev. 2:9., "I know the
blasphemy of them that say they are Jews, and are not." O! I beseech
you, labour in this to be like God; he is a God of truth; he can as well
part with his Deity as his verity; be, I say, like God, be true in your
words, be true in your profession; God's children are children that
will not lie, Ps. 51:6. When God sees "Truth in the inward parts," and
"lips in which is no guile," now he sees his own image in you; this
draws God's heart towards you; likeness draws love.

BUT ONE GOD

QUEST. V. The fifth question is, Are there more Gods than one?
Ans. There is but one only, the living and true God.
That there is a God hath been proved; and those that will not believe
the verity of his essence, shall feel the severity of his wrath, Deut.
6:4., "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord." He is the 'only
God,' Deut. 4:39., "Know therefore this day, and consider it in thy
heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth
beneath, there is none else." Isa. 45:21., "A just God and a Saviour;
there is none besides me." There are many titular gods; kings
represent God; their regal sceptre is an emblem of his power and
authority. Judges are called 'gods,' Ps. 82:6., "I have said, ye are
gods," viz. set in God's place to do justice; but dying gods, v. 7., "Ye
shall die like men." 1 Cor. 8:5, 6., "There be that are called gods;"
"but to us there is but one God."
Argument 1. There is but one First Cause that hath its being of itself,
and on which all other beings depend. As in the heavens, the primum
mobile moves all the other orbs, so God gives life and motion to
every thing existent. There can be but one God, because there is but
one First Cause.
2. There is but one infinite Being, therefore there is but one God.
There cannot be two infinites: Jer. 23:24., "Do not I fill heaven and
earth," saith the Lord? If there be one infinite, filling all places at
once, how can there be any room for another infinite to subsist?
3. There is but one Omnipotent Power. If there be two Omnipotents,
then we must always suppose a content between these two; that
which one would do, the other power being equal, would oppose, and
so all things would be brought into confusion. If a ship should have
two pilots of equal power, one would be ever crossing the other;

when one would sail, the other would cast anchor, here were a
confusion, and the ship must needs perish. The order and harmony
in the world, the constant and uniform government of all things, is a
clear argument that there is but one Omnipotent, one God that rules
all: Isa. 44:6., "I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there
is no God."
Use 1st. Of information. If there be but one God, then (1.) it excludes
all other gods. Some have feigned that there were two gods: so the
Valentinians; others, that there were many gods: so the Polytheists.
The Persians worshipped the sun; the Egyptians the lion and
elephant; the Grecians worshipped Jupiter; these, I may say, "err,
not knowing the scriptures," Mat. 22:29. Their faith is a fable. God
hath given them up to strong delusions, to believe a lie, that they may
be damned, 2 Thess. 2:11.—2. If there be but one God, then there can
be but one true religion in the world, Eph. 4:5., "One Lord, one
faith." If there were many gods, then there might be many religions,
every god would be worshipped in his way; but if there be but one
God, there is but one religion; one Lord, one faith. Some say, we may
be saved in any religion. It is absurd to imagine that God who is One
in essence, should appoint several religions in which he will be
worshipped. It is as dangerous to set up a false religion as to set up a
false god. There are many ways to hell; men may go thither which
way their fancy leads them; but there is but one direct road to
heaven, viz. faith and holiness. There is no way to be saved but this:
as there is but one God, so there is but one true religion.—3. If there
be but one God, then you have but One that you need chiefly to study
to please, and that is God. If there were divers gods, we should be
hard put to it how to please them all; one would command one thing,
another the quite contrary, and to please two contrary masters, is
impossible; but there is but one God, therefore you have but One to
please. As in a kingdom there is but one king, therefore every one

seeks to ingratiate himself into his favour, Prov. 19:6., so there is but
one true God; therefore here lies our main work to please him. Be
sure to please God, whoever else you displease. This was Enoch's
wisdom, Heb. 11:5., he had this testimony before he died, that "he
pleased God."
QUEST. What doth this pleasing God imply?
Ans. 1. We please God when we comply with his will. It was Christ's
meat and drink to do his Father's will, John 4:34., and so he pleased
him: Mat. 3:17., "A voice came from heaven, saying, this is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." It is the will of God that we
should be holy, 1 Thess. 4:11. Now, when we are bespangled with
holiness, our lives are walking Bibles; this is according to God's will
and it pleaseth him.
A. 2. We please God, when we do the work that he sets us about,
John 17:4., "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do,"
viz. my mediatory work. Many finish their lives, but do not finish
their work. Our work God hath cut out for us is to observe the first
and second tables. In the first, is set down our duty towards God; in
the second our duty towards man. Such as make morality the chief
and sole part of religion, set the second table above the first; nay,
they take away the first table; for, if prudence, justice, temperance,
be enough to save, then what needs the first table? and so our
worship towards God shall be quite left out. But those two tables
which God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.
A. 3. We please God, when we dedicate our heart to give him the best
of every thing. Abel gave God the fat of the offering, Gen. 4:4.
Domitian would not have his image carved in wood, or iron, but in
gold. Then we please God, when we serve him with love, fervency,
alacrity; we give him golden services, here lies our wisdom and piety,

to please God. There is but one God, therefore there is but One whom
we have chiefly to please, namely, God.
A. 4. If there be but one God, then we must pray to none but God.
The Papists pray to saints and angels: 1. To saints. A Popish writer
saith, "when we pray to the saints departed, they being touched with
compassion, say the like to God for us, as the disciples did to Christ
for the Canaanitish woman, Mat. 15:23., 'Send her away, for she
crieth after us.' " The saints above know not our wants, Isa. 63:16.,
Abraham is ignorant of us; or, if they did, we we have no warrant to
pray to them. Prayer is a part of divine worship, which must only be
given to God. 2. They pray to angels. Angel-worship is forbidden, Col.
2:18, 19.; and that we may not pray to angels, is clear from Rom.
10:14., "How shall they call then on him in whom they have not
believed?" We may not pray to any but whom we may believe in; but
we may not believe in any angel, therefore we may not pray to him.
There is but one God, and it is a sin to invoke any but only God.
A. 5. If there be but one God, who is 'above all,' Eph. 4:6., then he
must be loved above all. 1. We must love him with a love of
appreciation; set the highest estimate on him, who is the only
fountain of being and bliss.—2. We must love him with a love of
complacency: amor est complacentia amantis is amato, ACQUIN.
Our love to other things must be more indifferent; some drops of
love may run beside to the creature, but the full stream must run
towards God; the creature may have the milk of our love, but we
must keep the cream of our love for God; God who is above all, must
be loved above all, Ps. 73:25., "There is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee."
Use 2d. Of Caution. If there be but one God, then let us take heed of
setting up more gods than one: Ps. 16:4., "Their sorrows shall be

multiplied, that hasten after another God; their drink-offerings of
blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into my lips." God is a
jealous God, and he will not endure that we should have other gods.
It is easy to commit idolatry with the creature: 1. Some make a god of
pleasure, 2 Tim. 3:4., "Lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God."
Whatever we love more than God, we make a god.—2. Others make
money their god; the covetous man worships the image of gold,
therefore he is called an idolater, Eph. 5:5. That which a man trusts
to, he makes his god; but he makes the wedge of gold his hope, he
makes money his creator, redeemer and comforter. It is his creator,—
if he hath money, then he thinks he is made; it is his redeemer,—if he
be in danger, he trusts in his money to redeem him out; it is his
comforter,—if at any time he be sad, the golden harp drives away the
evil spirit; so that money is his god. God made man of the the dust of
the earth, and man makes a god of the dust of the earth.—3. Another
makes a god of his child, sets his child in God's room, and so
provokes God to take it away. If you lean too hard upon a glass, it will
break; many break their children by leaning too hard upon them.—4.
Others make a god of their belly, Phil. 3:19., "Whose god is their
belly." Clemens Alexandrinus writes of a fish that hath its heart in its
belly,—an emblem of epicures, their heart is in their belly, they mind
nothing but indulging the sensual appetite; they do sacrificari lari,—
their belly is their god, and to this they pour drink-offerings. Thus
men make many gods. The apostle names the wicked man's trinity, 1
John 2:16., "The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life;" the lust of the flesh,—pleasure; the lust of the eye,—money;
pride of life,—honour. O take heed of this! Whatever you deify
besides God, will prove a bramble; and fire will come out of this
bramble and devour you, Judg. 9:15.
Use 3d. Of reproof. If the Lord Jehovah be the only true God, then it
reproves those who renounce the true God, I mean, such as seek to

familiar spirits. This is too much practised among them that call
themselves Christians. It is a sin condemned by the law of God, Deut.
18:10, 11., "There shall not be found among you any one that consults
with familiar spirits." How ordinary is this? If people have lost any of
their goods, they send to wizards to know how they may come by
their goods again. What is this but consulting with the devil? And so
you renounce God and your baptism? What! because you have lost
your goods, will you lose your souls too? 2 Kings 1:6., "Thus saith the
Lord, is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that thou sendest
to inquire of Beelzebub?" So, is it not because you think there is not a
God in heaven, that ye ask counsel of the devil? If any here be guilty,
be deeply humbled, ye have renounced the true God; better be
without the goods ye have lost than have the devil help you to them
again.
Use 4th. Of Exhortation. If there be but one God, as God is one, so let
them that serve him be one. This is what Christ prayed so heartily
for, John 17:21., "That they all may be one." Christians should be one,
1. In judgment; the apostle exhorts to be all of one mind, 1 Cor. 1:18.
How sad is it to see religion wearing a coat of divers colours; to see
Christians of so many opinions, and going so many different ways? It
is Satan hath sown these tares of division, Mat. 13:39. He first
divided men from God, and now divides one man from another.—2.
One in affection. They should have one heart, Acts 4:32., "The
multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul."
As in music, though there be several strings of a viol, yet all make one
sweet harmony: so, though there are several Christians, yet there
should be one sweet harmony of affection among them. There is but
one God, and they that serve him should be one. There is nothing
would render the true religion more lovely, or make more proselytes
to it, than to see the professors of it tied together with the heartstrings of love, Ps. 133:1., "Behold how good and how pleasant a

thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity!" It is as the sweet
dew on Hermon, and the fragrant ointment poured on Aaron's head.
If God be one, let all that profess him be of one mind, and one heart;
this fulfils Christ's prayer, "that they all may be one."—2. If there be
but one God, let us labour to clear the title, that this God is ours, Ps.
48:14., "This God is our God." What comfort can it be to hear that
there is a God, and that he is the only God, unless he be our God?
What is Deity without property? O let us labour to clear the title! Beg
the Holy Spirit: the Spirit works by faith; by faith we are one with
Christ, and through Christ we come to have God for our God, and so
all his glorious fulness is made over to us by a deed of gift.
Use 5th. What cause have we to be thankful, that we have the
knowledge of the only true God? How many are brought up in
blindness? Some worship Mahomet; divers of the Indians worship
the devil; they light a candle to him, that he should not hurt them.
Such as know not the true God must needs stumble into hell in the
dark. O be thankful that we are born in such a land, where the light
of the gospel hath shined! To have the knowledge of the true God, is
more than if we had mines of gold, rocks of diamonds, islands of
spices; especially if God hath savingly revealed himself to us,—if he
hath given us eyes to see the light,—if we so know God as to be
known of him, as to love him, and believe in him: Matth. 11:25., we
can never be enough thankful to God, that he hath hid the knowledge
of himself from the wise and prudent of the world, and hath revealed
it unto us.

OF THE TRINITY
QUEST. IV. HOW many persons are there in the Godhead?

Ans. Three persons, yet but one God.—1 John 5:7., "There are three
that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one."
God is but one, yet are there three distinct persons subsisting in one
Godhead. This is a sacred mystery which the light within could never
have discovered. As the two natures in Christ, yet but one person, is a
wonder: so three persons, yet but one Godhead. I am in a great deep:
the Father God,—the Son God,—the Holy Ghost God,—yet not three
Gods, but one God. The three persons in the blessed Trinity are
distinguished, but not divided; three substances, but one essence.
This is a divine riddle, where one make three, and three make but
one. Our narrow thoughts can no more comprehend the Trinity in
Unity, than a little nut-shell will hold all the water in the sea. Let me
shadow it out by this similitude: in the body of the sun, there is the
substance of the sun, the beams, and the heat; the beams are
begotten of the sun, the heat proceeds both from the sun and the
beams; but these three, though different, are not divided; they all
three make one sun: so in the blessed Trinity, the Son is begotten of
the Father, the Holy Ghost proceeds from both; yet though they are
three distinct persons, yet but one God. First, let me speak of the
Unity in Trinity; then of the Trinity in Unity.
I. Of the Unity in Trinity. The Unity of the persons in the Godhead
consists in two things:
1. The identity of essence. In the Trinity there is an oneness in
essence: the three persons are of the same divine nature and
substance; so that in Deo non est magis et minus,—there are no
degrees in the Godhead; one person is not God more than another.
2. The Unity of the persons in the Godhead consists in the mutual inbeing of them, or their being in one together. The three persons are

so united that one person is in another, and with another: John
17:21., "Thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee."
II. Let me speak of the Trinity in Unity. 1. The first person in the
Trinity is God the Father: he is called the first person, in respect of
order, not dignity: for God the Father hath no essential perfection
which the other persons have not; he is not more wise, more holy,
more powerful, than the other persons are; a priority, not a
superiority.
2. The second person in the Trinity is Jesus Christ, who is begotten of
the Father before all time, Prov. 8:23, 24, 25., "I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. When there
were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were no fountains
abounding with water. Before the mountains were settled; before the
hills, was I brought forth." Which scripture declares the eternal
generation of the Son of God. This second person in the Trinity, who
is Jehovah, is become our Jesus. The scripture calls him the branch
of David, Jer. 23:5., and I may call him the flower of the virgin
having assumed our nature. "By him all that believe are justified,"
Acts 13:39.
3. The third person in the Trinity, is the Holy Ghost who proceeds
from the Father and the Son; his work is to illuminate the mind, and
enkindle sacred motions. The essence of the Spirit is in heaven, and
every where; but the influence of it is in the hearts of believers: This
is that blessed Spirit who gives us the holy unction, 1 John 2:20.
Though Christ merits grace for us, it is the Holy Ghost works it in us:
Though Christ makes the purchase, it is the Holy Ghost makes the
assurance, and seals us up to the day of redemption. Thus I have
spoken of all the three persons. The Trinity of persons may be proved
out of Mat. 3:16., "Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway

out of the water, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove,
and lighting upon him; and lo, a voice from heaven, saying, This is
my beloved Son." Here are three names given to the three persons.
He who spake with a voice from heaven, was God the Father; he who
was baptized in Jordan, was God the Son; he who descended in the
likeness of a dove, was God the Holy Ghost. Thus I have shewn you
the unity of essence, and the Trinity of persons.
Use 1st. It confutes the Jews and the Turks, who believe only the first
person in the Godhead. This cuts asunder the sinews of our comfort.
Take away the distinction of the persons in the Trinity, and you
overthrow man's redemption; for God the Father being offended
with man for sin, how shall he be pacified without a mediator? This
mediator is Christ, he makes our peace. And Christ having died, and
shed his blood, how shall this blood be applied, but by the Holy
Ghost? Therefore, if there be not three persons in the Godhead,
man's salvation cannot be wrought out; if there be no second person
in the Trinity, then there is no redeemer; if no third person, then
there is no comforter. And so the plank is taken away by which we
should get to heaven.
2. It confutes the execrable opinion of the Socinians, who deny the
Divinity of the Lord Jesus; they make him only to be a creature of an
higher rank. As the Papists blot out the second commandment, so
the Socinians would the second person in the Trinity. If to oppose
Christ's members be such a sin, what is it to oppose Christ himself?
(1.) Jesus Christ is coequal with God the Father, Phil. 2:6., "He
thought it no robbery to be equal with God." (2.) He is co-eternal
with God the Father, Prov. 8:23., "I was from the beginning;" for else
there was a time when God was without a Son, and so he should be
no Father; nay, else there was a time when God was without his
glory, for Christ is the brightness of his Father's glory, Heb. 1:3. (3.)

He is co-essential with God the Father. The Godhead subsists in
Christ, Col. 2:9., "For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead
bodily." It is said, not only Christ was 'with God' before the
beginning, but he 'was God,' John 1:1., and 1 Tim. 3:16., 'God
manifest in the flesh.' The title of Lord, so often given to Christ, in
the New Testament, doth answer to the title of Jehovah in the Old
Testament, Deut. 6:5; Mat. 22:37.: so that Christ hath a co-eternity,
and con-substantiality with his Father, John 10:30., "I and my
Father are one." It were blasphemy for any angel to speak thus. Yet
further, to prove Christ's Godhead, consider 1st, The glorious
incommunicable attributes belonging to God the Father are ascribed
to Christ. 1. Is God the Father omnipotent? So is Jesus Christ. He is
the Almighty, Rev. 1:8.; he creates, Col. 1:16. 2. Is God the Father
infinitely immense, filling all places? Jer. 23:24., so is Jesus Christ.
While Christ was on the earth by his bodily presence, he was at the
same time in the bosom of the Father, John 3:13., in regard of his
divine presence. 2dly, The same jura regalia, or prerogatives royal,
which belong to God the Father, belong also to Christ: 1. Doth God
the Father seal pardons, this is a flower of Christ's crown, Mat. 9:2.,
"Thy sins be forgiven thee." Nor doth Christ only remit sin organice,
as ministers do, by virtue of a power delegated to them from God;
but Christ doth it by his own power and authority.—2. Is God the
Father the adequate object of faith? Is he to be believed in? So is his
Son, John 14:1.—3. Doth adoration belong to God the Father? So it
doth to the Son, Heb. 1:6., "Let all the angels of God worship him."
How sacrilegious therefore is the Socinian, who would rob Christ of
the best flower of his crown, his Godhead? They that deny Christ to
be God, must greatly wrest, or else deny the scripture to be the word
of God.
3. It confutes the Arians, who deny the Holy Ghost to be God. The
eternal Godhead subsists in the Holy Ghost, John 16:13., "He will

guide you into all truth." Christ speaks not there of an attribute, but
of a person; and that the Godhead subsists in the person of the Holy
Ghost, appears thus: the Spirit, who gives diversity of gifts, is said to
be the same Lord, and the same God, 1 Cor. 12:5, 6. The black and
unpardonable sin is said in a special manner to be committed against
the Godhead subsisting in the Holy Ghost, Matth. 12:32. The mighty
power of God is made manifest by the Holy Ghost; he changeth the
hearts of men. The devil would have Christ prove himself to be God,
by turning stones into bread; but thus the Holy Ghost shews his
Godhead, by turning stones into flesh, Ezek. 36:26., "I will take away
the stony heart; and give you a heart of flesh." Yet further, the power
and Godhead of the Holy Ghost appeared in the effecting the glorious
conception of our Lord Jesus Christ; the very shadow of the Holy
Ghost made a virgin conceive, Luke 1:35. The Holy Ghost works
miracles, which transcend the sphere of nature; as raising the dead,
Rom. 8:11. To him belongs divine worship, our souls and bodies are
the temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6:19., in which temples he is to
be worshipped, v. 20. We are baptized in the name of the Holy
Ghost; therefore either we must believe his Godhead, or renounce
our baptism in his name. Methinks, it were enough for such men as
have not so much as heard whether there be an Holy Ghost, Acts
19:2., to deny his Deity; but that any who go for Christians, should
deny this article of their creed, seems to me very strange. They who
would wittingly and willingly blot out the third person, shall have
their names blotted out of the book of life.
Use 2d. Of exhortation. 1st, Believe this doctrine, the Trinity of
persons in the unity of essence. The Trinity is purely an object of
faith; the plumb-line of reason is too short to fathom this mystery;
but where reason cannot wade, there faith must swim. There are
some truths in religion may be demonstrated by reason, as that there
is a God; but the Trinity of persons in the Unity of essence is wholly

supernatural, and must be believed by faith. This sacred doctrine,
though it be not against reason, yet it is above reason. Those
illuminated philosophers, that could find out the causes of things,
and discourse of the magnitude and influence of the stars,—the
nature of minerals,—could never, by their deepest search, find out
the mystery of the Trinity: this is of divine revelation, and must be
adored with humble believing. We can be no good Christians,
without the firm belief of the Trinity. How can we pray to God the
Father, but in the name of Christ, and through the help of the Spirit?
Believe the glorious Trinity. How are the Quakers to be abhorred,
who go under the name of Christians, yet undervalue and renounce
Jesus Christ. I have read of some of the Quakers, who speak thus:
"We deny the person of him whom you call Christ, and affirm, That
they who expect to be saved by that Christ without works, will be
damned in that faith?" Could the devil himself speak worse
blasphemy? They would pull up all religion by the roots, and take
away that corner-stone, on which the hope of our salvation is built.—
2dly, If there be one God subsisting in three persons, then let us give,
(1.) Equal reverence to all the persons in the Trinity. There is not
more or less in the Trinity; the Father is not more God than the Son
and Holy Ghost. There is an order in the Godhead, but no degrees;
one person hath not a majority or supereminency above another,
therefore we must give equal worship to all the Persons: John 5:23.,
"That all men should honour the Son, even as they honour the
Father." Adore Unity in Trinity.—3dly, Obey all the Persons in the
blessed Trinity, for all of them are God. 1. Obey God the Father; his
words, either perceptive or minatory, must be observed. Christ
himself, as man, obeyed God the Father, John 4:34., much more then
must we, Deut. 27:10.—2. Obey God the Son, Ps. 2:12., "Kiss the Son,
lest he be angry?" Kiss him with a kiss of obedience; Christ's
commands are not grievous, 1 John 5:3. Nothing he commands but is
for our interest and benefit. O then kiss the Son! Why do the elders

throw down their crowns at the feet of Christ, and fall down before
the Lamb? Rev. 4:10, 11, but to testify their subjection, and to profess
their readiness to serve and obey him.—3. Obey God the Holy Ghost.
Our souls are breathed into us by the glorious Spirit, Job 33:4., "The
Spirit of God hath made me." Our souls are adorned by the blessed
Spirit, every grace is a divine sparkle lighted in the soul by the Holy
Ghost. Nay, more, the Spirit of God sanctified Christ's human nature;
he united it with the divine, and fitted the Man Christ to be our
Mediator. Well then doth this third person in the Trinity, the Holy
Ghost, deserve to be obeyed; he is God, and this tribute of homage
and obedience is to be paid him by us.
