PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 28 of 28
The Sciences as Sources of Illustration


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 28. The Sciences as Sources of Illustration.

CHAPTER XXVIII
THE SCIENCES AS SOURCES OF ILLUSTRATION
ASTRONOMY
I propose, brethren, if I am able to do it,--and I am somewhat
dubious upon that point,--to give you a set of lectures at intervals

upon THE VARIOUS SCIENCES AS SOURCES OF ILLUSTRATION.
It seems to me that every student for the Christian ministry ought to
know at least something of every science; he should intermeddle with
every form of knowledge that may be useful in his life's work. God
has made all things that are in the world to be our teachers, and
there is something to be learned from every one of them; and as he
would never be a thorough student who did not attend all classes at
which he was expected to be present, so he who does not learn from
all things that God has made will never gather all the food that his
soul needs, nor will he be likely to attain to that perfection of mental
manhood which will enable him to be a fully-equipped teacher of
others.
I shall commence with the science of ASTRONOMY; and you will, at
the beginning, understand that I am not going to deliver an
astronomical lecture, nor to mention all the grand facts and details of
that fascinating science; but I intend simply to use astronomy as one
of the many fields of illustration that the Lord has provided for us.
Let me say, however, that the science itself is one which ought to
receive much attention from all of us. It relates to many of the
greatest wonders in nature, and its effect upon the mind is truly
marvellous. The themes on which astronomy discourses are so
grand, the wonders disclosed by the telescope are so sublime that,
very often, minds that have been unable to receive knowledge
through other channels have become remarkably receptive while
they have been studying this science. There is an instance of a
brother, who was one of the students in this College, and who
seemed to be a dreadful dolt; we really thought he never would learn
anything, and that we should have to give him up in despair. But I
introduced to him a little book called The Young Astronomer; and he
afterwards said that, as he read it, he felt just as if something had
cracked inside his head, or as if some string had been snapped. He
had laid hold of such enlarged thoughts that I believe his cranium
did actually experience an expansion which it ought to have
undergone in his childhood, and which it did undergo by the

marvellous force of the thoughts suggested by the study of even the
elements of astronomical science.
This science ought to be the special delight of ministers of the gospel,
for surely it brings us into closer connection with God than almost
any other science does. It has been said that an undevout astronomer
is mad. I should say that an undevout man of any sort is mad, with
the worst form of madness; but, certainly, he who has become
acquainted with the stars in the heavens, and who yet has not found
out the great Father of lights, the Lord who made them all, must be
stricken with a dire madness. Notwithstanding all his learning, he
must be afflicted with a mental incapacity which places him almost
below the level of the beasts that perish.
Kepler, the great mathematical astronomer, who has so well
explained many of the laws which govern the universe, closes one of
his books, his Harmonics, with this reverent and devout expression
of his feelings: "I give thee thanks, Lord and Creator, that thou hast
given me joy through thy creation; for I have been ravished with the
work Of thy hands. I have revealed unto mankind the glory of thy
works, as far as my limited spirit could conceive their infinitude.
Should I have brought forward anything that is unworthy of thee, or
should I have sought my own fame, be graciously pleased to forgive
me." And you know how the mighty Newton, a very prince among the
sons of men, was continually driven to his knees as he looked
upwards to the skies, and discovered fresh wonders in the starry
heavens. Therefore, the science which tends to bring men to bow in
humility before the Lord should always be a favourite study with us
whose business it is to inculcate reverence for God in all who come
under our influence.
The science of astronomy would never have become available to us in
many of its remarkable details if it had not been for the discovery or
invention of the telescope. Truth is great, but it does not savingly
affect us till we become personally acquainted with it. The knowledge
of the gospel, as it is revealed to us in the Word of God, makes it true

to us; and oftentimes the Bible is to us what the telescope is to the
astronomer. The Scriptures do not make the truth; but they reveal it
in a way in which our poor, feeble intellect, when enlightened by the
Holy Spirit, is able to behold and comprehend it.
From a book* to which I am indebted for many quotations in this
lecture, I learn that the telescope was discovered in this singular
manner: "A maker of spectacles at Middleburg stumbled upon the
discovery owing to his children directing his attention to the
enlarged appearance of the weathercock of a church, as accidentally
seen through two spectacle-glasses, held between the fingers some
distance apart. This was one of childhood's inadvertent acts; and
seldom has there been a parallel example of mighty results springing
out of such a trivial circumstance. It is strange to reflect upon the
playful pranks of boyhood being connected in their issue, and at no
distant date, with enlarging the known bounds of the planetary
system, resolving the nebula of Orion, and revealing the richness of
the firmament." In a similar way, a simple incident has often been
the means of revealing to men the wonders of divine grace. What a
certain individual only meant to be trifling with divine things, God
has overruled for his soul's salvation. He stepped in to hear a sermon
as he might have gone to the theatre to see a play; but God's Spirit
carried the truth to his heart, and revealed to him the deep things of
the kingdom, and his own personal interest in them.
I think that incident of the discovery of the telescope might be
usefully employed as an illustration of the connection between little
causes and great results, showing how the providence of God is
continually making small things to be the means of bringing about
wonderful and important revolutions. It may often happen that what
seems to us to be a matter of pure accident, with nothing at all
notable about it, may really have the effect of changing the entire
current of our life, and it may be influential also in turning the lives
of many others in quite a new direction.

When once the telescope had been discovered, then the numbers and
position and movements of the stars became increasingly visible,
until at the present time we are able to study the wonders of the
stellar sky, and continually to learn more and more of the marvels
that are there displayed by the hand of God. The telescope has
revealed to us much more of the sun, and the moon, and the stars,
than we could ever have discovered without its aid. Dr. Livingstone,
on account of his frequently using the sextant when he was travelling
in Africa, was spoken of by the natives as the white man who could
bring down the sun, and carry it under his arm. That is what the
telescope has done for us, and that is what faith in the gospel has
done for us in the spiritual heavens; it has brought down to us the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and given us the high eternal
things to be our present possession, and our perpetual joy.
Thus, you see, the telescope itself may be made to furnish us with
many valuable illustrations. We may also turn to good account the
lessons to be learned by the study of the stars for the purpose of
navigation. The mariner, crossing the trackless sea, by taking
astronomical observations, can steer himself with accuracy to his
desired haven. Captain Basil Hall tells us, in the book I have
previously mentioned, that "he once sailed from San Blas, on the
West Coast of Mexico; and, after a voyage of eight thousand miles,
occupying eighty-nine days, he arrived off Rio de Janeiro, having in
this interval passed through the Pacific Ocean, rounded Cape Horn,
and crossed the South Atlantic, without making land, or seeing a
single sail except an American whaler. When within a week's sail of
Rio, he set seriously about determining, by lunar observations, the
position of his ship, and then steered his course by those common
principles of navigation which may be safely employed for short
distances between one known station and another. Having arrived
within what he considered, from his computations, fifteen or twenty
miles of the coast, he hove to, at four o'clock in the morning, to await
the break of day, and then bore up, proceeding cautiously on account
of a thick fog. As this cleared away, the crew had the satisfaction of
seeing the great Sugar-Loaf Rock, which stands on one side of the

harbour's mouth, so nearly right ahead that they had not to alter
their course above a point in order to hit the entrance of the port.
This was the first land they had seen for nearly three months, after
crossing so many seas, and being set backwards and forwards by
innumerable currents and foul winds, The effect upon all on board
was electric; and, giving way to their admiration, the sailors greeted
the commander with a hearty cheer.
In a similar manner, we also sail by guidance from the heavenly
bodies, and we have for a long season no sight of land, and
sometimes do not even see a passing sail; and yet, if we take our
observations correctly, and follow the track which they point out, we
shall have the great blessing, when we are about to finish our voyage,
of seeing, not the great Sugar-Loaf Rock, but the Fair Haven of Glory
right straight before us. We shall not have to alter our course even a
single point; and, as we sail into the heavenly harbour, what songs of
joy will we raise, not in glorification of our own skill, but in praise of
the wondrous Captain and Pilot who has guided us over life's stormy
sea, and enabled us to sail in safety even where we could not see our
way!
Kepler makes a wise remark, when speaking about the mathematical
system by which the course of a star could be predicted. After
describing the result of his observations, and declaring his firm belief
that the will of the Lord is the supreme power in the laws of nature,
he says, "But if there be any man who is too dull to receive this
science, I advise that, leaving the school of astronomy, he follow his
own path, and desist from this wandering through the universe; and,
lifting up his natural eyes, with which he alone can see, pour himself
out in his own heart, in praise of God the Creator; being certain that
he gives no less worship to God than the astronomer, to whom God
has given to see more clearly with his inward eye, and who, for what
he has himself discovered, both can and will glorify God."
That is, I think, a very beautiful illustration of what you may say to
any poor illiterate man in your congregation, "Well, my friend, if you

cannot comprehend this system of theology which I have explained
to you, if these doctrines seem to you to be utterly incomprehensible,
if you cannot follow me in my criticism upon the Greek text, if you
cannot quite catch the poetical idea that I tried to give you just now,
which is so charming to my own mind, nevertheless, if you know no
more than that your Bible is true, that you yourself are a sinner, and
that Jesus Christ is your Saviour, go on your way, and worship and
adore, and think of God as you are able to do. Never mind about the
astronomers, and the telescopes, and the stars, and the sun, and the
moon; worship the Lord in your own fashion. Altogether apart from
my theological knowledge, and my explanation of the doctrines
revealed in the Scriptures, the Bible itself, and the precious truth you
have received into your own soul, through the teaching of the Holy
Spirit, will be quite enough to make you an acceptable worshipper of
the Most High God."
I suppose you are all aware that among the old systems of astronomy
was one which placed the earth in the centre, and made the sun, and
the moon, and the stars revolve around it. "Its three fundamental
principles were the immobility of the earth, its central position, and
the daily revolution of all the heavenly bodies around it in circular
orbits."
Now, in a similar fashion, there is a way of making a system of
theology of which man is the centre, by which it is implied that Christ
and His atoning sacrifice are only made for man's sake, and that the
Holy Spirit is merely a great Worker on man's behalf, and that even
the great and glorious Father is to be viewed simply as existing for
the sake of making man happy. Well, that may be the system of
theology adopted by some; but, brethren, we must not fall into that
error, for, just as the earth is not the centre of the universe, so man is
not the grandest of all beings. God has been pleased highly to exalt
man; but we must remember how the psalmist speaks of him: "When
I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars, which thou hast ordained; what is man, that thou art mindful
of him; and the son of man, that thou visitest him?" In another place,

David says, "Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him!
or the son of man, that thou makest account of him! Man is like to
vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth away." Man cannot be
the centre of the theological universe, he is altogether too
insignificant a being to occupy such a position, and the scheme of
redemption must exist for some other end than that of merely
making man happy, or even of making him holy. The salvation of
man must surely be first of all for the glory of God; and you have
discovered the right form of Christian doctrine when you have found
the system that has God in the centre, ruling and controlling
according to the good pleasure of His will. Do not dwarf man so as to
make it appear that God has no care for him; for if you do that, you
slander God. Give to man the position that God has assigned to him;
by doing so, you will have a system of theology in which all the truths
of revelation and experience will move in glorious order and
harmony around the great central orb, the Divine Sovereign Ruler of
the universe, God over all, blessed forever.
You may, however, any one of you, make another mistake by
imagining yourself to be the centre of a system. That foolish notion is
a good illustration, I think. There are some men whose fundamental
principles are, first of all, their own immobility; what they are, they
always are to be, and they are right, and no one can stir them;
secondly, their position is central, for them suns rise and set, and
moons do wax and wane . For them, their wives exist; for them, their
children are born; for them, everything is placed where it appears in
God's universe; and they judge all things according to this one rule,
"How will it benefit me?" That is the beginning and the end of their
grand system, and they expect the daily revolution, if not of all the
heavenly bodies certainly of all the earthly bodies around them. The
sun, the moon, and the eleven stars are to make obeisance to them.
Well, brethren, that is an exploded theory so far as the earth is
concerned, and there is no truth in such a notion with reference to
ourselves. We may cherish the erroneous idea; but the general public
will not, and the sooner the grace of God expels it from us, the better,

so that we may take our proper position in a far higher system that
any of which we can ever be the centre.
THE SUN, then, not the earth, is the centre of the solar system;
which system, mark you, is probably only one little insignificant
corner of the universe, although it includes such a vast space that if I
could give you the actual figures you would not be able to form the
slightest idea of what they really represented. Yet that tremendous
system, compared with the whole of God's universe may be only like
a single grain of dust on the sea-shore, and there may be myriads
upon myriads of systems, some of which are made up of innumerable
systems as large as ours, and the great sun himself may only be a
planet revolving round a greater sun, and this world only a little
satellite to the sun, never yet observed by the astronomers who, it
may be, live in that remoter sun still farther off. It is a marvellous
universe that God has made; and however much of it we may have
seen, we must never imagine that we have discovered more than a
very small portion of the worlds upon worlds that God has created.
The earth , and all the planets, and all the solid matter of the
universe, are controlled, as you know, by the force of attractions. We
are kept in our place in the world, in going round the sun, by two
forces, the one called centripetal, which draws us towards the sun,
and the other called centrifugal, which is generally illustrated by the
tendency of drops of water on a trundled mop to fly off at a tangent
from the circle they are describing.
Now, I believe that, in like manner, there are two forces which are
ever at work upon all of us, the one which draws us towards God, and
the other which drives us away from Him, and we are thus kept in
the circle of life; but, for my part, I shall be very glad when I can pass
out of that circle, and get away from the influence of the centrifugal
force. I believe that, the moment I do so,--as soon as ever the
attraction which draws me away from God is gone,--I shall be with
Him in heaven; that I do not doubt. Directly one or other of the two
forces which influence human life shall be exhausted, we shall have

either to drift away into the far-off space, through the centrifugal
force,--which God forbid!--or else we shall fly at once into the central
orb, by the centripetal force, and the sooner that glorious end of life
comes, the better will it be for us. With Augustine, I would say, "All
things are drawn to their own centre. Be thou the Centre of my heart,
O God, my Light, my only Love!"
The sun himself is an enormous body; he has been measured, but I
think I will not burden you with the figures, since they will convey to
you no adequate idea of his actual size. Suffice it to say that, if the
earth and the moon were put inside the sun, there would be
abundance of room for them to go on revolving in their orbits just as
they are now doing; and there would be no fear of their knocking
against that external crust of the sun which would represent to them
the heavens.
It takes about eight minutes for light to reach us from the sun. We
may judge of the pace at which that light comes when we reflect that
a cannon-ball, rushing with the swiftest possible velocity, would take
seven years to get there, and that a train, travelling at the rate of
thirty miles an hour, and never stopping for refreshments, would
require more than three hundred and fifty years before it would
reach the terminus. You may thus form some slight idea of the
distance that we are from the sun; and this, I think, furnishes us with
a good illustration of faith. There is no man who can know, except by
faith, that the sun exists. That he did exist eight minutes ago, I know,
for here is a ray of light that has just come from him, and told me
that; but I cannot be sure that he is existing at this moment. There
are some of the fixed stars, that are at such a vast distance from the
earth, that a ray of light from them takes hundreds of years to reach
us; and, for aught we know, they may have been extinct long ago. Yet
we still put them down in our chart of the heavens, and we can only
keep them there by faith, for as, "through faith we understand that
the worlds were framed by the word of God," so it is only by faith that
we can know that any of them now exist. When we come to examine
the matter closely, we find that our eyesight, and all our faculties and

senses, are not sufficient to give us positive conviction with regard to
these heavenly bodies; and therefore we still have to exercise faith; so
is it to a high degree in spiritual affairs, we walk by faith, not by
sight.
That the sun has spots upon his face, is a fact which everybody
notices. Just so; and if you are suns, and are never so bright, yet if
you have any spots upon you, you will find that people will be very
quick to notice them, and to call attention to them. There is often
much more talk about the sun's spots than there is about his
luminous surface; and, after the same fashion, more will be said
about any spots and imperfections that men may discover in our
character than about any excellencies that they may see in us. It was
for some time asserted that there were no spots or specks whatever
on the sun. Many astronomers, with the aid of the telescope, as well
as without it, discovered these blemishes and patches on the face of
the sun; but they were assured by men who ought to have known,
namely, by the reverend fathers of the church, that it was impossible
that there could be anything of the kind. The book I have previously
quoted says: "Upon Scheiner, a German Jesuit, reporting the
evidence of his senses to his provincial superior, the latter positively
refused to believe him. I have read, said he, Aristotle's writings from
end to end many times, and I can assure you that I have nowhere
found in them anything similar to what you mention. Go, my son,
and tranquillize yourself: be assured that what you take for spots in
the sun are the faults of your glasses, or of your eyes." So, brethren,
we know the force of bigotry, and how men will not see what is
perfectly plain to us, and how, even when facts are brought before
them, they cannot be made to believe in them, but will attribute them
to anything but that which is the real truth. I am afraid that the Word
of God itself has often been treated just in that way. Truths that are
positively and plainly revealed there are stoutly denied, because they
do not happen to fit in with the preconceived theories of unbelievers.
There have been a great many attempts to explain what the spots
upon the sun really are. One theory is, that the solar orb is

surrounded by a luminous atmosphere, and that the spots are open
spaces in that atmosphere through which we see the solid surface of
the sun. I cannot see any reason why that theory should not be the
truth; and, if it be so, it seems to me to explain the first chapter of
Genesis, where we are told that God created the light on the first day,
though he did not make the sun until the fourth day. Did he not
make the light first, and then take the sun, which otherwise might
have been a dark world, and put the light on it as a luminous
atmosphere? The two things certainly might very well fit in with one
another; and if these spots are really openings in the luminous
atmosphere through which we see the dark surface of the sun, they
are admirable illustrations of the spots that men see in us. We are
clothed with holiness as with a garment of light; but every now and
then there is a rift through which observers can see down into the
dark body of natural depravity that still is in the very best of us.
It is a dangerous thing to look at the sun with unprotected eyes.
Some have ventured to look at it with glasses that have no colouring
in them, and they have been struck blind. There have been several
instances of persons who have inadvertently neglected to use a
proper kind of glass before turning the telescope to the sun, and so
have been blinded. This is an illustration of our need of a Mediator,
and of how necessary it is to see God through the medium of Christ
Jesus our Lord; else might the excessive glory of the Deity utterly
destroy the faculty of seeing God at all.
The effect of the sun upon the earth, I shall not dwell upon now, as
that may rather concern another branch of science than astronomy.
It will suffice to say that living plants will sometimes grow without
the sun, as you may have seen them in a dark cellar; but how
blanched they are when existing under such circumstances! What
must have been the pleasure with which Humboldt entered into the
great subterranean cave called the Cueva del Guacharo, in the
district of Caraccas! It is a cavern inhabited by nocturnal, fruit-eating
birds, and this was what the great naturalist saw: "Seeds, carried in
by the birds to their young, and dropped, had sprung up, producing

tall, blanched, spectral stalks, covered with half-formed leaves; but it
was impossible to recognize the species from the change in form,
colour, and aspect, which the absence of light had occasioned. The
native Indians gazed upon these traces of imperfect organization
with mingled curiosity and fear, as if they were pale and disfigured
phantoms banished from the face of the earth.
So, brethren, think what you and I would be without the light of
God's countenance. Picture a church growing, as some churches do
grow, without any light from heaven, a cavern full of strange birds
and blanched vegetation. What a terrible place for anyone to visit!
There is a cave of that sort at Rome, and there are others in various
parts of the earth; but woe unto those who go to live in such dismal
dens!
What a wonderful effect the light of God's countenance has upon
men who have the divine life in them, but who have been living in the
dark! Travellers tell us that, in the vast forests of the Amazon and the
Orinoco, you may sometimes see, on a grand scale, the influence of
light in the colouring of the plants when the leaf-buds are
developing. One says: "Clouds and rain sometimes obscure the
atmosphere for several days together, and during this time the buds
expand themselves into leaves. But these leaves have a pallid hue till
the sun appears, when, in a few hours of clear sky and splendid
sunshine, their colour is changed to a vivid green. It has been related
that, during twenty days of dark, dull weather, the sun not once
making his appearance, the leaves were expanded to their full size,
but were almost white. One forenoon, the sun began to shine in full
brightness, when the colour of the forest changed so rapidly that its
progress might be marked. By the middle of the afternoon, the
whole, for many miles, presented the usual summer dress."
That is a beautiful illustration, it seems to me, that does not want any
opening up; you can all make the application of it to the Lord Jesus
for yourselves. As Dr. Watts sings:

"In darkest shades if He appear,
My dawning is begun;
He is my soul's sweet morning star,
And He my rising sun."
Then we begin to put on all sorts of beauty, as the leaves are painted
by the rays of the sun. We owe every atom of colour that there is in
any of our virtues, and every trace of flavour that there is in any of
our fruits, to those bright sunbeams that come streaming down to us
from the Sun of righteousness, who carries many other blessings
besides healing beneath His wings.
The effect of the sun upon vegetation can be observed among the
flowers in your own garden. Notice how they turn to him whenever
they can; the sunflower, for instance, follows the sun's course as if he
were himself the sun's son, and lovingly looked up to his father's
face. He is very much like a sun in appearance, and I think that is
because he is so fond of turning to the sun. The innumerable leaves
of a clover field bend towards the sun; and all plants, more or less,
pay deference to the sunlight to which they are so deeply indebted.
Even the plants in the hothouse, you can observe, do not grow in that
direction you would expect them to do if they wanted warmth, that
is, towards the stove-pipe, whence the heat comes, nor even to the
spot where most air is admitted; but they will always, if they possibly
can, send out their branches and their flowers towards the sun. That
is how we ought to grow towards the Sun of righteousness; it is for
our soul's health that we should turn our faces towards the Sun, as
Daniel prayed with his windows open towards Jerusalem. Where
Jesus is, there is our Sun; towards him let us constantly incline our
whole being.
Not very long ago I met with the following remarkable instance of the
power of rays of light transmitted from the sun. Some divers were
working at Plymouth Breakwater; they were down in the diving-bell,
thirty feet below the surface of the water; but a convex glass, in the
upper part of the bell, concentrated the sun's rays full upon them,

and burnt their caps. As I read this story, I thought it was a capital
illustration of the power there is in the gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Some of our hearers are fully thirty feet under the waters of
sin, if they are not even deeper down than that; but, by the grace of
God, we will yet make them feel the blessed burning power of the
truths we preach, even if we do not succeed in setting them all on fire
with this powerful glass. Perhaps, when you were a boy, you had a
burning-glass, and when you were out with a friend who did not
know what you had in your pocket, while he was sitting very quietly
by your side, you took out your glass, and held it for a few seconds
over the back of his hand until he felt something rather hot just
there. I like the man who, in preaching, concentrates the rays of the
gospel on a sinner till he burns him. Do not scatter the beams of
light; you can turn the glass so as to diffuse the rays instead of
concentrating them; but the best way of preaching is to focus Jesus
Christ, the Sun of righteousness, right on a sinner's heart. It is the
best way in the world to get at him; and if he is thirty feet under the
water, this burning-glass will enable you to reach him; only mind
that you do not use your own candle instead of the Sun, for that will
not answer the same purpose.
Sometimes the sun suffers eclipse, as you know. The moon intrudes
between us and the sun, and then we cannot see the great orb of day.
I suppose we have all seen one total eclipse, and we may see another.
It is a very interesting sight; but it appears to me that people take a
great deal more notice of the sun when he is eclipsed than they do
when he is shining clearly. They do not stand looking at him, day
after day, when he is pouring forth his bright beams in unclouded
glory; but as soon as ever he is eclipsed, then they are out in their
thousands, with their glasses, and every little boy in the street has a
fragment of smoked glass through which he watches the eclipse of
the sun.
Thus, brethren, I do not believe that our Lord Jesus Christ ever
receives so much attention from men as when he is set forth as the
suffering Saviour, evidently crucified among them. When the great

eclipse passed over the Sun of Righteousness, then all eyes were fixed
upon Him, and well they might be. Do not fail to tell your hearers
continually about that awful eclipse on Calvary; but mind that you
also tell them all the effects of that eclipse, and that there will be no
repetition of that stupendous event.
"Lo! the sun's eclipse is o'er;
Lo! he sets in blood no more."
Speaking of eclipses reminds me that there is, in the book I have
mentioned, a striking description of one given by a correspondent
who wrote to the astronomer Halley. He took his stand at Haradow
Hill, close to the east end of the avenue of Stonehenge, a very capital
place for observation, and there he watched the eclipse. He says of it:
"We were now enveloped in a total and palpable darkness, if I may be
allowed the expression. It came on rapidly, but I watched so
attentively that I could perceive its progress. It came upon us like a
great black cloak thrown over us, or like a curtain drawn from that
side. The horses we held by the bridle seemed deeply struck by it,
and pressed closely to us with marks of extreme surprise. As well as I
could perceive, the countenances of my friends wore a horrible
aspect. It was not without an involuntary exclamation of wonder that
I looked around me at this moment. It was the most awful sight I had
ever beheld in my life."
So, I suppose, it must be in the spiritual realm. When the Sun of this
great world suffered eclipse, then were all men in darkness; and
when any dishonour comes upon the cross of Christ, or upon Christ
Himself, then is each Christian himself in darkness of a horrible
kind. He cannot be in the light if his Lord and Master is in the shade.
One observer describes what he saw in Austria, where, it appears, all
the people made the eclipse a time for keeping holiday, and turned
out together on the plain with various modes of observing the
wonderful sight. This writer says: "The phenomenon, in its
magnificence, had triumphed over the petulance of youth, over the

levity which some persons assume as a sign of superiority, over the
noisy indifference of which soldiers usually make profession. A
profound stillness also reigned in the air: the birds had ceased to
sing." The more curious thing is that, in London, after an eclipse,
when the cocks found that the sun shone out again, they all began
crowing as though they joyfully thought that the daylight had broken
through the gloom of night.
Yet this wonderful phenomenon does not appear to have always
attracted the attention of all persons who might have witnessed it.
History says that, at one time, there was a battle being fought, I
think, in Greece, and, during its progress, there came on a total
eclipse of the sun; but the warriors went on fighting all the same,
indeed, they never noticed the extraordinary occurrence. That shows
us how strong passions may make us forget surrounding
circumstances, and it also teaches us how a man's engagements on
earth may make him oblivious of all that is transpiring in the
heavens. We read, just now, of how those horses, that were standing
idly on Salisbury Plain, trembled during the eclipse; but another
writer tells us that the horses in Italy, that were busily occupied in
drawing the carriages, do not appear to have taken the slightest
notice of the phenomenon, but to have gone on their way the same as
usual. Thus, the engagements of a worldly man are often so
engrossing in their character that they prevent him from feeling
those emotions which are felt by other men, whose minds are more
at liberty to meditate upon them.
I met with a very pretty story, concerning an eclipse, which you will
probably like to hear. A poor little girl, belonging to the commune of
Sièyes, in the Lower Alps, was tending her flock on the mountainside
at six o'clock on a bright summer morning. The sun had risen, and
was dissipating the vapours of the night, and everyone thought that
there would be a glorious, unclouded day; but gradually the light
darkened until the sun had wholly disappeared, and a black orb took
the place of the glowing disc, while the air became chill, and a
mysterious gloom pervaded the whole region. The little child was so

terrified by the circumstance, which was certainly unusual, that she
began to weep, and cried out loudly for help. Her parents, and other
friends, who came at her call, did not know anything about an
eclipse, so they were also astounded and alarmed; but they tried to
comfort her as best they could. After a short time, the darkness
passed away from the face of the sun, and it shone out as before, and
then the little girl cried aloud, in the patois of the district, "O
beautiful sun!" and well she might. When I read the story, I thought
that, when my heart had suffered eclipse, and the presence of Christ
had gone for a while, and then had come back again, how beautiful
the Sun seemed to me, even more bright and fair than before the
temporary darkness. Jesus seemed to shine on me with a brighter
light than ever before, and my soul cried out in an ecstasy of delight,
"O beautiful Sun of righteousness!"
That story must, I think, close our illustrations derived from the sun;
for we want also to learn all we can from his planets, and if we intend
to pay a visit to them all, we shall have to travel far, and to travel fast,
too.
The nearest planet that revolves around the sun is MERCURY, which
is about 37,000,000 miles from the great luminary. Mercury,
therefore, receives a far greater allowance of light and heat from the
sun than comes to us upon the earth. It is believed that, even at the
poles of Mercury, water would always boil; that is to say, if the planet
is constituted at all as this world is. None of us could possibly live
there; but that is no reason why other people should not, for God
could make some of his creatures to live in the fire just as well as He
could make others to live out of it. I have no doubt that, if there are
inhabitants there, they enjoy the heat. In a spiritual sense, at any
rate, we know that men who live near to Jesus dwell in the divine
flame of love.
Mercury is a comparatively small planet; its diameter is about 2,960
miles, while that of the earth is 7,975. Mercury rushes round the sun
in eighty-eight days, travelling at the rate of nearly 110,000 miles in

an hour, while the earth traverses only 65,000 miles in the same
time. Fancy crossing the Atlantic in about two or three minutes! It is
an instance of the wisdom of God that Mercury appears to be the
densest of the planets. You see, that part of a machine in which there
is the most rapid whirl, and the greatest wear and tear, ought to be
made of the strongest material; and Mercury is made very strong in
order to bear the enormous strain of its swift motion, and the great
heat to which it is subjected.
This is an illustration of how God fits every man for his place; if He
means me to be Mercury, the messenger of the gods, as the ancients
called him, and to travel swiftly, He will give me a strength
proportioned to my day. In the formation of every planet, adapting it
to its peculiar position, there is a wonderful proof of the power and
forethought of God; and in a similar manner does He fit human
beings for the sphere they are each called to occupy.
I like to see in Mercury a picture of the child of God who is full of
grace. Mercury is always near the sun; indeed, so near that it is itself
very seldom seen. I think Copernicus said that he never did see it,
although he had long watched for it with great care, and he deeply
regretted that he had to die without having ever seen this planet.
Others have observed it, and it has been quite a treat for them to be
able to watch its revolutions. Mercury is usually lost in the rays of the
sun; and that is where you and I ought to be, so close to Christ, the
Sun of righteousness, in our life and in our preaching, that the people
who are trying to observe our movements can scarcely see us at all.
Paul's motto must be ours: "Not I, but Christ."
Mercury, also, in consequence of being so near the sun, is apparently
the least understood of any of the planets. It has, perhaps, given
more trouble to the astronomers than any other member of the
heavenly family; they have paid great attention to it, and tried to find
out all about it; but they have had a very difficult task, for it is
generally lost in the solar glory, and never seen in a dark portion of
the heavens. So, I believe, brethren, that the nearer we live to Christ,

the greater mystery shall we be to all mankind. The more we are lost
in His brightness, the less will they be able to understand us. If we
were always what we should be, men would see in us an illustration
of the text, "Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God." Like
Mercury, we ought also to be so active in our appointed orbit that we
should not give observers time to watch us in any one position; and
next, we should be so absorbed in the glory of Christ's presence, that
they would not be able to perceive us.
When Mercury is seen from the earth, it is never visible in its
brightness, for its face is always turned towards the sun. I am afraid
that, whenever any of us are seen very much, we usually appear only
as black spots; when the preacher is very prominent in a sermon,
there is always a darkness. I like gospel preaching to be all Christ, the
Sun of righteousness, and no black spot at all; nothing of ourselves,
but all of the Lord Jesus. If there are any inhabitants of Mercury, the
sun must appear to them four or five times as large as he does to us;
the brightness would be insufferable to our eyes. It would be a very
splendid sight if one could gaze upon it; and thus, the nearer you get
to Christ, the more you see of Him, and the more He grows in your
esteem.
The next planet to Mercury is VENUS; it is about 66,000,000 miles
from the sun, and is a little smaller than the earth, its diameter being
7,510 miles, compared with our 7,975. Venus goes round the sun in
225 days, travelling at the rate of 80,000 miles an hour. When the
Copernican system of astronomy was fairly launched upon the world,
one of the objections to it was stated thus: It is clear that Venus does
not go round the sun, because, if it does, it must present the same
aspect as the moon, namely, it must sometimes be a crescent, at
other times a half-moon, or it must assume the form known as
gibbous, and sometimes it must appear as a complete circle. But,
said the objector, pointing to Venus, she is always the same size; look
at her, she is not at all like the moon. This was a difficulty that some
of the earlier astronomers could not explain; but when Galileo was
able to turn his newly made telescope to the planet, what did he

discover? Why, that Venus does pass through similar phases to those
of the moon! We cannot always see the whole of it enlightened, yet I
suppose it is true that the light of Venus always appears about the
same to us. You will perceive in a moment why that is; when the
planet's face is turned toward us, it is at the greatest distance from
the earth; consequently, the light that reaches us is no more than
when it is closet, but has its face at last partly turned away from us.
To my mind, the. two facts are perfectly reconcilable; and so is it, I
believe, with some of the doctrines of grace that perplex certain
people. They say, "How do you make these two things agree?" I reply,
"I do not know that I am bound to prove how they agree. If God had
told me, I would tell you; but as He has not done so, I must leave the
matter where the Bible leaves it." I may not have discovered the
explanation of any apparent difference between the two truths, and
yet, for all that, the two things may be perfectly consistent with one
another.
Venus is both the morning star and "the star of the evening, beautiful
star." It has been called Lucifer, and Phosphorus, the lightbringer,
and also Hesperus, the vesper star. You perhaps remember how
Milton, in Paradise Lost, refers to this double character and office of
Venus:
"Fairest of stars! last in the train of night,
If better thou belong not to the dawn;
Sure pledge of day, that crown'st the smiling morn
With thy bright circlet: praise him in thy sphere,
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime."
Our Lord Jesus Christ calls Himself, "the bright and morning star."
Whenever He comes into the soul, He is the sure harbinger of that
everlasting light which shall go no more down for ever. Now that
Jesus, the Sun of righteousness, has gone from the gaze of man, you
and I must be like evening stars, keeping as close as we can to the
great central Sun, and letting the world know what Jesus was like by

our resemblance to Him. Did He not say to His disciples, "Ye are the
light of the world"?
The next little planet that goes round the sun is THE EARTH. Its
distance from the sun varies from about ninety-two to ninety-five
millions of miles. Do not be discouraged, gentlemen, in your hopes of
reaching the sun, because you are nothing like so far away as the
inhabitants of Saturn; if there are any residents there, they are about
ten times as far from the sun as we are. Still, I do not suppose you
will ever take a seat in Sol's fiery chariot; at least, not in your present
embodied state; it is far too warm a place for you to be at home there.
The earth is somewhat larger than Venus, and it takes much longer
to go round the sun, it is twelve months on its journey, or, speaking
exactly, 365 days, 6 hours, 9 minutes, and 10 seconds. This world is a
slow-going concern; and I am afraid it is less to the glory of God than
any other world that he has made. I have not seen it from a distance;
but I should suspect that it never shines anything like so brightly as
Venus; for, through sin, a cloud of darkness has enveloped it. I
suppose that, in the millennial days, the curtain will be drawn back,
and a light will be thrown upon the earth, and that it will then shine
to the glory of God like its sister stars that have never lost their
pristine brightness. I think there have been some curtains drawn up
already; every sermon, full of Christ, that we preach, rolls away some
of the mists and fogs from the surface of the planet; at any rate,
morally and spiritually, if not naturally.
Still brethren, though the earth travels slowly, when compared with
Mercury and Venus, yet, as Galileo said, it does move, and at a pretty
good rate, too. I dare say, if you were to walk for twenty minutes, and
you knew nothing about the speed at which the earth is travelling,
you would be surprised if I assured you that you had in that short
space of time gone more than 20,000 miles; but it would be a fact.
This book, which has already given us much useful information, says:
"It is a truly astonishing thought that, awake, asleep, at home,
abroad, we are constantly carried round with the terrestrial mass, at
the rate of eleven miles a minute, and are, at the same time,

travelling with it in space with a velocity of sixty-six thousand miles
an hour. Thus, during the twenty minutes consumed in walking a
mile from our thresholds, we are silently conveyed more than twenty
thousand miles from one portion of space to another; and, during a
night of eight hours' rest, or tossing to and fro, we are unconsciously
translated through an extent equal to twice the distance of the lunar
world."
We do not take any notice of this movement, and so it is that little
things, which are near and tangible, often seem more notable than
great things which are more remote. This world impresses many men
with far greater force than the world to come has ever done, because
they look only upon the things that are seen and temporal. "But,"
perhaps you say, "we do not feel ourselves moving." No, but you are
moving, although you are not conscious of it. So, I think that,
sometimes, when a believer in Christ does not feel himself advancing
in divine things, he need not fret on that account; I am not certain
that those who imagine themselves to be growing spiritually are
really doing so. Perhaps they are only growing a cancer somewhere;
and its deadly fibres make them fancy there is a growth within them.
Alas! so there is; but it is a growth unto destruction.
When a man thinks that he is a full-grown Christian, he reminds me
of a poor boy whom I used to see. He had such a splendid head for
his body that he had often to lay it on a pillow, for it was too weighty
for his shoulders to carry, and his mother told me that, when he tried
to stand up, he often tumbled down, overbalanced by his heavy head.
There are some people who appear to grow very fast, but they have
water on the brain, and are out of due proportion; but he who truly
grows in grace does not say, "Dear me! I can feel that I am growing;
bless the Lord! Let's sing a hymn, I'm a growing! I'm a growing!" I
have sometimes felt that I was growing smaller, brethren; I think
that is very possible, and a good thing, too. If we are very great in our
own estimation, it is because we have a number of cancers, or foul
gatherings, that need to be lanced, so as to let out the bad matter that
causes us to boast of our bigness.

It is a good thing that we do not feel ourselves moving, for, as I
before reminded you, we walk by faith, not by sight. Yet I know that
we are moving, and I am persuaded that I shall return, as nearly as
the earth's revolution permits, to this exact spot this day
twelvemonth. If they are looking down at me from Saturn, they will
spy me out somewhere near this same place, unless the Lord should
come in the meantime, or he should call me up to be with Him.
If we did feel the world move, it would probably be because there was
some obstruction in the heavenly road; but we go on so softly, and
gently, and quietly, that we do not perceive it. I believe that growth in
grace is very much after the same fashion. A babe grows, and yet
does not know that he grows; the seed unconsciously grows in the
earth, and so we are developing in the divine life until we come to the
fulness of the stature of men in Christ Jesus.
Waiting upon the earth is THE MOON. In addition to her duty as one
of the planets revolving round the sun, she has the task of attending
upon the earth, doing much useful service for it, and at night lighting
it with her great reflector-lamp, according to the allowance of oil she
has available for shedding her beams upon us. The moon also
operates upon the earth by her powers of attraction; and as the water
is the more mobile part of our planet, the moon draws it towards
herself, so making the tides; and those tides help to keep the whole
world in healthful motion; they are a sort of life-blood to it.
The moon undergoes eclipse, sometimes very frequently, and a great
deal more often than the sun; and this phenomenon has occasioned
much terror. Among some tribes, an eclipse of the moon is an
occasion for the greatest possible grief. Sir R. Schomberg thus
describes a total lunar eclipse in San Domingo: "I stood alone upon
the flat roof of the house which I inhabited, watching the progress of
the eclipse. I pictured in imagination the lively and extraordinary
scene which I once witnessed in the interior of Guiana, among the
untutored and superstitious Indians, how they rushed out of their
huts when the first news of the eclipse came, gibbered in their

tongue, and, with violent gesticulations, threw up their clenched fists
towards the moon. When, as on this occasion, the disc was perfectly
eclipsed, they broke out in moanings, and sullenly squatted upon the
ground, hiding their faces between their hands. The females
remained, during this strange scene, within their huts. When,
shining like a sparkling diamond, the first portion of the moon, that
had disencumbered itself from the shadow, became visible, all eyes
were turned towards it. They spoke to each other with subdued
voices; but their observations became louder and louder, and they
quitted their stooping position as the light increased. When the
bright disc announced that the monster which wanted to stifle the
Queen of Night had been overcome, the great joy of the Indians was
expressed in that peculiar whoop, which, in the stillness of the night,
may be heard for a great distance."
Want of faith causes the most extraordinary fear, and produces the
most ridiculous action. A man who believes that the moon, though
temporarily hidden, will shine forth again, looks upon an eclipse as a
curious phenomenon worthy of his attention, and full of interest; but
the man who really fears that God is blowing out the light of the
moon, and that he shall never see its bright rays any more, feels in a
state of terrible distress. Perhaps he will act as the Hindoos and some
of the Africans do during an eclipse; they beat old drums, and blow
bullocks' horns, and make all manner of frightful noises, to cause the
dragon who is supposed to have swallowed the moon to vomit it up
again. That is their theory of an eclipse, and they act accordingly; but
once know the truth, and know especially the glorious truth that "All
things work together for good to them that love God, to them that are
the called according to his purpose," and we shall not be afraid of any
dragon swallowing the moon, nor of anything else that the fears of
men have made them imagine. If we are ignorant of the truth, every
event that occurs, which may be readily enough accounted for from
God's point of view, may cause the utmost terror, and drive us,
perhaps, into the wildest follies.

The next planet to the earth is MARS; fiery Mars, generally shining
with a ruddy light. It used to be thought that the colour of Mars'
"blood-red shield" was caused by the absorption of the solar rays; but
this idea has been refuted, and it is now believed to be due to the
colour of its soil. According to the former idea, an angry man, who is
like Mars, the god of war, must be one who has absorbed all other
colours for his own use, and only shows the red rays to others; while
the more modern notion, that the soil of the planet gives it its
distinctive colour, teaches us that, where there is a fiery nature, there
will be a warlike exhibition of it unless it is restrained by grace. Mars
is about 140,000,000 miles from the sun; it is much smaller than our
earth, its equatorial diameter being 4,363 miles. Travelling at the
rate of 53,600 miles an hour, it takes 687 days to complete its
revolution round the sun.
Between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, there is a wide zone, in
which, for many centuries, no planets were visible; but the
astronomers said within themselves, "There must surely be
something or other between Mars and Jupiter." They could not find
any great planets; but as telescopes became larger, and more
powerful, they observed that there was a great number of
ASTEROIDS or PLANETOIDS, as some term them. I do not know
how many there are, for they are like some of our brethren's families,
they are daily increasing. Some hundreds of them have already been
discovered; and by the aid of telescopic photography, we may expect
to hear of the finding of many more. The first asteroid was identified
on the first day of the present century, and was named Ceres. Many
of them have been called by female mythological names, I suppose
because they are the smaller planets, and it is considered gallant to
give them ladies' names. They appear to vary from about 20 to 200
miles in diameter; and many have thought that they are the
fragments of some planet that once revolved between Mars and
Jupiter, but that has been blown up, and gone to pieces in a general
wreck.

Those meteoric stones, which sometimes fall to the earth, but which
much more frequently, at certain seasons of the year, are seen
shooting across the midnight sky, may also be fragments of the
aforesaid world which has perished. At all events, since the fathers
fell asleep, all things have not continued as they were; there have
been changes in the starry world to let men know that other changes
will yet come. These blocks of meteoric matter are flying through
space, and when they get within the range of our atmosphere there is
an opposing medium; they have to drive through it at an enormous
rapidity, and so they become burning hot, and thus they become
visible. And, in like manner, I believe that there are plenty of good
men in the world who are invisible till they get to be opposed, and
being opposed, and having the love of God driving them on with
tremendous momentum, they become red-hot with holy fervour,
they overcome all opposition, and then they become visible to the eye
of mankind. For my part, I rather like to pass through an opposing
medium. I think that we all want to travel in that kind of atmosphere
just to give us the sacred friction that will fully develop the powers
with which we have been entrusted. If God has given us force, it is
not at all a bad thing for us to be put where there is opposition,
because we shall not be stopped by it, but shall by that very process
be made to shine all the brighter as lights in the world.
Beyond the space which is occupied by the asteroids, is the
magnificent planet, JUPITER, the brightest star which we see, except
Venus; and yet he is very, very far away. His mean distance from the
sun is about 475,000,000 miles; that is, more than five times as far
off as we are. Even here, we are so far away that we do not often see
the sun; but Jupiter is five times as far from the sun, and it takes him
4,333 days, or nearly twelve of our years, to go round the great
luminary, travelling at a speed of 27,180 miles an hour. The reason
why Jupiter is so bright is, partly, because of his great size, for he is
nearly 90,000 miles in diameter, while the earth is less than 8,000,
and it may be partly because he is better constituted for reflecting, or
else, at that distance, his magnitude would not avail him. And
brethren, if you and I are put in difficult positions, where we seem to

be unable to shine to the glory of God, we must ask the Lord specially
to constitute us so that we can better reflect his brightness, and so
produce as good an effect as our brethren who are placed in more
favourable positions.
Jupiter is attended by four moons. These satellites were discovered
soon after the invention of the telescope; yet there were several
persons who would not believe in their existence, and one of our
excellent friends, the Jesuits, of course, was strongest in his
determination that he never would, by any process, be convinced of
that which others knew to be a fact. He was asked to look through a
telescope in order to see that it was really so; but he declined because
he said that, perhaps, if he did so, he would be obliged to believe it;
and as he had no desire to do so, he refused to look. Are there not
some who act thus toward the truths of revelation? Some time after,
the Jesuit fell under the anger of good Kepler, and being convinced
that he was in the wrong, he went to the astronomer, and begged his
pardon. Kepler told him that he would forgive him, but he would
have to inflict a penance upon him. "What will it be?" he enquired.
"Why," said Kepler, "you must look through that telescope." That was
the direst punishment the Jesuit could possibly receive; for, when he
looked through the instrument, he was obliged to say that he did see
what he had formerly denied, and he was obliged to express his
conviction of the truth of the astronomer's teaching. So, sometimes,
to make a man see the truth is a very severe penalty to him. If he
does not want to see it, it is a good thing to compel him to look at it.
There are a great many brethren, who are not Jesuits, and who yet
are not anxious to know the whole truth; but I hope that you and I,
Brethren, will always desire to learn all that the Lord has revealed in
His Word.
This was the argument of Sizzi, an astronomer of some note, who
tried to prove that Jupiter's moons could not exist. I wonder whether
you can see the flaw in it: "There are seven windows given to animals
in the domicile of the head, through which the air is admitted to the
tabernacle of the body, to enlighten, to warm, and to nourish it;

which windows are the principal parts of the microcosm, or little
world, two nostrils, two eyes, two ears, and one mouth. So, in the
heavens, as in a microcosm, or great world, there are two favourable
stars, Jupiter and Venus; two unpropitious, Mars and Saturn; two
luminaries, the sun and the moon; and Mercury alone undecided and
indifferent, from which, and from many other phenomena of nature,
such as the seven metals, etc., which it were tedious to enumerate,
we gather that the number of planets is necessarily seven. Moreover,
the satellites are invisible to the naked eye, and therefore can
exercise no influence over the earth, and therefore would be useless,
and therefore do not exist. Besides, as well the Jews and other
ancient nations, as modern Europeans, have adopted the division of
the week into seven days, and have named them from the seven
planets. Now, if we increase the number of the planets, this whole
system falls to the ground."
I think, brethren, that I have heard the same kind of argument
advanced many times with reference to spiritual matters; that is, an
argument from theory against fact; but facts will always overturn
theories all the world over, only that, sometimes, it takes a good
while before the facts can be absolutely proved.
It is a singular thing, and another instance of the power and wisdom
of God, that though the satellites of Jupiter are constantly being
eclipsed, as is natural enough from their rapid revolutions around
him, yet they are never all eclipsed at one time. One moon may be
eclipsed, and perhaps another, or even three out of the four; but
there is always one left shining; and, in like manner, God never takes
away all the comfort of His people at once, there is always some ray
of light to cheer them.
There is a great deal more to be learned from Jupiter; but having
introduced you to him, I will leave you to examine him for
yourselves, and to get all you can out of him.

Far, far beyond Jupiter is SATURN. That respectable planet has been
very much slandered, but I am happy to inform you that he does not
deserve such treatment. He is nearly 900,000,000 miles from the
sun. I wonder whether any brother here, with a large mind, has any
idea of what a million is; I do not suppose that he has, and I am sure
that I have not. It takes a vast deal of thinking to comprehend what a
million means; but to realize what is meant by a million miles, is
altogether beyond one's mental grasp. A million pins would be
something enormous; but a million miles! And here we are talking of
nine hundred millions of miles; well, I give up all thought of
understanding what that is so long as I am in this finite state. Why,
when you speak of nine hundred millions, you might as well say nine
hundred billions at once; for the one term is almost as
incomprehensible as the other; and yet, please to recollect that this
vast space is to our great God only a mere hand's-breadth compared
with the immeasurable universe that he has created.
I said that Saturn had been greatly slandered, and so he has. You
know that we have, in our English language, the word "saturnine", as
a very uncomplimentary description of certain individuals. When a
man is praised for being very hearty and genial, he is said to be
jovial, in allusion to Jove, or Jupiter, the brightly-shining planet; but
a person of an opposite temperament is called saturnine, because it
is supposed that Saturn is a dull planet, dreadfully dreary, and that
his influences are malignant and baneful. If you have read some of
the astrological books which I have had the pleasure of studying, you
have there been told that, if you had been born under the influence of
Saturn, you might almost as well have been born under the influence
of Satan, for it will come to about the same thing in the end. He is
supposed to be a very slow sort of individual, his symbol is the
hieroglyphic of lead; but he is really a very light and buoyant
personage. His diameter is about nine times as great as that of the
earth, and while in volume he is equal to 746 worlds as large as ours,
his weight is only equal to 92 such globes. The densities of the
planets appear to diminish according to their distance from the sun,
not in regular proportion, but still very largely so; and there seems to

be no reason why those which are most remote, and travel slowly,
should be made so dense as those which are nearer the central orb,
and revolve more quickly around him.
This useful volume, from which I have already given you several
extracts, says: "Instead, therefore, of sinking like lead in the mighty
waters, he would float upon the liquid, if an ocean could be found
sufficiently capacious to receive him. John Goad, the well-known
astro-meteorologist, declared the planet not to be such a plumbeous
blue-nosed fellow as all antiquity had believed, and the world still
supposed. But it was the work of others to prove it. For six thousand
years or so, Saturn concealed his personal features, interesting
family, and strange appurtenances,--the magnificent out-buildings of
his house,--from the knowledge of mankind. But he was caught at
last by a little tube, pointed at him from a slope of the Apennines, the
holder of which, in invading his privacy, cared not to ask leave, and
deemed it no intrusion." When that "little tube" was turned upon
him, he was found to be a most beautiful planet, one of the most
varied and most marvellous of all the planetary worlds.
Take that as an illustration of the falseness of slander, and of how
some persons are very much bemired and bespattered because
people do not know them. This planet, which was so despised, turned
out to be a very beautiful object indeed; and, instead of being very
dull, and what the word saturnine usually means, he is bright and
glorious. Saturn also has no less than eight satellites to attend him;
and, in addition, he has three magnificent rings, of which Tennyson
has sung:
"Still as, while Saturn whirls, his steadfast shade
Sleeps on his luminous rings."
Saturn has only about a hundredth part of the light from the sun as
compared with what we receive; and yet, I suppose, the atmosphere
might be so arranged that he might have as much solar light as we
have; but even if the atmosphere is of the same kind as ours, Saturn

would still have as much light as we have in an ordinary London fog.
I am speaking, of course, of the light from the sun; but then we
cannot tell what illuminating power the Lord may have put in the
planet himself; and beside that, he has his eight moons, and his three
shining rings, which have a brilliance that we cannot either imagine
or describe. What must it be to see a marvellous arch of light rising to
a height of 37,570 miles above the planet, and having the enormous
span of 170,000 miles! If you were at the equator of Saturn, you
would only see the rings as a narrow band of light; but if you could
journey towards the poles, you would see above you a tremendous
arch, blazing with light, like some of the vast reflectors that you see
hung up in large buildings where they cannot get sufficient sunlight.
The reflector helps to gather up the rays of light, and throw them
where they are needed; and I have no doubt that these rings act like
reflectors to Saturn. It must be a wonderful world to live in if there
are inhabitants there; they get compensations which fully make up
for their disadvantages in being so far away from the sun. So is it in
the spiritual world, what the Lord withholds in one direction he
makes up in another; and those who are far removed from the means
of grace, and Christian privileges, have an inward light and joy,
which others, with greater apparent advantages, might almost envy.
Journeying again in the heavens, far, far beyond Saturn, we come to
URANUS, or HERSCHEL, as it is sometimes called, after the
astronomer who discovered it in 1781. The mean distance of Uranus
from the sun is believed to be about 1,754,000,000 miles; I give you
the figures, but neither you nor I can have the slightest conception of
the distance they represent. To be an observer standing on Uranus,
the sun would probably appear only as a far-away speck of light; yet
the planet revolves around the sun at about 15,000 miles an hour,
and occupies about eighty-four of our years in completing one
journey. Uranus is said to be equal in volume to seventy-three or
seventy-four earths, and to be attended by four moons. I do not know
much about Uranus, therefore I do not intend to say much about
him.

That may serve as an illustration of the lesson that a man had better
say as little as possible concerning anything of which he knows only a
little; and that is a lesson which many people need to learn. For
instance, there are probably more works on the Book of Revelation
than upon any other part of the Scriptures, and, with the exception of
just a few, they are not worth the paper on which they are printed.
Then, next to the Book of Revelation, in this respect, is the Book of
Daniel; and because it is so difficult to explain, many men have
written upon it, but as a rule the result of their writing has been that
they have only confuted and contradicted one another. Let us,
brethren, preach what we know; and say nothing of that of which we
are ignorant.
We have gone a long way, in imagination, in travelling to the planet
Uranus; but we have not yet completed our afternoon's journey. It
was observed by certain astronomers that the orbit of Uranus some
times deviated from the course they had marked in their chart of the
heavens; and this convinced them that there was another planetary
body, not then discovered, which was exerting an unseen but
powerful influence upon Uranus.
This fact, that these huge worlds, with so many millions of miles of
space between them, do retard or accelerate each other's movements,
is to me a beautiful illustration of the influence that you and I have
upon our fellow-men. Whether consciously or unconsciously, we
either impede a man's progress in the path that leads to God, or else
we quicken his march along the heavenward way. "None of us liveth
to himself."
The astronomers came to the conclusion that there must be another
planet, previously unknown to them, that was disturbing the motion
of Uranus. Unknown to one another, an Englishman, Mr. Adams, of
Cambridge, and a Frenchman, M. Leverrier, set to work to find out
the position in which they expected the heavenly body to be
discovered, and their calculations brought them to almost identical
results. When the telescopes were pointed to that part of the heavens

where the mathematical astronomers believed the planet would be
found, it was at once discovered, shining with a pale and yellow light,
and we now know it by the name of NEPTUNE.
The volume before me thus speaks of the two methods of finding a
planet, the one worker using the most powerful telescope, and the
other making mathematical calculations: "To detect a planet by the
eye, or to track it to its place by the mind, are acts as
incommensurable as those of muscular and intellectual power.
Recumbent on his easy chair, the practical astronomer has but to
look through the cleft in his revolving cupola, in order to trace the
pilgrim star in its course; or, by the application of magnifying power,
to expand its tiny disc, and thus transfer it from among its sidereal
companions to the planetary domains. The physical astronomer, on
the contrary, has. no such auxiliaries: he calculates at noon, when the
stars disappear under a meridian sun; he computes at midnight,
when clouds and darkness shroud the heavens; and from within that
cerebral dome which has no opening heavenwards, and no
instrument but the eye of reason, he sees in the disturbing agencies
of an unseen planet, upon a planet by him equally unseen, the
existence of the disturbing agent, and from the nature and amount of
its action he computes its magnitude, and indicates its place."
What a grand thing is reason! Far above the mere senses, and then
faith is high above reason; only, in the case of the mathematical
astronomer of whom we are thinking, reason was a kind of faith. He
argued, "God's laws are so-and-so and so-and-so. This planet Uranus
is being disturbed, some other planet must have disturbed it, so I will
search and find out where he is;" and when his intricate calculations
were completed, he put his finger on Neptune as readily as a
detective lays his hand on a burglar, and a great deal sooner; indeed,
it seems to me that it is often easier to find a star than to catch a
thief.
Neptune had long been shining before he was discovered and named;
and you and I, brethren, may remain unknown for years, and

possibly the world may never discover us; but I trust that our
influence, like that of Neptune, will be felt and recognized, whether
we are seen of men, or only shine in solitary splendour to the glory of
God.
Well, we have travelled in thought as far as Neptune, which is about
2,748,000,000 miles from the sun; and, standing there, we look over
into space, and there are myriads, and myriads, and myriads of miles
in which there appear to be no more planets belonging to the solar
system. There may be others that have not been discovered yet; but,
as far as we know, beyond Neptune there is a great gulf fixed.
There are, however, what I may call "leapers" in the system, which,
without the use of a pole, are able to cross this gulf; they are THE
COMETS. These comets are, as a rule, so thin,--a mere filmy mass of
vapour,--that when they come flashing into our system, and rushing
out again, as they do, they never disturb the motion of a planet. And
there are some terrestrial comets about, that I know, that go to
various towns, and blaze away for a time; but they have no power to
disturb the planets revolving there in their regular course. The power
of a man does not consist in rushing to and fro, like a comet, but in
steadily shining year after year like a fixed star. The astronomer
Halley says, "If you were to condense a comet down to the thickness
of the ordinary atmosphere, it would not fill a square inch of space."
So thin is a comet, that you might look through five thousand miles
of it, and see just as easily as if it were not there. It is well to be
transparent, brethren; but I hope you will be more substantial than
most of the comets of which we have heard.
Comets come with great regularity, though they seem to be very
irregular. Halley prophesied that the comet of 1682, of which little
had been previously known, would return at regular intervals of
about seventy-five years. He knew that he would not live to see its
reappearance; but he expressed the hope that when it did return, his
prophecy might be remembered. Various astronomers were looking
out for it, and they hoped it might arrive at the time foretold,

because, otherwise, ignorant people would not believe in astronomy.
But the comet came back all right; so their minds were set at rest,
and Halley's prediction was verified.
Among the stories concerning comet-watching, there is one that
contains an illustration and a lesson also. "Messier, who had
acquired the name of the comet-hunter, from the number he
discovered, was particularly anxious upon the occasion. Of great
simplicity of character, his zeal after comets was often displayed in
the oddest manner. While attending the death-bed of his wife, and
necessarily absent from his observatory, the discovery of one was
snatched from him by Montaigne de Limoges. This was a grievous
blow. A visitor began to offer him consolation on account of his
recent bereavement, when Messier, thinking only of the comet,
answered, I had discovered twelve; alas, to be robbed of the
thirteenth by that Montaigne! But instantly recollecting himself, he
exclaimed, Ah! cette pauvre femme! and went on deploring wife and
comet together." He evidently lived so much in the heavens that he
forgot his wife; and if science can sometimes carry a man away from
all the trials of this mortal life, surely our heavenly life ought to lift us
up above all the distractions and cares that afflict us.
The return of a comet is frequently announced with great certainty.
This paragraph appeared in a newspaper: "On the whole, it may be
considered as tolerably certain that the comet will become visible in
every part of Europe about the latter end of August, or the beginning
of September next. It will most probably be distinguishable by the
naked eye, like a star of the first magnitude, but with a duller light
than that of a planet, and surrounded with a pale nebulosity, which
will slightly impair its splendour. On the night of the 7th of October,
the comet will approach the well-known constellation of the Great
Bear; and between that and the 11th, it will pass directly through the
seven conspicuous stars of that constellation. Towards the close of
November, the comet will plunge among the rays of the sun, and
disappear, and not issue from them, on the other side, until the end
of December. This prospectus of the movements of a body, invisible

at the time, millions of miles away, is nearly as definite as the early
advertisements of coaching between London and Edinburgh. Let us
now place the observations of the eye alongside the anticipations of
science, and we shall find that science has proved almost absolutely
correct."
Just think of the calculations, gentlemen, that were necessary, for,
though a comet does not interfere with the course of a planet, a
planet interferes very considerably with the course of a comet; so
that, in their calculations, the astronomers had to recollect the track
in which the comet would have to travel. Thinking of him as a wayworn traveller, we remember that he will have to go by Neptune's
bright abode, and Neptune will be sure to give him a cup of tea; then
he will journey on as far as Uranus, and put up for the night there; in
the morning, he will pay an early visit to Saturn, and he will stay
there for breakfast; he will dine with Jupiter; by and by he will reach
Mars, and there will be sure to be a row there; and he will be glad
when he gets to Venus, and, of course, he will be detained by her
charms. You will, therefore, very readily see, gentlemen, that the
calculations as to the return of a comet are extremely difficult, and
yet the astronomers do estimate the time to a nicety. This science is a
very marvellous one, not only for what it reveals, but for the talent
which it brings out, and the lessons it continually teaches us about
the wonderful works of our great Father.
We have done with the solar system, and even with those interlopers
which come to us every now and then from far remote systems, for a
comet, I suppose, is only seen for a month, or a week, and then
sometimes does not reappear for hundreds of years. Where have they
gone all that while? Well, they have gone somewhere, and they are
serving the purpose of the God who made them, I dare say; but, for
my own part, I would not like to be a comet in God's system. I would
like to have my fixed place, and keep on shining for the Lord there. I
have lived in London for a good many years, and I have seen many
comets come and go during that time. Oh, the great lights 1 have
seen rush by! They have gone off into some unknown sphere, as

comets usually do. I have generally noticed that, when men are going
to do so much more than everybody else, and they are so amazingly
pompous over it, their history is usually pretty accurately described
by that simple simile of going up like a rocket, and coming down like
a stick.
I do not know whether you can, in imagination, lean over the
battlements of this little solar system, and see what there is beyond
it. Do not narrow your minds, gentlemen, to a few hundred millions
of miles! If you look out for a long way indeed, you will begin to see a
star. I should only be uttering meaningless words if I told you its
distance from us; yet there are others, of those that we are able to
see, that are almost immeasurably farther away. They have taken a
deal of trouble to send us a ray of light such a vast distance, to inform
us that they are getting on very well, and that, though they are at
such a distance from us, they still enjoy themselves as best they can
in our absence.
These stars, as the common people look at them, seem to be
scattered about in the heavens, as we say, "anyhow." I always admire
that charming variety; and I am thankful to God that he has not set
the stars in straight lines, like rows of street-lamps. Only think,
brethren, how it would be if we looked up at night, and saw the stars
all arranged in rows, like pins on a paper! Bless the Lord, it is not so!
He just took a handful of bright worlds, and scattered them about the
sky, and they dropped into most beautiful positions, so that people
say, "There is the Great Bear;" and, "That is Charles's Wain," and
every countryman knows the Reaping-hook. Have you not seen it,
brethren? Others say, "That is the Virgin, and that is the Ram, and
that is the Bull," and so on.
I think that naming of the various constellations is very like a good
deal of mystical preaching that there is nowadays. The preachers say,
"That is so-and-so, and that is so-and-so." Well, perhaps it is so; but I
do not see it. You may imagine anything you like in the constellations
of the heavens. I have pictured a fortress in the fire, and watched it

being built up, and seen little soldiers come and pull it all down. You
can see anything in the fire, and in the sky, and in the Bible, if you
like to look for it in that way; you do not see it in reality, it is only a
freak of your imagination. There are no bulls and bears in the
heavens. There may be a virgin, but she is not to be worshipped as
the Romanists teach. I hope you all know the pole-star; you ought
also to know the pointers; they point to the pole-star, and that is just
what we ought to do, to direct the poor slaves of sin and Satan to the
true Star of liberty, our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ.
Then there are the Pleiades; almost anybody can tell you where they
are. They are a cluster of apparently little stars, but they are intensely
bright. They teach me that, if I am a very little man, I must try to be
very bright; if I cannot be like Aldebaran, or some of the brightest
gems of the sky, I must be as bright as I can in my own particular
sphere, and be as useful there as if I were a star of the first
magnitude. Then, on the other side of the globe, they look up to the
Southern Cross. I dare say one of our brethren from Australia will
give you a private lecture upon that constellation. It is very beautiful
to think of the Cross being the guide of the mariner; it is the best
guide anyone can have, either this side of the tropics, or the other.
Beside the stars, there are vast luminous bodies which are called
NEBULAE. In some parts of the heavens, there are enormous masses
of light-matter; they were supposed by some to be the material out of
which worlds were made. These were the lumps of mortar, out of
which, according to the old atheistic theory, worlds grew by some
singular process of evolution; but when Herschel turned his
telescope upon them, he very soon put the nose of that theory out of
joint, for he discovered that these nebulae were simply enormous
masses of stars, such myriads upon myriads of miles away, that, to
our sight, they looked just like a little dust of light.
There are many wonderful things to be learned about the stars, to
which I hope you will give your earnest attention as you have the
opportunity. Among the rest is this fact, that some stars have ceased

to be visible to us. Tycho Brahé said that, on one occasion he found a
number of villagers looking up at the sky; and, on asking them why
they were gazing at the heavens, they told him that a new star had
suddenly appeared. It shone brightly for a few months, and then
vanished. Many times, a starry world has seemed to turn red, as if it
were on fire; it has apparently burned, and blazed away, and then
disappeared.. Kepler, writing concerning such a phenomenon, says:
"What it may portend is hard to determine; and thus much only is
certain, that it comes to tell mankind either nothing at all, or high
and weighty news, quite beyond human sense and understanding."
In allusion to the opinions of some, who explained the novel object
by the Epicurean doctrine of a fortuitous combination of atoms, he
remarks, with characteristic oddity, yet good sense, "I will tell these
disputants, my opponents, not my opinion, but my wife's. Yesterday,
when weary with writing, and my mind quite dusty with considering
these atoms, I was called to supper, and a salad that I had asked for
was set before me. It seems, then, said I, aloud, that if pewter dishes,
leaves of lettuce, grains of salt, drops of water, vinegar, and oil, and
slices of egg, had been flying about in the air from all eternity, it
might at last happen, by chance, that there would come a salad. Yes,
says my wife, but not one so nice or well dressed as this which I have
made for you."
So I should think; and if the fortuitous combination of atoms could
not make a salad, it is not very likely that they could make a world. I
once asked a man, who said that the world was a fortuitous
concourse of atoms, "Have you ever chanced to have no money, and
to be away where you knew nobody who would give you a dinner?"
He replied, "Yes, I have." "Well, then," said I, "did it ever happen to
you that a fortuitous concourse of atoms made a leg of mutton for
you, with some nice boiled turnips, and caper sauce, for your
dinner?" "No," he said, "it has not." "Well," I answered, "a leg of
mutton, at any rate, even with turnips and caper sauce included, is
an easier thing to make than one of these worlds, like Jupiter or
Venus."

We are told, in the Word of God, that one star differeth from another
star in glory; yet one that is small may give more light to us than a
larger star which is farther away. Some stars are what is called
variable, they appear larger at one time than another. Algol, in the
head of Medusa, is of this kind. We are told that "The star, at the
brightest, appears of the second magnitude, and remains so for about
two days, fourteen hours. Its light then diminishes, and so rapidly,
that in three and a half hours it is reduced to the fourth magnitude. It
wears this aspect rather more than fifteen minutes, then increases,
and in three and a half hours more resumes its former appearance." I
am afraid that many of us are variable stars; if we do sometimes wax
dim, it will be well if we regain our brightness as quickly as Algol
does. Then there are thousands of double stars. I hope that you will
each get a wife who will always shine with you, and never eclipse you,
for a double star may be very bright at one time, and sometimes be
eclipsed altogether. There are also triple stars, or systems, and
quadruple systems, and there are, in some cases, hundreds or
thousands all spinning round one another, and around their central
luminaries. Wonderful combinations of glory and beauty may be
seen in the stellar sky; and some of these stars are red, some blue,
some yellow, all the colours of the rainbow are represented in them.
It would be very wonderful to live in one of them, and to look across
the sky, and see all the glories of the heavens that God has made. On
the whole, however, for the present, I am quite content to abide upon
this little planet, especially as I am not able to change it for another
home, until God so wills it.

*The Heavens and the Earth. A popular Handbook of Astronomy. By
Thomas Milner, M.A., F.R.G.S. Religious Tract Society. (Now out of
print.)
In September, 1892, a fifth satellite was discovered through the
great telescope at the Lick Observatory on Mount Hamilton,
California.The Voices of the Stars. By J. E. Walker, M.A. Elliot Stock.

----MONERGISM BOOKS
Lectures to My Students by C. H. Spurgeon, Copyright © 2018
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted
the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text
of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored
in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system,
in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of Monergism Books.
ePub, .mobi & .pdf Editions September 2018. Requests for
information should be addressed to: Monergism Books, PO Box 491,
West Linn, OR 97068
