PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 28
Attention!


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 9. Attention!.

LECTURE IX
ATTENTION!
Our subject is one which I find scarcely ever noticed in any books
upon homiletics--a very curious fact, for it is a most important
matter, and worthy of more than one chapter. I suppose the
homiletical savans consider that their entire volumes are seasoned
with this subject, and that they need not give it to us in lumps,
because, like sugar in tea, it flavours the whole. That overlooked
topic is, How TO OBTAIN AND RETAIN THE ATTENTION OF OUR
HEARERS. Their attention must be gained, or nothing can be done
with them: and it must be retained, or we may go on word-spinning,
but no good will come of it.
Over the head of military announcements our English officers always
place the word "ATTENTION!" in large capitals, and we need some
such word over all our sermons. We need the earnest, candid,
wakeful, continued attention of all those who are in the congregation.
If men's minds are wandering far away they cannot receive the truth,
and it is much the same if they are inactive. Sin cannot be taken out
of men, as Eve was taken out of the side of Adam, while they are fast
asleep. They must be awake, understanding what we are saying, and
feeling its force, or else we may as well go to sleep too. There are
preachers who care very little whether they are attended to or not; so
long as they can hold on through the allotted time it is of very small
importance to them whether their people hear for eternity, or hear in
vain: the sooner such ministers sleep in the churchyard and preach
by the verse on their gravestones the better. Some brethren speak up
the ventilator, as if they sought the attention of the angels; and
others look down upon their book as if they were absorbed in
thought, or had themselves for an audience, and felt much honoured
thereby. Why do not such brethren preach on the prairie and edify
the stars? If their preaching has no reference to their hearers they

might do so with evident propriety; if a sermon be a soliloquy, the
more lonely the performer the better. To a rational preacher (and all
are not rational) it must seem essential to interest all his audience,
from the eldest to the youngest. We ought not to make even children
inattentive. "Make them inattentive," say you, "who does that?" I say
that most preachers do; and when children are not quiet in a meeting
it is often as much our fault as theirs. Can you not put in a little story
or parable on purpose for the little ones? Can you not catch the eye of
the boy in the gallery, and the little girl downstairs, who have begun
to fidget, and smile them into order? I often talk with my eyes to the
orphan boys at the foot of my pulpit. We want all eyes fixed upon us
and all ears open to us. To me it is an annoyance if even a blind man
does not look at me with his face. If I see anybody turning round,
whispering, nodding, or looking at his watch, I judge that I am not up
to the mark, and must by some means win these minds. Very seldom
have I to complain, and when I do, my general plan is to complain of
myself, and own that I have no right to attention unless I know how
to command it.
Now, there are some congregations whose attention you do not
readily gain; they do not care to be interested. It is useless to scold
them; that will be like throwing a bush at a bird to catch it. The fact
is, that in most cases there is another person whom you should scold,
and that is yourself. It may be their duty to attend, but it is far more
your duty to make them do so. You must attract the fish to your
hook, and if they do not come you should blame the fisherman and
not the fish. Compel them to stand still a while and hear what God
the Lord would speak to their souls. The minister who recommended
the old lady to take snuff in order to keep from dozing was very
properly rebuked by her reply,--that if he would put more snuff into
the sermon she would be awake enough. We must plentifully cast
snuff into the sermon, or something yet more awakening. Recollect
that to some of our people it is not so easy to be attentive; many of
them are not interested in the matter, and they have not felt enough
of any gracious operation on their hearts to make them confess that

the gospel is of any special value to them. Concerning the Saviour
whom you preach you may say to them,
"Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by,
Is it nothing to you that Jesus should die?"
Many of them have through the week been borne down by the press
of business cares. They ought to roll their burden on the Lord; but do
you always do so? Do you always find it easy to escape from
anxieties? Are you able to forget the sick wife and the ailing children
at home? There is no doubt whatever that many come into the house
of God loaded heavily with the thoughts of their daily avocations. The
farmer recollects the fields that are to be ploughed or to be sown; it is
a wet Sunday, and he is reflecting upon the yellow look of the young
wheats. The merchant sees that dishonoured bill fluttering before his
eyes, and the tradesman counts over his bad debts. I should not
wonder if the colours of the ladies' ribbons and the creak of the
gentlemen's boots disturb many. There are troublesome flies about,
you know: Beelzebub, the god of flies, takes care that wherever there
is a gospel feast the guests should be worried with petty annoyances.
Often mental mosquitoes sting the man while you are preaching to
him, and he is thinking more of trifling distractions than of your
discourse; is it so very wonderful that he does? You must drive the
mosquitoes away, and secure your people's undistracted thoughts,
turning them out of the channel in which they have been running six
days into one suitable for the Sabbath. You must have sufficient
leverage in your discourse and its subject to lift them right up from
the earth to which they cleave, and to elevate them a little nearer
heaven.
Frequently it is very difficult for congregations to attend, because of
the place and the atmosphere. For instance, if the place is like this
room at present, sealed against the pure air, with every window
closed, they have enough to do to breathe, and cannot think of
anything else: when people have inhaled over and over again the air
which has been in other people's lungs, the whole machinery of life

gets out of gear, and they are more likely to feel an aching head than
a broken heart. The next best thing to the grace of God for a preacher
is oxygen. Pray that the windows of heaven may be opened, but begin
by opening the windows of your meeting-house. Look at many of our
country places, and I am afraid our city chapels too, and you will find
that the windows are not made to open. The modern barbarous style
of building gives us no more ceiling than a barn, and no more
openings for ventilation than would be found in an oriental dungeon,
where the tyrant expected his prisoner to die by inches. What would
we think of a house where the windows could not be opened? Would
any of you hire such a dwelling? Yet Gothic architecture and silly
pride make many persons renounce the wholesome sash window for
little holes in the ceiling, or bird traps in the windows, and so places
are made far less comfortable than Nebuchadnezzar's furnace was to
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Provided all such chapels were
properly insured, I could not pray for their preservation from fire.
Even where the windows will open they are often kept closed by the
month together, and from Sunday to Sunday the impure atmosphere
is unchanged. This ought not to be endured. I know some people do
not notice such things, and I have heard it remarked that foxes are
not killed by the stench of their own holes; but I am not a fox, and
bad air makes me dull, and my hearers dull too. A gust of fresh air
through the building might be to the people the next best thing to the
gospel itself; at least it would put them into a fit frame of mind to
receive the truth. Take trouble on week days to remove the hindrance
arising from foul air. In my former chapel in Park Street I mentioned
to my deacons several times my opinion that the upper panes of the
iron-framed windows had better be taken out, as the windows were
not made to open. I mentioned this several times, and nothing came
of it; but it providentially happened one Monday that somebody
removed most of those panes in a masterly manner, almost as well as
if they had been taken out by a glazier. There was considerable
consternation, and much conjecture as to who had committed the
crime, and I proposed that a reward of five pounds should be offered
for the discovery of the offender, who when found should receive the
amount as a present. The reward was not forthcoming, and therefore

I have not felt it to be my duty to inform against the individual. I
trust none of you will suspect me, for if you do I shall have to confess
that I have walked with the stick which let the oxygen into that
stifling structure.
Sometimes the manners of our people are inimical to attention; they
are not in the habit of attending; they attend the chapel but do not
attend to the preacher. They are accustomed to look round at every
one who enters the place, and they come in at all times, sometimes
with much stamping, squeaking of boots, and banging of doors. I was
preaching once to a people who continually looked round, and I
adopted the expedient of saying, "Now, friends, as it is so very
interesting to you to know who comes in, and it disturbs me so very
much for you to look round, I will, if you like, describe each one as he
comes in, so that you may sit and look at me, and keep up at least a
show of decency." I described one gentleman who came in, who
happened to be a friend whom I could depict without offence, as "a
very respectable gentleman who had just taken his hat off," and so
on; and after that one attempt I found it was not necessary to
describe any more, because they felt shocked at what I was doing,
and I assured them that I was much more shocked that they should
render it necessary for me to reduce their conduct to such an
absurdity. It cured them for the time being, and I hope for ever,
much to their pastor's joy.
We will now suppose that this is set right. You have let the foul air
out of the place, and reformed the manners of the people. What
next? In order to get attention, the first golden rule is, always say
something worth hearing. Most persons possess an instinct which
leads them to desire to hear a good thing. They have a similar
instinct, also, which you had better take note of, namely, that which
prevents their seeing the good of attentively listening to mere words.
It is not a severe criticism to say that there are ministers whose
words stand in a very large proportion to their thoughts. In fact, their
words hide their thoughts, if they have any. They pour out heaps of
chaff, and, perhaps, there may be somewhere or other an oat or two,

but it would be hard to say where. Congregations will not long attend
to words, words, words, words, and nothing else. Amongst the
commandments I am not aware of one which runs thus: "Thou shalt
not be verbose," but it may be comprehended under the command,
"Thou shalt not steal;" for it is a fraud upon your hearers to give
them words instead of spiritual food. "In the multitude of words
there wanteth not sin," even in the best preacher. Give your hearers
something which they can treasure up and remember; something
likely to be useful to them, the best matter from the best of places,
solid doctrine from the divine Word. Give them manna fresh from
the skies; not the same thing over and over again, in the same form
ad nauseam, like workhouse bread cut into the same shape all the
year round. Give them something striking, something that a man
might get up in the middle of the night to hear, and which is worth
his walking fifty miles to listen to. You are quite capable of doing
that. Do it, brethren. Do it continually, and you will have all the
attention you can desire.
Let the good matter which you give them be very clearly arranged.
There is a great deal in that. It is possible to heap up a vast mass of
good things all in a muddle. Ever since the day I was sent to shop
with a basket, and purchased a pound of tea, a quarter-of-a-pound of
mustard, and three pounds of rice, and on my way home saw a pack
of hounds and felt it necessary to follow them over hedge and ditch
(as I always did when I was a boy), and found when I reached home
that all the goods were amalgamated--tea, mustard, and rice--into
one awful mess, I have understood the necessity of packing up my
subjects in good stout parcels, bound round with the thread of my
discourse; and this makes me keep to firstly, secondly, and thirdly,
however unfashionable that method may now be. People will not
drink your mustardy tea, nor will they enjoy muddled-up sermons, in
which you cannot tell head from tail, because they have neither, but
are like Mr. Bright's Skye terrier, whose head and tail were both
alike. Put the truth before men in a logical, orderly manner, so that
they can easily remember it, and they will the more readily receive it.

Be sure, moreover, to speak plainly; because, however excellent
your matter, if a man does not comprehend it, it can be of no use to
him; you might as well have spoken to him in the language of
Kamskatka as in your own tongue, if you use phrases that are quite
out of his line, and modes of expression which are not suitable to his
mind. Go up to his level if he is a poor man; go down to his
understanding if he is an educated person. You smile at my
contorting the terms in that manner, but I think there is more going
up in being plain to the illiterate, than there is in being refined for
the polite; at any rate, it is the more difficult of the two, and most like
the Saviour's mode of speech. It is wise to walk in a path where your
auditors can accompany you, and not to mount the high horse and
ride over their heads. Our Lord and Master was the King of
preachers, and yet He never was above anybody's comprehension,
except so far as the grandeur and glory of His matter were
concerned; His words and utterances were such that He spake like
"the holy child Jesus." Let your hearts indite a good matter, clearly
arranged and plainly put, and you are pretty sure to gain the ear, and
so the heart.
Attend also to your manner of address; aim in that at the promotion
of attention. And here I should say, as a rule do not read your
sermons. There have been a few readers who have exercised great
power, as, for instance, Dr. Chalmers, who could not have had a
more attentive audience had he been extemporising; but then I do
not suppose that we are equal to Dr. Chalmers: men of such
eminence may read if they prefer it, but for us there is "a more
excellent way." The best reading I have ever heard has tasted of
paper, and has stuck in my throat. I have not relished it, for my
digestion is not good enough to dissolve foolscap. It is better to do
without the manuscript, even if you are driven to recite. It is best of
all if you need neither to recite nor to read. If you must read, mind
that you do it to perfection. Be the very best of readers, and you had
need to be if you would secure attention.

Here let me say, if you would be listened to, do not extemporise in
the emphatic sense, for that is as bad as reading, or perhaps worse,
unless the manuscript was written extemporaneously; I mean
without previous study. Do not go into the pulpit and say the first
thing that comes to hand, for the uppermost thing with most men is
mere froth. Your people need discourses which have been prayed
over and laboriously prepared. People do not want raw food; it must
be cooked and made ready for them. We must give out of our very
souls, in the words which naturally suggest themselves, the matter
which has been as thoroughly prepared by us as it possibly could
have been by a sermon-writer; indeed, it should be even better
prepared, if we would speak well. The best method is, in my
judgment, that in which the man does not extemporise the matter,
but extemporises the words; the language comes to him at the
moment, but the theme has been well thought out, and like a master
in Israel he speaks of that which he knows, and testifies of what he
has seen.
In order to get attention, make your manner as pleasing as it can
possibly be. Do not, for instance, indulge in monotones. Vary your
voice continually. Vary your speed as well--dash as rapidly as a
lightning flash, and anon, travel forward in quiet majesty. Shift your
accent, move your emphasis, and avoid sing-song. Vary the tone; use
the bass sometimes, and let the thunders roll within; at other times
speak as you ought to do generally--from the lips, and let your speech
be conversational. Anything for a change. Human nature craves for
variety, and God grants it in nature, providence and grace; let us
have it in sermons also. I shall not, however, dwell much upon this,
because preachers have been known to arouse and sustain attention
by their matter alone, when their mode of speech has been very
imperfect. If Richard Sibbes, the Puritan, were here this afternoon, I
would guarantee him fixed attention to anything that he used to say,
and yet he stammered dreadfully. One of his contemporaries says he
Sib-ilated, he lisped and hissed so much. We need not look far for
instances in modern pulpits, for there are too many of them; but we
may remember that Moses was slow of speech, and yet every ear was

attent to his words; probably Paul also laboured under a similar
infirmity, for his speech was said to be contemptible; of this,
however, we are not sure, for it was only the criticism of his enemies.
Paul's power in the churches was very great, and yet he was not
always able to maintain attention when his sermon was long, for at
least one hearer went to sleep under him with serious result. Manner
is not everything. Still, if you have gathered good matter, it is a pity
to convey it meanly; a king should not ride in a dust-cart; the
glorious doctrines of grace should not be slovenly delivered. Right
royal truths should ride in a chariot of gold. Bring forth the noblest of
your milk-white steeds, and let the music sound forth melodiously
from the silver trumpets, as truth rides through the streets. If people
do not attend, do not let them find excuses in our faulty utterance. If,
however, we cannot mend in this respect let us be the more diligent
to make up for it by the richness of our matter, and on all occasions
let us do our very best.
As a rule, do not make the introduction too long. It is always a pity to
build a great porch to a little house. An excellent Christian woman
once heard John Howe, and, as he took up an hour in his preface, her
observation was, that the dear good man was so long a time in laying
the cloth, that she lost her appetite: she did not think there would be
any dinner after all. Spread your table quickly, and have done with
the clatter of the knives and the plates. You may have seen a certain
edition of Doddridge's Rise and Progress of Religion in the Soul,
with an introductory essay by John Foster. The essay is both bigger
and better than the book and deprives Doddridge of the chance of
being read. Is not this preposterous? Avoid this error in your own
productions. I prefer to make the introduction of my sermon very
like that of the town-crier, who rings his bell and cries, "Oh, yes! Oh,
yes! This is to give notice," merely to let people know that he has
news for them, and wants them to listen. To do that, the introduction
should have something striking in it. It is well to fire a startling shot
as the signal gun to clear the decks for action. Do not start at the full
pitch and tension of your mind, but yet in such way that all will be
led to expect a good time. Do not make your exordium a pompous

introduction into nothing, but a step to something better still. Be
alive at the very commencement.
In preaching, do not repeat yourselves. I used to hear a divine who
had a habit, after he had uttered about a dozen sentences, of saying,
"As I have already observed," or, "I repeat what I before remarked."
Well, good soul, as there was nothing particular in what he had said,
the repetition only revealed the more clearly the nakedness of the
land. If it was very good, and you said it forcibly, why go over it
again? And if it was a feeble affair, why exhibit it a second time?
Occasionally, of course, the repetition of a few sentences may be very
telling; anything may be good occasionally, and yet be very vicious as
a habit. Who wonders that people do not listen the first time when
they know it is all to come over again?
Yet further, do not repeat the same idea over and over again in other
words. Let there be something fresh in each sentence. Be not for ever
hammering away at the same nail: yours is a large Bible; permit the
people to enjoy its length and breadth. And, brethren, do not think it
necessary or important every time you preach to give a complete
summary of theology, or a formal digest of doctrines, after the
manner of Dr. Gill--not that I would discredit or speak a word
against Dr. Gill--his method is admirable for a body of divinity, or a
commentary, but not suitable for preaching. I know a divine whose
sermons whenever they are printed read like theological summaries,
more fitted for a classroom than for a pulpit--they fall flat on the
public ear. Our hearers do not want the bare bones of technical
definition, but meat and flavour. Definitions and differences are all
very well; but when they are the staple of a sermon they remind us of
the young man whose discourse was made up of various important
distinctions. Upon this performance an old deacon observed that
there was one distinction which he had omitted, namely, the
distinction between meat and bones. If preachers do not make that
distinction, all their other distinctions will not bring them much
distinction.

In order to maintain attention, avoid being too long. An old preacher
used to say to a young man who preached an hour,--"My dear friend,
I do not care what else you preach about, but I wish you would
always preach about forty minutes." We ought seldom to go much
beyond that--forty minutes, or, say, three-quarters of an hour. If a
fellow cannot say all he has to say in that time, when will he say it?
But somebody said he liked "to do justice to his subject." Well, but
ought he not to do justice to his people, or, at least, have a little
mercy upon them, and not keep them too long? The subject will not
complain of you, but the people will. In some country places, in the
afternoon especially, the farmers have to milk their cows, and one
farmer bitterly complained to me about a young man--I think from
this College--"Sir, he ought to have given over at four o'clock, but he
kept on till half-past, and there were all my cows waiting to be
milked! How would he have liked it if he had been a cow?" There
was a great deal of sense in that question. The Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ought to have prosecuted that
young sinner. How can farmers hear to profit when they have cowson the-brain? The mother feels morally certain during that extra ten
minutes of your sermon that the baby is crying, or the fire is out, and
she cannot and will not give her heart to your ministrations. You are
keeping her ten minutes longer than she bargained for, and she looks
upon it as a piece of injustice on your part. There is a kind of moral
compact between you and your congregation that you will not weary
them more than an hour-and-a-half, and if you keep them longer, it
amounts to an infraction of a treaty and a piece of practical
dishonesty of which you ought not to be guilty. Brevity is a virtue
within the reach of all of us; do not let us lose the opportunity of
gaining the credit which it brings. If you ask me how you may
shorten your sermons, I should say, study them better. Spend more
time in the study that you may need less in the pulpit. We are
generally longest when we have least to say. A man with a great deal
of well-prepared matter will probably not exceed forty minutes;
when he has less to say he will go on for fifty minutes, and when he
has absolutely nothing he will need an hour to say it in. Attend to
these minor things and they will help to retain attention.

If you want to have the attention of your people--to have it
thoroughly and always, it can only be accomplished by their being
led by the Spirit of God into an elevated and devout state of mind. If
your people are teachable, prayerful, active, earnest, devout, they will
come up to the house of God on purpose to get a blessing. They will
take their seats prayerfully, asking God to speak to them through
you; they will remain on the watch for every word, and will not
weary. They will have an appetite for the gospel, for they know the
sweetness of the heavenly manna, and they will be eager to gather
their appointed portions. No man will ever have a congregation to
preach to which surpasses my own in this respect. Indeed, those with
whom the preacher is most at home are usually the best hearers for
him. It is comparatively easy to me to preach at the Tabernacle; my
people come on purpose to hear something, and their expectation
helps to fulfil itself. If they would hear another preacher with the
same expectancy, I believe they would generally be satisfied; though
there are exceptions.
When the preacher first settles, he cannot expect that his
congregation will give him that solemn earnest attention which those
obtain who stand up like fathers among their own children, endeared
to their people by a thousand memories, and esteemed for age and
experience. Our whole life must be such as to add weight to our
words, so that in after years we shall be able to wield the invincible
eloquence of a long-sustained character, and obtain, not merely the
attention, but the affectionate veneration of our flock. If by our
prayers and tears and labours our people become spiritually healthy,
we need not fear that we shall lose their attention. A people
hungering after righteousness, and a minister anxious to feed their
souls, will act in sweetest harmony with each other when their
common theme is the Word of the Lord.
If you need another direction for winning attention, I should say, be
interested yourself, and you will interest others. There is more in
those words than there seems to be, and so I will follow a custom
which I just now condemned, and repeat the sentence--be interested

yourself, and you will interest other people. Your subject must weigh
so much upon your own mind that you dedicate all your faculties at
their best to the deliverance of your soul concerning it; and then
when your hearers see that the topic has engrossed you, it will by
degrees engross them.
Do you wonder that people do not attend to a man who does not feel
that he has anything important to say? Do you wonder that they do
not listen with all their ears when a man does not speak with all his
heart? Do you marvel that their thoughts ramble to subjects which
are real to them when they find that the preacher is wasting time
over matters which he treats as if they were fiction? Romaine used to
say it was well to understand the art of preaching, but infinitely
better to know the heart of preaching; and in that saying there is no
little weight. The heart of preaching, the throwing of the soul into it,
the earnestness which pleads as for life itself, is half the battle as to
gaining attention. At the same time, you cannot hold men's minds in
rapt attention by mere earnestness if you have nothing to say. People
will not stand at their doors for ever to hear a fellow beat a drum;
they will come out to see what he is at, but when they find that it is
much ado about nothing, they will slam the door and go in again, as
much as to say, "You have taken us in and we do not like it." Have
something to say, and say it earnestly, and the congregation will be at
your feet.
It may be superfluous to remark that for the mass of our people it is
well that there should be a goodly number of illustrations in our
discourses. We have the example of our Lord for that: and most of
the greatest preachers have abounded in similes, metaphors,
allegories, and anecdotes. But beware of overdoing this business. I
read the other day the diary of a German lady who has been
converted from Lutheranism to our faith, and she speaks of a certain
village where she lives: "There is a mission-station here, and young
men come down to preach to us. I do not wish to find fault with these
young gentlemen, but they tell us a great many very pretty little
stories, and I do not think there is much else in what they say. Also I

have heard some of their little stories before, therefore they do not so
much interest me, as they would do if they would tell us some good
doctrine out of the Scriptures." The same thing has no doubt crossed
many other minds. "Pretty stories" are all very well, but it will never
do to rely upon them as the great attraction of a sermon. Moreover,
take warning concerning certain of these "pretty little stories," for
their day is over and gone; the poor things are worn threadbare and
ought to go into the rag-bag. I have heard some of them so many
times, that I could tell them myself, but there is no need. From stock
anecdotes may both ourselves and our hearers be mercifully
delivered. Ancient jests sicken us when witlings retail them as their
own ideas, and anecdotes to which our great-grandfathers listened
have much the same effect upon the mind. Beware of those extremely
popular compilations of illustrations which are in every Sundayschool teacher's hand, for nobody will thank you for repeating what
everybody already knows by heart: if you tell anecdotes let them have
some degree of freshness and originality; keep your eyes open, and
gather flowers from the garden and the field with your hands; they
will be far more acceptable than withered specimens borrowed from
other men's bouquets, however beautiful those may once have been.
Illustrate richly and aptly, but not so much with parables imported
from foreign sources as with apt similes growing out of the subject
itself. Do not, however, think the illustration everything; it is the
window, but of what use is the light which it admits if you have
nothing for the light to reveal? Garnish your dishes, but remember
that the joint is the main point to consider, not the garnishing. Real
instruction must be given and solid doctrine taught, or you will find
your imagery pall upon your hearers, and they will pine for spiritual
meat.
In your sermons cultivate what Father Taylor calls "the surprise
power." There is a great deal of force in that for winning attention.
Do not say what everybody expected you would say. Keep your
sentences out of ruts. If you have already said, "Salvation is all of
grace" do not always add, "and not by human merit," but vary it and
say, "Salvation is all of grace; self-righteousness has not a corner to

hide its head in." I fear I cannot recall one of Mr. Taylor's sentences
so as to do it justice, but it was something like this: "Some of you
make no advance in the divine life, because you go forward a little
way and then you float back again: just like a vessel on a tidal river
which goes down with the stream just far enough to be carried back
again on the return tide. So you make good progress for a while, and
then all of a sudden--what did he say?--"you hitch up in some muddy
creek." Did he not also repeat us a speech to this effect,--"He felt sure
that if they were converted they would walk uprightly and keep their
bullocks out of their neighbour's corn."? Occasional resorts to this
system of surprise will keep an audience in a state of proper
expectancy. I sat last year about this time on the beach at Mentone
by the Mediterranean Sea. The waves were very gently rising and
falling, for there is little or no tide, and the wind was still.
The waves crept up languidly one after another, and I took little heed
of them, though they were just at my feet. Suddenly, as if seized with
a new passion, the sea sent up one far-reaching billow, which
drenched me thoroughly. Quiet as I had been before, you can readily
conceive how quickly I was on my feet, and how speedily my daydreaming ended. I observed to a ministering brother at my side,
"This shows us how to preach, to wake people up we must astonish
them with something they were not looking for." Brethren, take them
at unawares. Let your thunderbolt drop out of a clear sky. When all is
calm and bright let the tempest rush up, and by contrast make its
terrors all the greater. Remember, however, that nothing will avail if
you go to sleep yourself while you are preaching. Is that possible?
Oh, possible! It is done every Sunday. Many ministers are more than
half-asleep all through the sermon; indeed, they never were awake at
any time, and probably never will be unless a cannon should be fired
off near their ear: tame phrases, hackneyed expressions, and dreary
monotones make the staple of their discourses, and they wonder that
the people are so drowsy: I confess I do not.
A very useful help in securing attention is a pause. Pull up short
every now and then, and the passengers on your coach will wake up.

The miller goes to sleep while the mill wheels revolve; but if by some
means or other the grinding ceases, the good man starts and cries,
"What now?" On a sultry summer's day, if nothing will keep off the
drowsy feeling, be very short, sing more than usual, or call on a
brother or two to pray. A minister who saw that the people would
sleep, sat down and observed, "I saw you were all resting, and I
thought I would rest too." Andrew Fuller had barely commenced a
sermon when he saw the people going to sleep. He said, "Friends,
friends, friends, this won't do. I have thought sometimes when you
were asleep that it was my fault, but now you are asleep before I
begin, and it must be your fault. Pray wake up and give me an
opportunity of doing you some good." Just so. Know how to pause.
Make a point of interjecting arousing parentheses of quietude.
Speech is silver, but silence is golden when hearers are inattentive.
Keep on, on, on, on, on, with commonplace matter and monotonous
tone, and you are rocking the cradle, and deeper slumbers will result;
give the cradle a jerk, and sleep will flee.
I suggest again that in order to secure attention all through a
discourse we must make the people feel that they have an interest in
what we are saying to them. This is, in fact, a most essential point,
because nobody sleeps while he expects to hear something to his
advantage. I have heard of some very strange things, but I never did
hear of a person going to sleep while a will was being read in which
he expected a legacy, neither have I heard of a prisoner going to sleep
while the judge was summing up, and his life was hanging in
jeopardy. Self-interest quickens attention. Preach upon practical
themes, pressing, present, personal matters, and you will secure an
earnest hearing.
It will be well to prevent attendants traversing the aisles to meddle
with gas or candles, or to distribute plates for collections, or to open
windows. Deacons and sextons trotting over the place are a torture
never to be patiently endured, and should be kindly, but decidedly,
requested to suspend their perambulations.

Late attendance, also, needs remedying, and our gentlest reasonings
and expostulations must be brought to bear upon it. I feel sure that
the devil has a hand in many disturbances in the congregation, which
jar upon our nerves, and distract our thoughts: the banging of a pew
door, the sharp fall of a stick on the floor, or the cry of a child, are all
convenient means in the hands of the evil one for hindering us in our
work; we may, therefore, very justifiably beg our people to preserve
our usefulness from this class of assaults.
I gave you a golden rule for securing attention at the
commencement, namely, always say something worth hearing; I will
now give you a diamond rule, and conclude. Be yourself clothed with
the Spirit of God, and then no question about attention or nonattention will arise. Come fresh from the closet and from communion
with God, to speak to men for God with all your heart and soul, and
you must have power over them. You have golden chains in your
mouth which will hold them fast. When God speaks men must listen;
and though He may speak through a poor feeble man like
themselves, the majesty of the truth will compel them to regard His
voice. Supernatural power must be your reliance. We say to you,
perfect yourselves in oratory, cultivate all the fields of knowledge,
make your sermon mentally and rhetorically all it ought to be (you
ought to do no less in such a service), but at the same time
remember, "it is not by might, nor by power," that men are
regenerated or sanctified, but "by my Spirit, saith the Lord." Are you
not conscious sometimes of being clad with zeal as with a cloak, and
filled to the full with the Spirit of God? At such times you have had a
hearing people, and, ere long, a believing people; but if you are not
thus endowed with power from on high, you are to them no more
than a musician who plays upon a goodly instrument, or sings a
sweet song with a clear voice, reaching the ear but not the heart. If
you do not touch the heart you will soon weary the ear. Clothe
yourself, then, with the power of the Spirit of God, and preach to
men as those who must soon give an account, and who desire that
their account may not be painful to their people and grievous to
themselves, but that it may be to the glory of God.

Brethren, may the Lord be with you, while you go forth in His name
and cry, "He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."
