PURITAN GOLD -- The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 14
Doubting Castle and Giant Despair


{288} At this they trembled greatly, and I think that Christian fell
into a swoon; but, coming a little to himself again, they renewed
their discourse about the Giant's counsel; and whether yet they
had best to take it or no. Now Christian again seemed to be for
doing it, but Hopeful made his second reply as followeth:--

{289} HOPE. My brother, said he, rememberest thou not how valiant
thou hast been heretofore? Apollyon could not crush thee, nor
could all that thou didst hear, or see, or feel, in the Valley of
the Shadow of Death. What hardship, terror, and amazement hast
thou already gone through! And art thou now nothing but fear!
Thou seest that I am in the dungeon with thee, a far weaker man by
nature than thou art; also, this Giant has wounded me as well as
thee, and hath also cut off the bread and water from my mouth; and
with thee I mourn without the light. But let us exercise a little
more patience; remember how thou playedst the man at Vanity Fair,
and wast neither afraid of the chain, nor cage, nor yet of bloody
death. Wherefore let us (at least to avoid the shame, that becomes
not a Christian to be found in) bear up with patience as well as
we can.

{290} Now, night being come again, and the Giant and his wife being
in bed, she asked him concerning the prisoners, and if they had
taken his counsel. To which he replied, They are sturdy rogues, they
choose rather to bear all hardship, than to make away themselves.
Then said she, Take them into the castle-yard to-morrow, and show
them the bones and skulls of those that thou hast already despatched,
and make them believe, ere a week comes to an end, thou also wilt
tear them in pieces, as thou hast done their fellows before them.

{291} So when the morning was come, the Giant goes to them again,
and takes them into the castle-yard, and shows them, as his wife
had bidden him. These, said he, were pilgrims as you are, once,
and they trespassed in my grounds, as you have done; and when I
thought fit, I tore them in pieces, and so, within ten days, I will
do you. Go, get you down to your den again; and with that he beat
them all the way thither. They lay, therefore, all day on Saturday
in a lamentable case, as before. Now, when night was come, and
when Mrs. Diffidence and her husband, the Giant, were got to bed,
they began to renew their discourse of their prisoners; and withal
the old Giant wondered, that he could neither by his blows nor
his counsel bring them to an end. And with that his wife replied,
I fear, said she, that they live in hope that some will come to
relieve them, or that they have picklocks about them, by the means
of which they hope to escape. And sayest thou so, my dear? said
the Giant; I will, therefore, search them in the morning.

{292} Well, on Saturday, about midnight, they began to pray, and
continued in prayer till almost break of day.

Now a little before it was day, good Christian, as one half amazed,
brake out in passionate speech: What a fool, quoth he, am I, thus
to lie in a stinking Dungeon, when I may as well walk at liberty.
I have a Key in my bosom called Promise, that will, I am persuaded,
open any Lock in Doubting Castle. Then said Hopeful, That's good
news; good Brother pluck it out of thy bosom and try.

A key in Christian's bosom, called Promise, opens any lock in
Doubting Castle

Then Christian pulled it out of his bosom, and began to try at the
Dungeon door, whose bolt (as he turned the Key) gave back, and the
door flew open with ease, and Christian and Hopeful both came out.
Then he went to the outward door that leads into the Castle-yard,
and with his Key opened that door also. After he went to the iron
Gate, for that must be opened too, but that Lock went damnable
hard, yet the Key did open it. Then they thrust open the Gate to
make their escape with speed; but that Gate as it opened made such
a creaking, that it waked Giant Despair, who hastily rising to
pursue his Prisoners, felt his limbs to fail, for his Fits took
him again, so that he could by no means go after them. Then they
went on, and came to the King's High-way again, and so were safe,
because they were out of his jurisdiction

{294} Now, when they were over the stile, they began to contrive
with themselves what they should do at that stile to prevent those
that should come after from falling into the hands of Giant Despair.
So they consented to erect there a pillar, and to engrave upon the
side thereof this sentence--"Over this stile is the way to Doubting
Castle, which is kept by Giant Despair, who despiseth the King of
the Celestial Country, and seeks to destroy his holy pilgrims."
Many, therefore, that followed after read what was written, and
escaped the danger. This done, they sang as follows:--

 Out of the way we went, and then we found
 What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground;
 And let them that come after have a care,
 Lest heedlessness makes them, as we, to fare.
 Lest they for trespassing his prisoners are,
 Whose castle's Doubting, and whose name's Despair.


{295} They went then till they came to the Delectable Mountains,
which mountains belong to the Lord of that hill of which we have
spoken before; so they went up to the mountains, to behold the
gardens and orchards, the vineyards and fountains of water; where
also they drank and washed themselves, and did freely eat of the
vineyards. Now there were on the tops of these mountains Shepherds
feeding their flocks, and they stood by the highway side. The
Pilgrims therefore went to them, and leaning upon their staves, (as
is common with weary pilgrims when they stand to talk with any by
the way), they asked, Whose Delectable Mountains are these? And
whose be the sheep that feed upon them?


 Mountains delectable they now ascend,
 Where Shepherds be, which to them do commend
 Alluring things, and things that cautious are,
 Pilgrims are steady kept by faith and fear.


{296} SHEP. These mountains are Immanuel's Land, and they are
within sight of his city; and the sheep also are his, and he laid
down his life for them. [John 10:11]

CHR. Is this the way to the Celestial City?

SHEP. You are just in your way.

CHR. How far is it thither?

SHEP. Too far for any but those that shall get thither indeed.

CHR. Is the way safe or dangerous?

SHEP. Safe for those for whom it is to be safe; but the transgressors
shall fall therein. [Hos. 14:9]

CHR. Is there, in this place, any relief for pilgrims that are
weary and faint in the way?

SHEP. The Lord of these mountains hath given us a charge not to be
forgetful to entertain strangers, therefore the good of the place
is before you. [Heb. 13:1-2]

{297} I saw also in my dream, that when the Shepherds perceived
that they were wayfaring men, they also put questions to them, to
which they made answer as in other places; as, Whence came you?
and, How got you into the way? and, By what means have you so
persevered therein? For but few of them that begin to come hither
do show their face on these mountains. But when the Shepherds heard
their answers, being pleased therewith, they looked very lovingly
upon them, and said, Welcome to the Delectable Mountains.

{298} The Shepherds, I say, whose names were Knowledge, Experience,
Watchful, and Sincere, took them by the hand, and had them to their
tents, and made them partake of that which was ready at present.
They said, moreover, We would that ye should stay here awhile, to
be acquainted with us; and yet more to solace yourselves with the
good of these Delectable Mountains. They then told them, that
they were content to stay; so they went to their rest that night,
because it was very late.

{299} Then I saw in my dream, that in the morning the Shepherds called
up to Christian and Hopeful to walk with them upon the mountains;
so they went forth with them, and walked a while, having a pleasant
prospect on every side. Then said the Shepherds one to another,
Shall we show these pilgrims some wonders? So when they had concluded
to do it, they had them first to the top of a hill called Error,
which was very steep on the furthest side, and bid them look down
to the bottom. So Christian and Hopeful looked down, and saw at
the bottom several men dashed all to pieces by a fall that they
had from the top. Then said Christian, What meaneth this? The
Shepherds answered, Have you not heard of them that were made to
err by hearkening to Hymeneus and Philetus as concerning the faith
of the resurrection of the body? [2 Tim. 2:17,18] They answered,
Yes. Then said the Shepherds, Those that you see lie dashed
in pieces at the bottom of this mountain are they; and they have
continued to this day unburied, as you see, for an example to others
to take heed how they clamber too high, or how they come too near
the brink of this mountain.

{300} Then I saw that they had them to the top of another mountain,
and the name of that is Caution, and bid them look afar off; which,
when they did, they perceived, as they thought, several men walking
up and down among the tombs that were there; and they perceived
that the men were blind, because they stumbled sometimes upon the
tombs, and because they could not get out from among them. Then
said Christian, What means this?

{301} The Shepherds then answered, Did you not see a little below
these mountains a stile, that led into a meadow, on the left hand
of this way? They answered, Yes. Then said the Shepherds, From
that stile there goes a path that leads directly to Doubting Castle,
which is kept by Giant Despair, and these, pointing to them among
the tombs, came once on pilgrimage, as you do now, even till they
came to that same stile; and because the right way was rough in
that place, they chose to go out of it into that meadow, and there
were taken by Giant Despair, and cast into Doubting Castle; where,
after they had been a while kept in the dungeon, he at last did put
out their eyes, and led them among those tombs, where he has left
them to wander to this very day, that the saying of the wise man might
be fulfilled, "He that wandereth out of the way of understanding,
shall remain in the congregation of the dead." [Pro. 21:16] Then
Christian and Hopeful looked upon one another, with tears gushing
out, but yet said nothing to the Shepherds.

{302} Then I saw in my dream, that the Shepherds had them to another
place, in a bottom, where was a door in the side of a hill, and they
opened the door, and bid them look in. They looked in, therefore,
and saw that within it was very dark and smoky; they also thought
that they heard there a rumbling noise as of fire, and a cry of
some tormented, and that they smelt the scent of brimstone. Then
said Christian, What means this? The Shepherds told them, This is
a by-way to hell, a way that hypocrites go in at; namely, such as
sell their birthright, with Esau; such as sell their master, with
Judas; such as blaspheme the gospel, with Alexander; and that
lie and dissemble, with Ananias and Sapphira his wife. Then said
Hopeful to the Shepherds, I perceive that these had on them, even
every one, a show of pilgrimage, as we have now; had they not?

{303} SHEP. Yes, and held it a long time too.

HOPE. How far might they go on in pilgrimage in their day, since
they notwithstanding were thus miserably cast away?

SHEP. Some further, and some not so far, as these mountains.

Then said the Pilgrims one to another, We have need to cry to the
Strong for strength.

SHEP. Ay, and you will have need to use it, when you have it, too.

{304} By this time the Pilgrims had a desire to go forward, and
the Shepherds a desire they should; so they walked together towards
the end of the mountains. Then said the Shepherds one to another,
Let us here show to the Pilgrims the gates of the Celestial City,
if they have skill to look through our perspective glass. The
Pilgrims then lovingly accepted the motion; so they had them to
the top of a high hill, called Clear, and gave them their glass to
look.

{305} Then they essayed to look, but the remembrance of that last
thing that the Shepherds had shown them, made their hands shake;
by means of which impediment, they could not look steadily through
the glass; yet they thought they saw something like the gate, and
also some of the glory of the place. Then they went away, and sang
this song--

 Thus, by the Shepherds, secrets are reveal'd,
 Which from all other men are kept conceal'd.
 Come to the Shepherds, then, if you would see
 Things deep, things hid, and that mysterious be.


{306} When they were about to depart, one of the Shepherds gave
them a note of the way. Another of them bid them beware of the
Flatterer. The third bid them take heed that they sleep not upon
the Enchanted Ground. And the fourth bid them God-speed. So I
awoke from my dream.

{307} And I slept, and dreamed again, and saw the same two Pilgrims
going down the mountains along the highway towards the city. Now,
a little below these mountains, on the left hand, lieth the country
of Conceit; from which country there comes into the way in which
the Pilgrims walked, a little crooked lane. Here, therefore, they
met with a very brisk lad, that came out of that country; and his
name was Ignorance. So Christian asked him from what parts he
came, and whither he was going.

{308} IGNOR. Sir, I was born in the country that lieth off there
a little on the left hand, and I am going to the Celestial City.

CHR. But how do you think to get in at the gate? for you may find
some difficulty there.

IGNOR. As other people do, said he.

CHR. But what have you to show at that gate, that may cause that
the gate should be opened to you?

IGNOR. I know my Lord's will, and I have been a good liver; I pay
every man his own; I pray, fast, pay tithes, and give alms, and
have left my country for whither I am going.

{309} CHR. But thou camest not in at the wicket-gate that is at the
head of this way; thou camest in hither through that same crooked
lane, and therefore, I fear, however thou mayest think of thyself,
when the reckoning day shall come, thou wilt have laid to thy charge
that thou art a thief and a robber, instead of getting admittance
into the city.

IGNOR. Gentlemen, ye be utter strangers to me, I know you not; be
content and follow the religion of your country, and I will follow
the religion of mine. I hope all will be well. And as for the
gate that you talk of, all the world knows that that is a great way
off of our country. I cannot think that any man in all our parts
doth so much as know the way to it, nor need they matter whether
they do or no, since we have, as you see, a fine, pleasant green
lane, that comes down from our country, the next way into the way.

{310} When Christian saw that the man was "wise in his own conceit",
he said to Hopeful, whisperingly, "There is more hope of a fool
than of him." [Prov. 26:12] And said, moreover, "When he that is
a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom faileth him, and he saith to
every one that he is a fool." [Eccl. 10:3] What, shall we talk
further with him, or out-go him at present, and so leave him to
think of what he hath heard already, and then stop again for him
afterwards, and see if by degrees we can do any good to him? Then
said Hopeful--

 Let Ignorance a little while now muse
 On what is said, and let him not refuse
 Good counsel to embrace, lest he remain
 Still ignorant of what's the chiefest gain.
 God saith, those that no understanding have,
 Although he made them, them he will not save.


HOPE. He further added, It is not good, I think, to say all to him
at once; let us pass him by, if you will, and talk to him anon,
even as he is able to bear it.
