PURITAN GOLD -- Religious Affections by Jonathan Edwards: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 11
Part II: No Certain Signs I-III


I. I would mention some things, which are no signs one way or the other, either that
affections are such as true religion consists in, or that they are otherwise; that we may be guarded
against judging of affections by false signs.
II. I would observe some things, wherein those affections which are spiritual and gracious,
differ from those which are not so, and may be distinguished and known.
First, I would take notice of some things, which are no signs that affect titans are gracious,
or that they are not.
It is no sign one way or the other, that religious affections are very great, or raised very
high.
Some are ready to condemn all high affections: if persons appear to have their religious
affections raised to an extraordinary pitch, they are prejudiced against them, and determine that
they are delusions, without further inquiry. But if it be, as has been proved, that true religion lies
very much in religious affections, then it follows, that if there be a great deal of true religion, there
will be great religious affections; if true religion in the hearts of men be raised to a great height,
divine and holy affections will be raised to a great height.
Love is an affection, but will any Christian say, men ought not to love God and Jesus
Christ in a high degree? And will any say, we ought not to have a very great hatred of sin, and a
very deep sorrow for it? Or that we ought not to exercise a high degree of gratitude to God for the
mercies we receive of him, and the great things he has done for the salvation of fallen men? Or that
we should not have very great and strong desires after God and holiness? Is there any who will
profess, that his affections in religion are great enough; and will say, "I have no cause to be
humbled, that I am no more affected with the things of religion than I am; I have no reason to be
ashamed, that I have no greater exercises of love to God and sorrow for sin, and gratitude for the
mercies which I have received?" Who is there that will bless God that he is affected enough with
what he has read and heard of the wonderful love of God to worms and rebels, in giving his only
begotten Son to die for them, and of the dying love of Christ; and will pray that he may not be
affected with them in any higher degree, because high affections are improper and very unlovely in
Christians, being enthusiastical, and ruinous to true religion?
Our text plainly speaks of great and high affections when it speaks of "repining with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory:" here the most superlative expressions are used, which language
will afford. And the Scriptures often require us to exercise very high affections: thus in the first
and great commandment of the law, there is an accumulation of expressions, as though words
were wanting to express the degree in which we ought to love God: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, and with all thy strength." So the saints
are called upon to exercise high degrees of joy: "Rejoice," says Christ to his disciples, "and be
exceeding glad," Matt. 5:12. So it is said, Psalm 68:3, "Let the righteous be glad: let them rejoice
before God: yea, let them exceedingly rejoice." So in the book of Psalms, the saints are often
called upon to shout for joy; and in Luke 6:23, to leap for joy. So they are abundantly called upon
to exercise high degrees of gratitude for mercies, to "praise God with all their hearts, with hearts
lifted up in the ways of the Lord, and their souls magnifying the Lord, singing his praises, talking
of his wondrous works, declaring his doings, &c."

22
And we find the most eminent saints in Scripture often professing high affections. Thus the
Psalmist speaks of his love, as if it were unspeakable; Psal. 119:97, "O how love I thy law!" So he
expresses a great degree of hatred of sin, Psal. 139:21, 29: "Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate
thee? And am not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? I hate them with perfect hatred." He
also expresses a high degree of sorrow for sin: he speaks of his sins "going over his head as a
heavy burden that was too heavy for him: and of his roaring all the day, and his moisture being
turned into the drought of summer," and his bones being as it were broken with sorrow. So he
often expresses great degrees of spiritual desires, in a multitude of the strongest expressions which
can be conceived of; such as "his longing, his soul's thirsting as a dry and thirsty land, where no
water is, his panting, his flesh and heart crying out, his soul's breaking for the longing it hath,"
&c. He expresses the exercises of great and extreme grief for the sins of others, Psal. 119:136,
"Rivers of water run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law." And verse 53, "Horror hath
taken hold upon me, because of the wicked that forsake thy law." He expresses high exercises of
joy, Psal. 21:1: "The king shall joy in thy strength, and in thy salvation how greatly shall he
rejoice." Psal. 71:23 "My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee." Psal. 63:3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
"Because thy loving kindness is better than life; my lips shall praise thee, Thus will I bless thee,
while I live: I will lift up my hands in thy name. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and
fatness; and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips; when I remember thee upon my bed, and
meditate on thee in the night watches. Because thou hast been my help; therefore in the shadow of
thy wings will I rejoice."
The Apostle Paul expresses high exercises of affection. Thus he expresses the exercises of
pity and concern for others' good, even to anguish of heart; a great, fervent, and abundant love,
and earnest and longing desires, and exceeding joy; and speaks of the exultation and triumphs of
his soul, and his earnest expectation and hope, and his abundant tears, and the travails of his soul,
in pity, grief, earnest desires, godly jealousy, and fervent zeal, in many places that have been cited
already, and which therefore I need not repeat. John the Baptist expressed great joy, John 3:39.
Those blessed women that anointed the body of Jesus, are represented as in a very high exercise of
religious affection, on occasion of Christ's resurrection, Matt. 28:8: "And they departed from the
sepulcher with fear and great joy."
It is often foretold of the church of God, in her future happy seasons here on earth, that
they shall exceedingly rejoice: Psal. 89:15, 16, "They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy
countenance. In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteousness shall they be
exalted." Zech. 9:9, "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold
thy King cometh," &c. The same is represented in innumerable other places. And because high
degrees of joy are the proper and genuine fruits of the gospel of Christ, therefore the angel calls
this gospel, "good tidings of great joy, that should be to all people."
The saints and angels in heaven, that have religion in its highest perfection, are exceedingly
affected with what they behold and contemplate of God's perfections and works. They are all as a
pure heavenly flame of fire in their love and in the greatness and strength of their joy and gratitude:
their praises are represented, "as the voice of many waters and as the voice of a great thunder."
Now the only reason why their affections are so much higher than the holy affections of saints on
earth, is, they see the things they are affected by, more according to their truth, and have their
affections more conformed to the nature of things. And therefore, if religious affections in men
here below, are but of the same nature and kind with theirs, the higher they are, and the nearer they
are to theirs in degree, the better, because therein they will be so much the more conformed to
truth, as theirs are.
From these things it certainly appears, that religious affections being in a very high degree,
is no evidence that they are not such as have the nature of true religion. Therefore they do greatly
err, who condemn persons as enthusiasts merely because their affections are very high.
And on the other hand, it is no evidence that religious affections are of a spiritual and
gracious nature, because they are great. It is very manifest by the holy Scripture, our sure and
infallible rule to judge of things of this nature, that there are religious affections which are very
high, that are not spiritual and saving. The Apostle Paul speaks of affections in the Galatians,
which had been exceedingly elevated, and which yet he manifestly speaks of, as fearing that they
were vain, and had come to nothing: Gal. 4:15, "Where is the blessedness you spoke of? For I
bear you record, that if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and have
given them to me." And in the 11th verse, he tells them, "he was afraid of them, lest he had

23
bestowed upon them labor in vain." So the children of Israel were greatly affected with God's
mercy to them, when they had seen how wonderfully he wrought for them at the Red Sea, where
they sang God's praise; though they soon forgot his works. So they were greatly affected again at
mount Sinai, when they saw the marvelous manifestations God made of himself there; and seemed
mightily engaged in their minds, and with great forwardness made answer, when God proposed
his holy covenant to them, saying, "All that the Lord hath spoken will we do, and be obedient."
But how soon was there an end to all this mighty forwardness and engagedness of affection! How
quickly were they turned aside after other gods, rejoicing and shouting around their golden calf! So
great multitudes who were affected with the miracle of raising Lazarus from the dead, were
elevated to a high degree, and made a mighty ado, when Jesus presently after entered into
Jerusalem, exceedingly magnifying Christ, as though the ground were not good enough for the ass
he rode to tread upon; and therefore cut branches of palm trees, and strewed them in the way; yea,
pulled off their garments, and spread them in the way; and cried with loud voices, "Hosanna to the
Son of David, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, hosanna in the highest;" so as to
make the whole city ring again, and put all into an uproar. We learn by the evangelist John, that the
reason why the people made this ado, was because they were affected with the miracle of raising
Lazarus, John 12:18. Here was a vast multitude crying Hosanna on this occasion, so that it gave
occasion to the Pharisees to say, "Behold, the world has gone after him," John 12:19, but Christ
had at that time but few true disciples. And how quickly was this ado at an end! All of this nature is
quelled and dead, when this Jesus stands bound, with a mock robe and a crown of thorns, to be
derided, spit upon, scourged, condemned and executed. Indeed, there was a great and loud outcry
concerning him among the multitude then, as well as before; but of a very different kind: it is not
then, Hosanna, hosanna, but Crucify, crucify.
And it is the concurring voice of all orthodox divines, that there may be religious
affections, which are raised to a very high degree, and yet there be nothing of true religion.1
II. It is no sign that affections have the nature of true religion, or that they have not, that
they have great effects on the body.
All affections whatsoever, have in some respect or degree, an effect on the body. As was
observed before, such is our nature, and such are the laws of union of soul and body, that the
mind can have no lively or vigorous exercise, without some effect upon the body. So subject is the
body to the mind, and so much do its fluids, especially the animal spirits, attend the motions and
exercises of the mind, that there cannot be so much as an intense thought, without an effect upon
them. Yea, it is questionable whether an imbodied soul ever so much as thinks one thought, or has
any exercise at all, but that there is some corresponding motion or alteration of motion, in some
degree, of the fluids, in some part of the body. But universal experience shows, that the exercise
of the affections have in a special manner a tendency to some sensible effect upon the body. And if
this be so, that all affections have some effect upon the body, we may then well suppose, the
greater those affections be, and the more vigorous their exercise (other circumstances being equal)
the greater will be the effect on the body. Hence it is not to be wondered at, that very great and
strong exercises of the affections should have great effects on the body. And therefore, seeing
there are very great affections, both common and spiritual; hence it is not to be wondered at, that
great effects on the body should arise from both these kinds of affections. And consequently these
effects are no signs, that the affections they arise from, are of one kind or the other.
Great effects on the body certainly are no sure evidences that affections are spiritual; for we
see that such effects oftentimes arise from great affections about temporal things, and when
religion is no way concerned in them. And if great affections about secular things, that are purely
natural, may have these effects, I know not by what rule we should determine that high affections
about religious things, which arise in like manner from nature, cannot have the like effect.
Nor, on the other hand, do I know of any rule any have to determine, that gracious and
holy affections, when raised as high as any natural affections, and have equally strong and
vigorous exercises, cannot have a great effect on the body. No such rule can be drawn from
reason: I know of no reason, why a being affected with a view of God's glory should not cause
the body to faint, as well as being affected with a view of Solomon's glory. And no such rule has
1Mr. Stoddard observes, "That common affections are sometimes stronger than

saving."—GUIDE TO CHRIST, p. 2.

24
as yet been produced from the Scripture; none has ever been found in all the late controversies
which have been about things of this nature. There is a great power in spiritual affections: we read
of the power which worketh in Christians,2 and of the Spirit of God being in them as the Spirit of
power,3 and of the effectual working of his power in them.4 But man's nature is weak: flesh and
blood are represented in Scripture as exceeding weak; and particularly with respect to its unfitness
for great spiritual and heavenly operations and exercises, Matt. 26:41, 1 Cor. 15:43, and 50. The
text we are upon speaks of "joy unspeakable, and full of glory." And who that considers what
man's nature is, and what the nature of the affections is, can reasonably doubt but that such
unutterable and glorious joys, may be too great and mighty for weak dust and ashes, so as to be
considerably overbearing to it? It is evident by the Scripture that true divine discoveries, or ideas of
God's glory, when given in a great degree have a tendency, by affecting the mind, to overbear the
body; because the Scripture teaches us often, that if these ideas or views should be given to such a
degree as they are given in heaven, the weak frame of the body could not subsist under it, and that
no man can, in that manner, see God and live. The knowledge which the saints have of God's
beauty and glory in this world, and those holy affections that arise from it, are of the same nature
and kind with what the saints are the subjects of in heaven, differing only in degree and
circumstances: what God gives them here, is a foretaste of heavenly happiness, and an earnest of
their future inheritance. And who shall limit God in his giving this earnest, or say he shall give so
much of the inheritance, such a part of the future reward as an earnest of the whole, and no more?
And seeing God has taught us in his word, that the whole reward is such, that it would at once
destroy the body, is it not too bold a thing for us, so to set bounds to the sovereign God, as to say
that in giving the earnest of this reward in this world, he shall never give so much of it, as in the
least to diminish the strength of the body, when God has nowhere thus limited himself?
The Psalmist, speaking of the vehement religious affections he had, speaks of an effect in
his flesh or body, besides what was in his soul, expressly distinguishing one from the other, once
and again: Psal. 84:2, "My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord: my heart and
my flesh crieth out for the living God." Here is a plain distinction between the heart and the flesh,
as being each affected. So Psal. 63:1, "My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee, in a
dry and thirsty land, where no water is." Here also is an evident designed distinction between the
soul and the flesh.
The prophet Habakkuk speaks of his bodies being overborne by a sense of the majesty of
God, Hab. 3:16: "When I heard, my belly trembled: my lips quivered at the voice: rottenness enter
into my bones, and I trembled in myself." So the Psalmist speaks expressly of his flesh trembling,
Psal. 119:120: My flesh trembleth for fear of thee."
That such ideas of God's glory as are sometimes given in this world, have a tendency to
overhear the body, is evident, because the Scripture gives us an account, that this has sometimes
actually been the effect of those external manifestations God has made of himself to some of the
saints which were made to that end, viz., to give them an idea of God's majesty and glory. Such
instances we have in the prophet Daniel, and the apostle John. Daniel, giving an account of an
external representation of the glory of Christ, says, Dan. 10:8, "And there remained no strength in
me; for my comeliness was turned into corruption, and I retained no strength." And the apostle
John, giving an account of the manifestation made to him, says, Rev. 1:17, "And when I saw him,
I fell at his feet as dead." It is in vain to say here, these were only external manifestations or
symbols of the glory of Christ, which these saints beheld: for though it be true, that they were
outward representations of Christ's glory, which they beheld with their bodily eyes; yet the end
and use of these external symbols are representations was to give to these prophets an idea of the
thing represented, and that was the true divine glory and majesty of Christ, which is his spiritual
glory; they were made use of only as significations of this spiritual glory, and thus undoubtedly
they received them, and improved them, and were affected by them. According to the end for
which God intended these outward signs, they received by them a great and lively apprehension of
the real glory and majesty of God's nature, which they were signs of; and thus were greatly
affected, their souls swallowed up, and their bodies overborne. And I think they are very bold and
2Eph. 3:7.

32 Tim. 1:7.

4Eph. 3:7, 20.

25
daring, who will say God cannot, or shall not give the like clear and affecting ideas and
apprehensions of the same real glory and majesty of his nature, to any of his saints, without the
intervention of any such external shadows of it.
Before I leave this head, I would farther observe, that it is plain the Scripture often makes
use of bodily effects, to express the strength of holy and spiritual affections; such as trembling,5
groaning,6 being sick,7 crying out,8 panting,9 and fainting.10 Now if it be supposed, that these are
only figurative expressions, to represent the degree of affection: yet I hope all will allow, that they
are fit and suitable figures to represent the high degree of those spiritual affections, which the Spirit
of God makes use of them to represent; which I do not see how they would be, if those spiritual
affections, let them be in never to high a degree, have no tendency to any such things; but that on
the contrary, they are the proper effects and sad tokens of false affections, and the delusion of the
devil. I cannot think, God would commonly make use of things which are very alien from spiritual
affections, and are shrewd marks of the hand of Satan, and smell strong of the bottomless pit, as
beautiful figures, to represent the high degree of holy and heavenly affections.
III. It is no sign that affections are truly gracious affections, or that they are not, that they
cause those who have them to be fluent, fervent, and abundant, in talking of the things of religion.
There are many persons, who, if they see this in others, are greatly prejudiced against
them. Their being so full of talk, is with them a sufficient ground to condemn them, as Pharisees,
and ostentatious hypocrites. On the other hand, there are many, who if they see this effect in any,
are very ignorantly and imprudently forward, at once to determine that they are the true children of
God, and are under the saving influences of his Spirit, and speak of it as a great evidence of a new
creature; they say, "such a one's mouth is now opened: he used to be slow to speak; but now he is
full and free; he is free now to open his heart, and tell his experiences, and declare the praises of
God; it comes from him, as free as water from a fountain;" and the like. And especially are they
captivated into a confident and undoubting persuasion, that they are savingly wrought upon, if they
are not only free and abundant, but very affectionate and earnest in their talk.
But this is the fruit of but little judgment, a scanty and short experience; as events do
abundantly show: and is a mistake persons often run into, through their trusting to their own
wisdom and discerning, and making their own notions their rule, instead of the holy Scripture.
Though the Scripture be full of rules, both how we should judge of our own state, and also how
we should be conducted in our opinion of others; yet we have nowhere any rule, by which to judge
ourselves or others to be in a good estate, from any such effect: for this is but the religion of the
mouth and of the tongue, and what is in the Scripture represented by the leaves of a tree, which,
though the tree ought not to be without them, yet are nowhere given as an evidence of the
goodness of the tree.
That persons are disposed to be abundant in talking of things of religion, may be from a
good cause, and it may be from a bad one. It may be because their hearts are very full of holy
affections; "for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh:" and it may be because
persons' hearts are very full of religious affection which is not holy; for still out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaketh. It is very much the nature of the affections, of whatever kind they
be, and whatever objects they are exercised about, if they are strong, to dispose persons to be very
much in speaking of that which they are affected with: and not only to speak much, but to speak
very earnestly and fervently. And therefore persons talking abundantly and very fervently about the
things of religion, can be an evidence of no more than this, that they are very much affected with
the things of religion; but this may be (as has been already shown) and there be no grace. That
which men are greatly affected with, while the high affection lasts, they will be earnestly engaged
about, and will be likely to show that earnestness in their talk and behavior; as the greater part of
the Jews, in all Judah and Galilee, did for a while, about John the Baptist's preaching and baptism,
5Psal. 119:120. Ezra 9:4. Isa. 66:2, 5. Hab. 3:16.
6Rom. 8:36.

7Cant. 2:5, and 5:8.
8Psal. 84:2.

9Psal. 38: 10, and 42:1, and 119:131.
10Psal. 84:2, and 119:81.

26
when they were willing for a season to rejoice in his light; a mighty ado was made, all over the
land, and among all sorts of persons, about this great prophet and his ministry. And so the
multitude, in like manner, often manifested a great earnestness, a mighty engagedness of spirit in
everything that was external, about Christ and his preaching and miracles, "being astonished at his
doctrine, anon with joy receiving the word," following him sometimes night and day, leaving
meat, drink, and sleep to hear him: once following him into the wilderness, fasting three days
going to hear him; some times crying him up to the clouds, saying, "Never man spake like this
man!" being fervent and earnest in what they said. But what did these things come to, in the greater
part of them?
A person may be over full of talk of his own experiences; commonly falling upon it,
everywhere, and in all companies; and when it is so, it is rather a dark sign than a good one. As a
tree that is over full of leaves seldom bears much fruit; and as a cloud, though to appearance very
pregnant and full of water, if it brings with it overmuch wind, seldom affords much rain to the dry
and thirsty earth; which very thing the Holy Spirit is pleased several times to make use of, to
represent a great show of religion with the mouth, without answerable fruit in the life: Prov. 25:24,
"Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift, is like clouds and wind without rain." And the apostle
Jude, speaking of some in the primitive times, that crept in unawares among the saints, and having
a great show of religion, where for a while not suspected, "These are clouds (says he) without
water, carried about of winds," Jude ver. 4 and 12. And the apostle Peter, speaking of the same,
says, 2 Pet. 2:17, "These are clouds without water, carried with a tempest."
False affections, if they are equally strong, are much more forward to declare themselves,
than true: because it is the nature of false religion, to affect show and observation; as it was with
the Pharisees.11
It is no sign that affections are gracious, or that they are otherwise, that persons did not
make them themselves, or excite them of their own contrivance and by their own strength.
There are many in these days, that condemn all affections which are excited in a way that
the subjects of them can give no account of, as not seeming to be the fruit of any of their own
endeavors, or the natural consequence of the faculties and principles of human nature, in such
circumstances, and under such means; but to be from the influence of some extrinsic and
supernatural power upon their minds. How greatly has the doctrine of the inward experience, or
sensible perceiving of the immediate power and operation of the Spirit of God, been reproached
and ridiculed by many of late! They say, the manner of the Spirit of God is to co-operate in a
silent, secret, and undiscernable way with the use of means, and our own endeavors; so that there
is no distinguishing by sense, between the influences of the Spirit of God, and the natural
operations of the faculties of our own minds.
And it is true, that for any to expect to receive the saving influences of the Spirit of God,
while they neglect a diligent improvement of the appointed means of grace, is unreasonable
presumption. And to expect that the Spirit of God will savingly operate upon their minds, without
11That famous experimental divine, Mr. Shepherd, says, "A Pharisee's trumpet shall

be heard to the town's end; when simplicity walks through the town unseen. Hence a
man will sometimes covertly commend himself (and myself ever comes in), and tells
you a long story of conversion; and a hundred to one if some lie or other slip not out
with it. Why, the secret meaning is, I pray admire me. Hence complain of wants and
weaknesses: Pray think what a broken-hearted Christian I am." Parab. of the Ten
Virgins. Part I. pages 179, 180.
And holy Mr. Flavel says thus: "O reader, if thy heart were right with God, and
thou didst not cheat thyself with a vain profession, thou wouldst have frequent
business with God, which thou wouldst be loth thy dearest friend, or the wife of thy
bosom should be privy to. Non est religio, ubi omnia patent. Religion doth not lie
open to all, to the eyes of men. Observed duties maintain our credit; but secret duties
maintain our life. It was the saying of a heathen, about his secret correspondency
with his friend, What need the world be acquainted with it? Thou and I are theatre
enough to each other. There are inclosed pleasures in religion, which none but
renewed spiritual souls do feelingly understand." Flavel's Touchstone of Sincerity,
Chap. II. Sect. 2.

27
the Spirit's making use of means, as subservient to the effect, is enthusiastical. It is also
undoubtedly true, that the Spirit of God is very various in the manner and circumstances of his
operations, and that sometimes he operates in a way more secret and gradual, and from smaller
beginnings, than at others.
But if there be indeed a power, entirely different from, and beyond our power, or the
power of all means and instruments, and above the power of nature, which is requisite in order to
the production of saving grace in the heart, according to the general profession of the country;
then, certainly it is in no wise unreasonable to suppose, that this effect should very frequently be
produced after such a manner, as to make it very manifest, apparent, and sensible that it is so. If
grace be indeed owing to the powerful and efficacious operation of an extrinsic agent, or divine
efficient out of ourselves, why is it unreasonable to suppose it should seem to be so to them who
are the subjects of it? Is it a strange thing, that it should seem to be as it is? When grace in the heart
indeed is not produced by our strength, nor is the effect of the natural power of our own faculties,
or any means or instruments, but is properly the workmanship and production of the Spirit of the
Almighty, is it a strange and unaccountable thing, that it should seem to them who are subjects of
it, agreeable to truth, and not right contrary to truth; so that if persons tell of effects that they are
conscious to in their own minds, that seem to them not to be from the natural power or operation of
their minds, but from the supernatural power of some other agent, it should at once be looked upon
as a sure evidence of their being under a delusion, because things seem to them to be as they are?
For this is the objection which is made: it is looked upon as a clear evidence, that the
apprehensions and affections that many persons have, are not really from such a cause, because
they seem to them to be from that cause: they declare that what they are conscious of, seems to
them evidently not to be from themselves, but from the mighty power of the Spirit of God; and
others from hence condemn them, and determine what they experience is not from the Spirit of
God, but from themselves, or from the devil. Thus unreasonably are multitudes treated at this day
by their neighbors.
If it be indeed so, as the Scripture abundantly teaches, that grace in the soul is so the effect
of God's power, that it is fitly compared to those effects which are farthest from being owing to
any strength in the subject, such as a generation, or a being begotten, and resurrection, or a being
raised from the dead, and creation, or a being brought out of nothing into being, and that it is an
effect wherein the mighty power of God is greatly glorified, and the exceeding greatness of his
power is manifested;12 then what account can be given of it, that the Almighty, in so great a work
of his power, should so carefully hide his power, that the subjects of it should be able to discern
nothing of it? Or what reason or revelation have any to determine that he does so? If we may judge
by the Scripture this is not agreeable to God's manner, in his operations and dispensations; but on
the contrary, it is God's manner, in the great works of his power and mercy which he works for
his people, to order things so as to make his hand visible, and his power conspicuous, and men's
dependence on him most evident, that no flesh should glory in his presence,13 that God alone
might be exalted,14 and that the excellency of the power might be of God and not of man,15 and
that Christ's power might be manifested in our weakness,16 and none might say mine own hand
hath saved me.17 So it was in most of those temporal salvations which God wrought for Israel of
old, which were types of the salvation of God's people from their spiritual enemies. So it was in
the redemption of Israel from their Egyptian bondage; he redeemed them with a strong hand, and
an outstretched arm; and that his power might be the more conspicuous, he suffered Israel first to
be brought into the most helpless and forlorn circumstances. So it was in the great redemption by
Gideon; God would have his army diminished to a handful, and they without any other arms than
trumpets and lamps, and earthen pitchers. So it was in the deliverance of Israel from Goliath, by a
stripling with a sling and a stone. So it was in that great work of God, his calling the Gentiles, and
12Eph. 1:17-20.

131 Cor. 1:27, 28, 29.
14Isa. 2:11-17.
152 Cor. 4:7.

162 Cor. 12:9.
17Judg. 7:2.

28
converting the Heathen world, after Christ's ascension, after that the world by wisdom knew not
God, and all the endeavors of philosophers had proved in vain, for many ages, to reform the
world, and it was by everything become abundantly evident, that the world was utterly helpless,
by anything else but the mighty power of God. And so it was in most of the conversions of
particular persons, we have an account of in the history of the New Testament: they were not
wrought on in that silent, secret, gradual, and insensible manner, which is now insisted on; but
with those manifest evidences of a supernatural power, wonderfully and suddenly causing a great
change, which in these days are looked upon as certain signs of delusion and enthusiasm.
The Apostle, in Eph. 1:18, 19, speaks of God's enlightening the minds of Christians, and
so bringing them to believe in Christ, to the end that they might know the exceeding greatness of
his power to them who believe. The words are, "The eyes of our understanding being enlightened;
that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance
in the saints, and what is the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who believe, according
to the working of his mighty power," &c. Now when the apostle speaks of their being thus the
subjects of his power, in their enlightening and effectual calling, to the end that they might know
what his mighty power was to them who believe, he can mean nothing else than, "that they might
know by experience." But if the saints know this power by experience, then they feel it and discern
it, and are conscious of it; as sensibly distinguishable from the natural operations of their own
minds, which is not agreeable to a motion of God's operating so secretly, and undiscernably, that
it cannot be known that they are the subjects of the influence of any extrinsic power at all, any
otherwise than as they may argue it from Scripture assertions; which is a different; thing from
knowing it by experience.
So that it is very unreasonable and unscriptural to determine that affections are not from the
gracious operations of God's Spirit, because they are sensibly not from the persons themselves
that are the subjects of them.
On the other hand, it is no evidence that affections are gracious, that they are not properly
produced by those who are the subjects of them, or that they arise in their minds in a manner they
cannot account for.
There are some who make this an argument in their own favor; when speaking of what they
have experienced, they say, "I am sure I did not make it myself; it was a fruit of no contrivance or
endeavor of mine; it came when I thought nothing of it; if I might have the world for it, I cannot
make it again when I please." And hence they determine that what they have experienced, must be
from the mighty influence of the Spirit of God, and is of a saving nature; but very ignorantly, and
without grounds. What they have been the subjects of, may indeed not be from themselves
directly, but may be from the operation of an invisible agent, some spirit besides their own: but it
does not thence follow, that it was from the Spirit of God. There are other spirits who have
influence on the minds of men, besides the Holy Ghost. We are directed not to believe every spirit,
but to try the spirits, whether they be of God. There are many false spirits, exceeding busy with
men, who often transform themselves into angels of light, and do in many wonderful ways, with
great subtlety and power, mimic the operations of the Spirit of God. And there are many of Satan's
operations which are very distinguishable from the voluntary exercises of men's own minds. They
are so, in those dreadful and horrid suggestions, and blasphemous injections with which he
follows many persons; and in vain and fruitless frights and terrors, which he is the author of. And
the power of Satan may be as immediate, and as evident in false comforts and joys, as in terrors
and horrid suggestions; and oftentimes is so in fact. It is not in men's power to put themselves in
such raptures, as the Anabaptists in Germany, and many other raving enthusiasts like them, have
been the subjects of.
And besides, it is to be considered that persons may have those impressions on their
minds, which may not be of their own producing, nor from an evil spirit, but from the Spirit of
God, and yet not be from any saving, but a common influence of the Spirit of God; and the
subjects of such impressions may be of the number of those we read of, Heb. 6:4, 5, "that are
once enlightened, and taste of the heavenly gift, and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and
taste the good word of God, and the power of the world to come;" and yet may be wholly
unacquainted with those "better things that accompany salvations" of spoken of ver. 9.
And where neither a good nor evil spirit have any immediate hand, persons, especially such
as are of a weak and vapory habit of body, and the brain weak and easily susceptive of
impressions, may have strange apprehensions and imaginations, and strong affections attending

29
them, unaccountably arising, which are not voluntarily produced by themselves. We see that such
persons are liable to such impressions about temporal things; and there is equal reason, why they
should about spiritual things. As a person who is asleep has dreams that he is not the voluntary
author of; so may such persons, in like manner, be the subjects of involuntary impressions, when
they are awake.
