PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 14
The Reed and the Bruising


The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 1. The Reed and the Bruising.

1. The Reed and the Bruising

The prophet Isaiah, being lifted up and carried with the wing of a
prophetical spirit, passes over all the time between him and the
appearing of Jesus Christ in the flesh. Seeing with the eye of prophecy,
and with the eye of faith, Christ as present, he presents him, in the name
of God, to the spiritual eye of others, in these words: `Behold my servant,
whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth; I have put my
spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall
not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. A bruised
reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench: he
shall bring forth judgment unto truth' (Isa. 42:1 3). These words are
alleged by Matthew as fulfilled now in Christ (Matt. 12:18 20). In them
are propounded, first, the calling of Christ to his office; secondly, the
manner in which he carries it out.
CHRIST'S CALLING
God calls him here his servant. Christ was God's servant in the greatest
piece of service that ever was, a chosen and a choice servant who did and
suffered all by commission from the Father. In this we may see the sweet
love of God to us, in that he counts the work of our salvation by Christ his
greatest service, and in that he will put his only beloved Son to that
service. He might well prefix it with `Behold' to raise up our thoughts to
the highest pitch of attention and admiration. In time of temptation,
apprehensive consciences look so much to the present trouble they are in
that they need to be roused up to behold him in whom they may find rest
for their distressed souls. In temptations it is safest to behold nothing but
Christ the true brazen serpent, the true `Lamb of God that taketh away
the sin of the world', (John 1:29). This saving object has a special
influence of comfort to the soul, especially if we look not only on Christ,
but upon the Father's authority and love in him. For in all that Christ did
and suffered as Mediator, we must see God in him reconciling the world
unto himself (2 Cor. 5:19).
What a support to our faith is this, that God the Father, the party
offended by our sins, is so well pleased with the work of redemption! And
what a comfort is this, that, seeing God's love rests on Christ, as well
pleased in him, we may gather that he is as well pleased with us, if we be
in Christ! For his love rests in a whole Christ, in Christ mystical, as well as

Christ natural, because he loves him and us with one love. Let us,
therefore, embrace Christ, and in him God's love, and build our faith
safely on such a Saviour that is furnished with so high a commission.
See here, for our comfort, a sweet agreement of all three persons: the
Father gives a commission to Christ; the Spirit furnishes and sanctifies to
it, and Christ himself executes the office of a Mediator. Our redemption is
founded upon the joint agreement of all three persons of the Trinity.
HOW CHRIST PURSUES HIS CALLING
This is here said to be done modestly, without making a noise, or raising
dust by any pompous coming, as princes are accustomed to do. `His voice
shall not be heard.' His voice indeed was heard, but what voice? `Come
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden' (Matt. 11:28). He cried,
but how? `Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters' (Isa. 55:1).
And as his coming was modest, so it was mild, which is set down in these
words: `A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not
quench.'
We see, therefore, that the condition of those with whom he was to deal
was that they were bruised reeds and smoking flax; not trees, but reeds;
and not whole, but bruised reeds. The church is compared to weak things:
to a dove amongst the fowls; to a vine amongst the plants; to sheep
amongst the beasts; to a woman, which is the weaker vessel.
God's children are bruised reeds before their conversion and oftentimes
after. Before conversion all (except such as, being brought up in the
church, God has delighted to show himself gracious to from their
childhood) are bruised reeds, yet in different degrees, as God sees fit. And
as there are differences with regard to temperament, gifts and manner of
life, so there are in God's intention to use men in the time to come; for
usually he empties such of themselves, and makes them nothing, before
he will use them in any great services.
WHAT IT IS TO BE BRUISED
The bruised reed is a man that for the most part is in some misery, as

those were that came to Christ for help, and by misery he is brought to
see sin as the cause of it, for, whatever pretences sin makes, they come to
an end when we are bruised and broken. He is sensible of sin and misery,
even unto bruising; and, seeing no help in himself, is carried with restless
desire to have supply from another, with some hope, which a little raises
him out of himself to Christ, though he dare not claim any present
interest of mercy. This spark of hope being opposed by doubtings and
fears rising from corruption makes him as smoking flax; so that both
these together, a bruised reed and smoking flax, make up the state of a
poor distressed man. This is such an one as our Saviour Christ terms
`poor in spirit' (Matt. 5:3), who sees his wants, and also sees himself
indebted to divine justice. He has no means of supply from himself or the
creature, and thereupon mourns, and, upon some hope of mercy from the
promise and examples of those that have obtained mercy, is stirred up to
hunger and thirst after it.
THE GOOD EFFECTS OF BRUISING
This bruising is required before conversion that so the Spirit may make
way for himself into the heart by levelling all proud, high thoughts, and
that we may understand ourselves to be what indeed we are by nature.
We love to wander from ourselves and to be strangers at home, till God
bruises us by one cross or other, and then we `begin to think', and come
home to ourselves with the prodigal (Luke 15:17). It is a very hard thing to
bring a dull and an evasive heart to cry with feeling for mercy. Our hearts,
like criminals, until they be beaten from all evasions, never cry for the
mercy of the judge.
Again, this bruising makes us set a high price upon Christ. Then the
gospel becomes the gospel indeed; then the fig leaves of morality will do
us no good. And it makes us more thankful, and, from thankfulness, more
fruitful in our lives; for what makes many so cold and barren, but that
bruising for sin never endeared God's grace to them?
Likewise this dealing of God establishes us the more in his ways, having
had knocks and bruisings in our own ways. This is often the cause of
relapses and apostasy, because men never smarted for sin at the first;
they were not long enough under the lash of the law. Hence this inferior

work of the Spirit in bringing down high thoughts (2 Cor. 10:5) is
necessary before conversion. And, for the most part, the Holy Spirit, to
further the work of conviction, joins with it some affliction, which, when
sanctified, has a healing and purging power.
After conversion we need bruising so that reeds may know themselves to
be reeds, and not oaks. Even reeds need bruising, by reason of the
remainder of pride in our nature, and to let us see that we live by mercy.
Such bruising may help weaker Christians not to be too much
discouraged, when they see stronger ones shaken and bruised. Thus Peter
was bruised when he wept bitterly (Matt. 26:75). This reed, till he met
with this bruise, had more wind in him than pith when he said, `Though
all forsake thee, I will not' (Matt. 26:33). The people of God cannot be
without these examples. The heroic deeds of those great worthies do not
comfort the church so much as their falls and bruises do. Thus David was
bruised until he came to a free confession, without guile of spirit (Psa.
32:3 5); nay, his sorrows did rise in his own feeling unto the exquisite
pain of breaking of bones (Psa. 51:8). Thus Hezekiah complains that God
had `broken his bones' as a lion (Isa. 38:13). Thus the chosen vessel Paul
needed the messenger of Satan to buffet him lest he should be lifted up
above measure (2 Cor. 12:7).
Hence we learn that we must not pass too harsh judgment upon ourselves
or others when God exercises us with bruising upon bruising. There must
be a conformity to our head, Christ, who `was bruised for us' (Isa. 53:5)
that we may know how much we are bound unto him.
Ungodly spirits, ignorant of God's ways in bringing his children to
heaven, censure broken hearted Christians as miserable persons, whereas
God is doing a gracious, good work with them. It is no easy matter to
bring a man from nature to grace, and from grace to glory, so unyielding
and intractable are our hearts.
