PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 13 Of Growth In Grace — A Believer'S Privilege At Death

OF GROWTH IN GRACE 2 PET. 3:18. But grow in grace. The fourth fruit. Growth of grace. True grace is progressive,—of a spreading, growing nature. It is with grace as with the light: first, there is the crepusculum, or daybreak, then it shines brighter to the full meridian. A good Christian is like the crocodile, quamdiu vivet crescit,—he hath never done growing. The saints are not only compared to stars for their light, but to trees for their growth, Isa. 61:3., Hos. 14:5. A good Christian is not like Hezekiah's sun that went backward, nor Joshua's sun that stood still, but is always advancing in holiness, and increasing with the increase of God, Col. 2:16. Now to amplify and illustrate this: QUEST. 1. How many ways may a Christian be said to grow in grace? Ans. 1. He grows vigore,—in the exercise of grace; his lamp is burning and shining, therefore we read of a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1:3. Here is the activity of grace; the church prays for the blowing of the Spirit, that her spices might flow forth, Cant. 4:16. A. 2. A Christian grows gradu,—in the degree of grace; he goes from strength to strength, Ps. 84:7. viz. from one degree of grace to

another. A saint goes from 'faith to faith,' Rom. 1:17., and his love abounds more and more, Phil. 1:6. Here is growing in the degree. QUEST. 2. What is the right manner of a Christian's growth? Ans. 1. The right manner of growth, is to grow less in one's own eyes, Ps. 22:6., "I am a worm and no man." The sight of corruption and ignorance makes a Christian grow into a dislike of himself, he doth vanish in his own eyes. Job abhorred himself in the dust, ch. 42:6. This is good, to grow out of conceit with one's self. A. 2. The right manner of growth is to grow proportionably, when a Christian grows in one grace as well as another, 2 Pet. 1:5. To grow in knowledge, but not in meekness, brotherly love, good works, this is not the right growth; a thing may swell and not grow,—a man may be swelled with knowledge, yet may have no spiritual growth,—the right manner of growth is uniform, growing in one grace as well as another. As the beauty of the body is, when there is a symmetry of parts, not only the head grows, but the arms and breast; so spiritual growth is most beautiful, when there is a symmetry and proportion, every grace thrives. A. 3. The right manner of growth is, when a Christian hath grace suitable to his several employments and occasions; when corruptions are strong, and he hath grace able to give check to them,—burdens are heavy, and he hath patience able to bear them,—temptations fierce, and he hath faith able to resist them,—here is grace growing in the right manner. QUEST. 3. Whence is it that true grace cannot but grow? Ans. 1. It is proper for grace to grow; it is semen manens, the seed of God, 1 John 3:9. It is the nature of seed to grow; grace doth not lie in

the heart, as a stone in the earth, but as seed in the earth, which will spring up, first the blade and then the ear, and then the full corn in the car. A. 2. Grace cannot but grow, from the sweetness and excellency of it; he that hath grace, is never weary of it, but still would have more. The delight he hath in it, causeth thirst; grace is the image of God, and a Christian thinks he can never be enough like God. Grace instills peace; therefore a Christian cannot but strive to increase in grace, because, as grace grows, so peace grows. A. 3. Grace cannot but grow, from a believer's ingrafting into Christ; he who is a scion, ingrafted into this noble, generous stock, cannot but grow. Christ is so full of sap, and vivifical influence, that he makes all inoculated into him grow fruitful, Hos. 14:8., "From me is thy fruit found." QUEST. 4. What motives or incentives are there to make us grow in grace? Ans. 1. Growth is the end of the ordinances. Why doth a man lay out cost on ground, manure and water it, but that it may grow? The sincere milk of the word is given, that we may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2:2. The table of the Lord is on purpose for our spiritual nourishment and increase of grace. A. 2. The growth of grace is the best evidence of the truth of it. Things that have no life will not grow; a picture will not grow, a stake in the hedge will not grow, but a plant that hath a vegetative life grows. The growing of grace shews it to be alive in the soul. A. 3. Growth in grace is the beauty of a Christian. The more a child grows, the more it comes to its favour and complexion, and looks

more ruddy; so, the more a Christian grows in grace, the more he comes to his spiritual complexion, he looks fairer. Abraham's faith was beautiful when in its infancy, but at last it grew so vigorous and eminent, that God himself was in love with it, and crowned Abraham with this honour, to be the 'father of the faithful.' A. 4. The more we grow in grace, the more glory we bring to God. God's glory is more worth than the salvation of all men's souls. This should be our design, to raise the trophies of God's glory; and how can we do it more, than by growing in grace? John 15:8., "Hereby is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit." Though the least drachm of grace will bring salvation to us, yet it will not bring so much glory to God, Phil. 1:11., "Filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are to the praise of his glory." It commends the skill of the husbandman, when his plants grow and thrive; it is a praise and honour to God, when we thrive in grace. A. 5. The more we grow in grace, the more will God love us. Is it not that we pray for? The more growth, the more God will love us. The husbandman loves his thriving plants; the thriving Christian is God's Hephzibah, or chief delight. Christ loves to see the vine flourishing, and the pomegranates budding, Cant. 6:11. Christ accepts the truth of grace, but commends the growth of grace, Mat. 8:10., "I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel." Would you be as the beloved disciple that lay in Christ's bosom? Would you have much love from Christ? labour for much growth, let faith flourish with good works, and love increase into zeal. A. 6. What need have we to grow in grace. There is still something lacking in our faith, 1 Thess. 3:10. Grace is but in its infancy and minority, and we must still be adding a cubit to our spiritual stature; the apostles said, "Lord increase our faith," Luke 17:5. Grace is but

weak, 2 Sam. 3:39., "I am this day weak, though anointed king." So, though we are anointed with grace, yet we are but weak, and had need arrive at further degrees of sanctity. A. 7. The growth of grace will hinder the growth of corruption. The more health grows, the more the distempers of the body abate; so it is in spirituals,—the more humility grows, the more the swelling of pride is assuaged,—the more purity of heart grows, the more the fire of lust is abated. The growth of flowers in the garden doth not hinder the growing of weeds, but the growing of this flower of grace hinders the sprouting of corruption. As some plants have an antipathy, and will not thrive if they grow near together, as the vine and the hay tree: so, where grace grows, sin will not thrive so fast. A. 8. We cannot grow too much in grace: there is no nimium,—no excess there. The body may grow too great, as in the dropsy; but faith cannot grow too great, 2 Thess. 1:3., "Your faith groweth exceedingly;" here was exceeding, yet not excess. As a man cannot have too much health, so not too much grace. Grace is the beauty of holiness, Ps. 110:3. We cannot have too much spiritual beauty; it will be the only trouble at death, that we have grown no more in grace. A. 9. Such as do not grow in grace, decay in grace. Non progredi in via est regredi, BERN. There is no standing at a stay in religion, either we go forward or backward; if faith doth not grow, unbelief will; if heavenly mindedness doth not grow, covetousness will. A man that doth not increase his stock, diminisheth it; if you do not improve your stock of grace, your stock will decay. The angels on Jacob's ladder were either ascending or descending; if you do not ascend in religion, you descend. A. 10. The more we grow in grace, the more we shall flourish in glory. Though every vessel of glory shall be full, yet some vessels hold

more; he whose pound gained ten, was made ruler over ten cities, Luke 19:17. Such as do not grow much, though they do not lose their glory, yet they lessen their glory. If any shall follow the Lamb in whiter and larger robes of glory than others, they shall be such as have shone most in grace here. Use. Lament we may the want of growth: religion in many is grown only into a form and profession: this is to grow in leaves, not in fruit. Many Christians are like a body in an atrophy, which doth not thrive; they are not nourished by the sermons they hear; like the angels who assumed bodies, they did eat, but did not grow It is very suspicious where there is no growth, there wants a vital principle. Some instead of growing better, grow worse: they grow more earthly, more profane, 2 Tim. 3:13. Evil men proficient in pejus,—'shall wax worse and worse.' Many grow hell ward,—they grow past shame, Eph. 2:3, 5,—they are like some watered stuffs, which grow more rotten. QUEST. 5. How shall we know whether we grow in grace? Ans. For the deciding of this question, I shall, First, Shew the signs of our not growing; Secondly, Of our growing. 1st, The signs of our not growing in grace, but rather falling into a spiritual consumption. Sign 1. When we have lost our spiritual appetite. A consumptive person hath not that stomach to his meet as formerly. Perhaps, Christian, thou canst remember the time when thou didst hunger and thirst after righteousness, thou didst come to the ordinances with such a stomach as to a feast, but now it is otherwise, Christ is not so prized, nor his ordinances so loved: a sad presage, grace is on the declining hand,—thou art in a deep consumption. A sign David was near his grave, when he covered him with clothes, and got no

heat, 1 Kings 1:1.: so, when a person is plied with hot clothes, I mean ordinances, yet he hath no heat of affection to spiritual things, this is a sign he is declining in grace. Sign 2. When we grow more worldly. Perhaps once we were mounted into higher orbs,—we did set our hearts on things above, and speak the language of Canaan,—but now our minds are taken off heaven, we dig our comfort out of these lower mines, and with Satan compass the earth: a sign we are going down the hill apace, and our grace is in a consumption. It is observable when nature decays, and people are near dying, they grow more stooping; and truly, when men's hearts grow more stooping to the earth, and they can hardly lift up themselves to an heavenly thought, if grace be not dead, yet it is ready to die, Rev. 3:2. Sign 3. When we are less troubled about sin. Time was when the least sin did grieve us, as the least hair makes the eye weep: but now we can digest sin without remorse. Time was when a Christian was troubled if he neglected closet-prayer: now he can omit familyprayer. Time was when vain thoughts did trouble him: now he is not troubled for loose practices. Here is a sad declension in religion; and truly grace is so far from growing, that we can hardly perceive its pulse to beat. 2dly, The signs of our growing in grace. Sign 1. The first sign of our growing is when we are got beyond our former measures of grace: a sign a child thrives, when he hath outgrown his clothes, his clothes are too little for him. That knowledge which would serve us before, will not serve us now,—we have a deeper insight into religion,—our light is clearer,—our spark of love is increased into a flame: there is a sign of growth. That

competency of grace we once had, is too scanty for us; we have outgrown ourselves. Sign 2. When we are more firmly rooted in religion, Col. 2:7., Rooted in him, and established: the spreading of the root shews the growth of the tree. When we are so strongly fastened on Christ, that we cannot be blown down with the breath of heretics, a blessed sign of growth. Athanasius was called Adamus ecclesiæ, an adamant that could not be removed from the love of the truth. Sign 3. The third sign of growth: when we have a more spiritual frame of heart. 1st, We are more spiritual in our principles; we oppose sin out of love to God, and as it strikes at his holiness. 2dly, We are more spiritual in our affections; we grieve for the first rising of corruption, for the bubbling up of vain thoughts, the spring that runs under ground. We mourn not only for the penalty of sin, but the pollution; it is not only a coal that burns, but blacks. 3dly, We are spiritual in the performance of duty; we are more serious, reverent, fervent; we have more life in prayer, we put fire to the sacrifice, Rom. 12, "Fervent in spirit." We serve God with more love, which ripens and mellows our duty, and makes it come off with a better relish. Sign 4. The fourth sign of growth: when grace gets ground by opposition. The fire, by an antiperitasis, burns nottest in the coldest season. Peter's courage increased by the opposition of the high priest and the rulers, Acts 4:8, 11. The martyrs' zeal was increased by persecution. Here was grace of the first magnitude. QUEST. 6. What shall we do to grow in grace? Ans. 1. Take heed of that which will hinder its growth,—the love of any sin. The body may as well thrive in a fever, as grace can where any sin is cherished.

A. 2. Use all means for growth in grace. 1st, "Exercise yourselves to godliness," 1 Tim. 4:7. The body grows stronger by exercise. Trading of money makes men grow rich; the more we trade our faith in the promises, the richer in faith we grow. 2dly, If you would be growing Christians, be humble Christians. It is observed in some countries, (as in France.) the best and largest grapes, which they make their wine of, grow on the lower sort of vines; the humble saints grow most in grace, 1 Pet. 5:5., "God giveth grace to the humble" 3dly, Pray to God for spiritual growth. Some pray that they may grow in gifts. It is better to grow in grace than gifts; gifts are for ornament, grace is for nourishment,—to edify others, to save ourselves. Some pray that they may grow rich, but a fruitful heart is better than a full purse. Pray that God would make you grow in grace, though it be by affliction, Heb. 12:10. The vine grows by pruning. God's pruning-knife is to make us grow more in grace. QUEST. 7. How may we comfort such as complain they do not grow in grace? Ans. They may mistake; they may grow, when they think they do not, Prov. 13:7., "There is that maketh himself poor, yet he is rich." The sight Christians have of their defects in grace, and their thirst after greater measures of grace, makes them think they do not grow when they do. He who covets a great estate, because he hath not so much as he desires, therefore he thinks himself to be poor. Indeed Christians should seek after the grace they want, but they must not therefore overlook the grace they have. Let Christians be thankful for the least growth; if you do not grow so much in assurance, bless God if you grow in sincerity; if you do not grow so much in knowledge, bless God if you grow in humility. If a tree grows in the root, it is a true growth; if you grow in the root-grace of humility, it is as needful for you as any other growth.

OF PERSEVERANCE 1 PET. 1:5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. The fifth and last fruit of sanctification is perseverance in grace. The heavenly inheritance is kept for the saints, 1 Pet. 1:4.; and they are kept to the inheritance; in my text, "Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation." The apostle asserts a saint's stability and permanency in grace. The saints' perseverance is much oppugned by Papists and Arminians; but it is not the less true because it is opposed. A Christian's main comfort depends upon this doctrine of perseverance; take away this, and you much prejudice religion, and cut the sinews of all cheerful endeavours. Before I come to the full handling and discussing this great point, let me first clear the sense of it, which I shall do by way of concession or grant. When I say, believers do persevere: 1st, I grant that such as are so only in profession, may fall away, 2 Tim. 4:10., "Demas hath forsaken me." Blazing comets soon evaporate. A building on sand will fall, Mat. 7:26., Seeming grace may be lost. No wonder to see a bough fall from a tree that is only tied on! Hypocrites are only tied on Christ by an external profession, they are not ingrafted. Who ever thought artificial motions would hold long? The hypocrite's motion is only artificial, not vital. All blossoms do not ripen into fruit. 2dly, I grant that, if believers were left to stand upon their own legs, they might fall finally. Some of the angels, who were stars full of light and glory, yet did actually lose their grace; and if those pure angels

fell from grace, much more would the godly, who have so much sin to betray them, if they were not upheld by a superior power. 3dly, I grant, true believers, though they do not fall away actually, and lose all their race, yet their grace may fail in the degree, and they may make a great breach upon their sanctification. Grace may be moritura, non mortua,—'dying, but not dead,' Rev. 3:2., "Strengthen the things which are ready to die." Grace may be like fire in the embers: though not quenched, yet the flame is gone out. This decay of grace I shall shew in two particulars. 1. The lively actings of grace may be suspended, Rev. 2:4., "Thou hast left thy first love." Grace may be like a sleepy habit; the godly may act faintly in religion,—the pulse of their affections may beat low. The wise virgins slumbered, Mat. 25:5. The exercise of grace may be hindered; as when the course of water is stopped, and doth not run. 2. Instead of grace exercising in the godly, corruption may exercise,—instead of patience, murmuring,—instead of heavenliness, earthliness. How did pride put forth itself in the disciples when they strove who should be the greatest! How did lust put forth itself in David! Thus lively and vigorous may corruption be in the regenerate; they may fall into enormous sins. But though all this be granted, yet they do not, penitus exeidere,—fall away finally from grace. David did not quite lose his grace; for then, why did he pray, "Take not away thy Holy Spirit from me?" He had not quite lost the Spirit. As Eutychus, when he fell from a window, Acts 20 and all thought he was dead: No, saith Paul, "his life is in him." So David fell foully, but there was the life of grace in him. Though the saints may come to that pass, they have but little faith, yet not to have no faith; though their grace may be drawn low, yet not drawn dry; though grace may be abated, not abolished; though the wise virgins slumbered, yet their lamps were not quite gone out. Grace, when it is at the lowest, shall revive and flourish; as when Samson had lost his strength, his hair grew again, and he

renewed his strength. Having thus explained the proposition, I come now to the amplifying this great doctrine of the saints' perseverance. QUEST. 1. By what means do Christians come to persevere? Ans. 1. By the manuduction and help of ordinances, prayer, word, sacraments. Christians do not arrive at perseverance when they sit still and do nothing. It is not with us as with passengers in a ship, who are carried to the end of their voyage, and they sit still in the ship; or, as it is with noblemen, who have their rents brought in without their toil or labour; but we arrive at salvation in the use of means,—as a man comes to the end of a race by running,—to a victory by fighting, Mat. 26:41., "Watch and pray." As Paul said, Acts 27:31., "Except ye abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved." Believers shall come to shore at last,—arrive at heaven: but "except they abide in the ship," viz. in the use of ordinances, "they cannot be saved." The ordinances cherish grace; as they beget grace, so they are the breastmilk by which it is nourished and preserved to eternity. A. 2. Auxilio spiritus,—by the sacred influence and concurrence of the Spirit. The Spirit of God is continually at work in the heart of a believer to carry on grace to perseverance; it drops in fresh oil to keep the lamp of grace burning. The Spirit excites, strengthens, increaseth grace, and makes a Christian go from one step of faith to another, till he comes to the end of his faith, salvation, 1 Pet. 1:9. It is a fine expression of the apostle, 2 Tim. 1:14., "The Holy Ghost which dwelleth in us." He who dwells in an house, keeps the house in repair: the Spirit dwelling in a believer, keeps grace in repair. Grace is compared to a river of the water of life, John 7:38. This river can never be dried up, because God's Spirit is a spring which continually feeds it.

A. 3. Grace is carried on to perseverance, by Christ's daily intercession. As the Spirit is at work in the heart, so is Christ at work in heaven. Christ is ever praying that the saint's grace may hold out, John 17:11., Conserva illos,—Father, "keep those whom thou hast given me,"—keep them as the stars in their orbs,—keep them as jewels, that they may not be lost. "Father keep them." That prayer Christ made for Peter, was the copy of his prayer he now makes for believers, Luke 22:32., "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not," that it be not totally eclipsed; how can the children of such prayers perish? QUEST. 2. By what arguments may we prove the saints' perseverance? Ans. 1. A veritate Dei,—'from the truth of God.' God hath both asserted it, and promised it: 1. God hath asserted it, 1 John 2:9., "His seed remaineth in him." 1 John 2:27., "The anointing ye have received of him abideth in you."—2. As God hath asserted it, so he hath promised it: the truth of God, the most orient pearl of his crown, is laid a pawn in the promise, John 10:28., "I will give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish." Jer. 32:40., "I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me." God will so love his people that he will not forsake them; and they shall so fear him, that they shall not forsake him. If a believer should not persevere, God should break his promise, Hos. 2:19., "I will betroth thee unto me for ever, in righteousness and loving-kindness." God doth not marry his people unto himself, and then divorce them; he hates putting away, Mal. 2:16. God's love ties the marriage-knot so fast that neither death nor hell can break it asunder.

2. The second argument is, a potentia Dei,—from the power of God. In the text, we "are kept by the power of God unto salvation." Every person in the Trinity hath an hand in making a believer persevere. God the Father establisheth, 1 Cor. 1:21. God the Son confirms, 1 Cor. 1:8. God the Holy Ghost seals, Eph. 1:13.; so that it is the power of God that keeps us. Alas, we are not kept by our own power! The Pelagians held, that man, by his own power, might overcome temptation and persevere. But St. Austin confutes them. "Man," saith he, "prays unto God for perseverance, which would be absurd, if he had power of himself to persevere." And, saith St. Austin, "if all the power be inherent in a man's self, then why should not one persevere as well as another? Why not Judas as well as Peter?" So that it is not by any other than the power of God that we are kept. As the Lord preserved Israel from perishing in the wilderness, till he brought them to Canaan: the same care will he take, if not in a miraculous manner, yet in a spiritual invisible manner, in preserving his people in a state of grace, till he bring them to the celestial Canaan. As the heathens feigned of Atlas, that he did bear up the heavens from falling, the power of God is that Atlas which bears up the saints from falling. It is disputed, whether grace of itself may not perish, as Adam's; yet sure I am, grace kept by the power of God cannot perish. 3. The third argument is taken ab electione,—from God's electing love. Such as God hath from all eternity elected to glory cannot fall away finally; but every true believer is elected to glory, therefore he cannot fall away. What can frustrate election, or make God's decree void? This argument stands like Mount Sion, which cannot be moved; insomuch that some of the Papists hold, that those who have absolute election cannot fall away, 2 Tim. 2:19., "The foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his." The foundation of God is nothing else but God's decree in election; and this stands sure, God will not alter it, others cannot.

4. The fourth argument is taken, ab unione cum Christo,—from believers' union with Christ. They are knit to Christ, as the members to the head, by the nerves and ligaments of faith, so that they cannot be broken off, Eph. 3. What was once said of Christ's natural body, is true of his mystical. "A bone of it shall not be broken." As it is not possible to sever the leaven and the dough when they are once mingled and kneaded together, so it is impossible, when Christ and believers are once united, ever to be separated: Christ and his members make one body. Now, is it possible that any part of Christ should perish? How can Christ lose any member of his body mystical, and be perfect? In short, Si unus excidat quare non et alter? If one believer maybe broken off from Christ, then, by the same rule, why not another? Why not all? And so Christ should be an head without a body. 5. The fifth argument is taken ab emptione,—from the nature of a purchase. A man will not lay down his money for a purchase which may be lost, and the fee-simple alienated. Christ died, that he might purchase us as a people to himself for ever, Heb. 9:12., "Having obtained eternal redemption for us." Would Christ, think ye, have shed his blood that we might believe in him for a while, and then fall away? Do we think Christ will lose his purchase? 6. The sixth argument is, a victoria supra mundum,—from a believer's 'victory over the world.' The argument stands thus: He who overcomes the world, doth persevere in grace; but a believer doth overcome the world, therefore he perseveres in grace, 1 John 5:4., "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith." A man may lose a single battle in the field, yet at last win the victory. A child of God may be foiled in a single battle against temptation (as Peter was) but at last he is victorious. Now, if a saint be crowned

victor,—if the world be conquered by him,—he must needs persevere. I come next to answer some objections of the Arminians. 1st, The first objection of Arminians, is. If a believer shall persevere in grace, then, to what purpose are all those admonitions in scripture? "Let him take heed lest he fall", 1 Cor. 10:12. And Heb. 4:1., "Let us fear, lest any of you seem to come short." These admonitions seem to be superfluous and vain, if a saint shall certainly persevere. Ans. No, these counsels and admonitions are necessary to caution believers against carelessness; they are as goads and spurs to quicken them to a greater diligence in working out their salvation. These admonitions do not imply the saints can fall away, but they are preservatives to keep them from falling away. Christ told some of his disciples, they should abide in him, yet he exhorts them to abide in him, John 15. His exhorting them was not in the least to question their abiding in him, but to awaken their diligence, and make them pray the harder that they might abide in him. 2dly, The second objection is, Heb. 6:4., 'It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance." Ans. This place of scripture hath no force in it, for the apostle here speaks of hypocrites. He shews how far they may go, yet fall away. 1. "They who were once enlightened:" Men may have great illuminations, yet fall away. Was not Judas enlightened? 2. They have been made "partakers of the Holy Ghost,"—the common gifts of the Spirit, not the special grace. 3. They have "tasted the good word of God." Tasting here is opposed to eating the hypocrite may have a

kind of taste of the sweetness of religion, but his taste doth not nourish. There is a great deal of difference between one that takes a gargle and a cordial: the gargle only washeth his mouth,—he tastes it, and puts it out again,—but a cordial is drunk down which nourisheth and cherisheth the spirits. The hypocrite, who hath only some smack or taste of religion (as one tastes a gargle) may fall away. 4. And have felt "the powers of the world to come:" that is they may have such apprehensions of the glory of heaven, as to be affected with it, and seem to have some joy in the thoughts of it, yet fall away: as in the parable of the stony ground, Mat. 13:20. All this is spoken of the hypocrite; but it doth not therefore prove, that the true believer, who is effectually wrought upon, can fall away. Though meteors fall, it doth not therefore follow, that true stars fall. That this scripture speaks not of sound believers, is clear from ver. 9., "But we are persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation." Use 1st. SEE the excellency of grace, it perseveres: other things are but for a season,—health and riches are sweet, but they are but for a season,—but grace is a blossom of eternity. The seed of God remains, 1 John 3:9. Grace may suffer an eclipse, not a dissolution. It is called substance, for its solidity, Prov. 8:21.; and durable riches, for its permanency, Prov. 8:18. It lasts as long as the soul,—as heaven lasts. Grace is not like a lease which soon expires, but it runs parallel with eternity. Branch 2. See here that which may excite in the saints everlasting love and gratitude to God. What can make us love God more than the fixedness of his love to us? He is not only the author of grace, but finisher; his love is perpetuated and varried on to our salvation, John 10:27., "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life." "My sheep," there is election;

"hear my voice," there is vocation; "and I know them," there is justification; "and I give unto them eternal life," there is glorification. How may this make us love God, and set up the monuments and trophies of his praise! How much have we done to cause God to withdraw his Spirit, and suffer us to fall finally! yet that he should keep us, let his name be blessed, and his memorial eternized, who keepeth the feet of his saints, 1 Sam. 2:9. Branch 3. See whence it is that saints do persevere in holiness: it is solely to be ascribed to the power of God. We are kept by his power, —kept as in a garrison. It is a wonder any Christian perseveres, of you consider,—1. Corruption within. The tares are mingled with the wheat,—there is more sin than grace,—yet grace is habitually predominant. Grace is like a spark in the sea, a wonder it is not quenched,—a wonder sin doth not destroy grace; that it doth not do, as sometimes the nurse to the infant, overlay it, and it dies; so that this infant of grace is not smothered by corruption. 2. Temptations without. Satan envies us happiness, and he raiseth his militia, stirs up persecution; he shoots his fiery darts of temptations; they are called darts for their swiftness, fiery for their terribleness. We are every day beset with devils; as it was a wonder Daniel was kept alive in the midst of the roaring lions: so, that there are many roaring devils about us, and yet we are not torn in pieces. Now, whence is it we stand against these powerful temptations? We are kept by the power of God. 3. The world's golden snares, riches and pleasure. Luke 18:24., "How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God?" How many have been cast away upon these golden sands, 2 Tim. 4:10., as Demas? What a wonder any soul perseveres in religion, that the earth doth not choke the fire of all good affections? Whence is this but from the power of God? We are kept by his power.

Use 2d. Consolation. This doctrine of perseverance is as a Bezoar stone; it is a sovereign cordial to keep up the spirits of the godly from fainting. There is nothing doth more trouble a child of God than this, he fears he shall never hold out; these weak legs of mine will never carry me to heaven. But perseverance is an inseparable fruit of sanctification. Once in Christ, and for ever in Christ. A believer may fall from some degrees of grace, but not from the state of grace; an Israelite could never wholly sell or alienate his land of inheritance, Luke 15:23. A type of our heavenly inheritance, which cannot be wholly alienated from us. How despairing is the Arminian doctrine of falling from grace? To-day a saint,—to-morrow a reprobate; to-day a Peter,—to-morrow a Judas. This must needs cut the sinews of a Christian's endeavour, and be as the boring an hole in the vessel, to make all the wine of his joy run out. Were the Arminian doctrine true, how could the apostle say, the seed of God remains in him, 1 John 3:9., and the anointing of God abides? 1 John 2:27. What comfort were it to have one's name written in the book of life, if it might be blotted out again? But, be assured, for your comfort, grace, if true, though never so weak, shall persevere; though a Christian hath but little grace to trade with, yet he need not fear breaking, because God doth not only give him a stock of grace, but will keep his stock for him. Gratia concutitur, non excutitur, AUG. Grace may be shaken with fears and doubts, but it cannot be plucked up by the roots. Fear not falling away. If any thing should hinder the saints' perseverance, then it must be either sin or temptation; but neither of these. 1. Not the sin of believers. That which humbles them shall not damn them; but their sins are a mean to humble them, they gather grapes off thorns; from the thorn of sin they gather the grape of humility. 2. Not temptation. The devil lays the train of his temptation to blow up the fort of a saint's grace; but this cannot do it. Temptation is a medicine for security; the more Satan tempts, the more the saints pray. When Paul had the messenger of Satan to

buffet him, 2 Cor. 12:8., "For this I besought the Lord thrice that it might depart from me." Thus nothing can break off a believer from Christ, or hinder his perseverance. Let this wine be given to such as are of an heavy heart: this perseverance is comfort. 1. In the loss of worldly comforts. When our goods may be taken away, our grace cannot, Luke 10:42., "Mary hath chosen the better part which cannot be taken from her." 2. In the hour of death. When all things fail, friends take their farewell of us, yet still grace remains. Death may separate all things else from us but grace; a Christian may say on his deathbed, as Olevan, once, "Sight is gone,—speech and hearing are departing,—but the loving-kindness of God will never depart." QUEST. 1. What motives and incentives are there to make Christians persevere? Ans. 1. It is the crown and glory of a Christian to persevere, In Christianis non initia sed fide laudantur. Prov. 16:31., "The hoary head is a crown of glory, if found in the way of righteousness." When grey hairs shine with golden virtues, this is a crown of glory. The church of Thyatira was best at last, Rev. 2:19., "I know thy patience and thy works, and the last to be more than the first." The excellency of a building is not in having the first stone laid, but when it is finished. The glory and excellency of a Christian is, when he hath finished the work of faith. A. 2. You are within a few days' march of heaven. Salvation is near to you, Rom. 13:11., "Now is our salvation nearer than when we believed." Christians, it is but a little while and you will have done weeping and praying, and be triumphing; you shall put off your mourning, and put on white robes; you shall put off your armour, and put on a victorious crown; you who have made a good progress in religion, you are almost ready to commence and take your degree

of glory; now is your salvation nearer than when you began to believe. When a man is almost at the end of a race, will he now tire, or faint away? O labour to persevere, your salvation is now nearer,— you have but a little way to go, and you will set your foot in heaven! Though the way be up-hill and full of thorns, viz. sufferings, yet you have gone the greatest part of your way, and shortly you shall rest from your labours A. 3. How sad is it not to persevere in holiness? You expose yourselves to the reproaches of men, and the rebukes of God. First, to the reproaches of men. They will deride both you and your profession, Luke 14:30., "This man began to build, and was not able to finish." Such is he who begins in religion, and doth not persevere: he is the ludibrium, and derision of all. Secondly, to the rebukes of God. God is most severe against such as fall off, because they bring an evil report upon religion. Apostacy breeds a bitter worm in conscience; what a worm did Spira feel! And it brings swift damnation; it is a drawing back to perdition, Heb. 10:39. God will make his sword drunk with the blood of apostates. A. 4. The promises of mercy are annexed only to perseverance, Rev. 3:5., "He that overcometh, shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not blot out his name out of the book of life," Non pugnanti sed vincenti daubitur corona, AUG. The promise is not to him that fights, but that overcomes, Luke 22:28., "Ye are they which have continued with me, and I appoint unto you a kingdom." The promise of a kingdom, saith Chrysostom, is not made to them that heard Christ or followed him, but that continued with him. Perseverance carries away the garland; no man hath the crown set upon his head, but he who holds out to the end of the race. O therefore, by all this, be persuaded to persevere! God makes no account of such as do not

persevere. Who esteems of corn that sheds before harvest, or fruit that falls from the tree before it be ripe? QUEST. 2. What expedients or means may be used for a Christian's perseverance? Ans. 1. Take heed of those things which will make you desist and fall away. 1st, Take heed of presumption. Do not presume upon your own strength; exercise an holy fear and jealousy over your own hearts, Rom. 11:20., "Be not high-minded, but fear," 1 Cor. 10:12., "Let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall." It was Peter's sin, he leaned more upon his grace than upon Christ, and then he fell. A Christian hath cause to fear lest the lust and deceit of his heart betray him; take heed of presuming; fear begets prayer,—prayer begets strength,—and strength begets steadfastness. 2dly, Take heed of hypocrisy. Judas was first a sly hypocrite, and then a traitor, Ps. 78:37., "Their heart was not right with God, neither were they steadfast in his covenant." If there be any venom or malignity in the blood, it will break forth into a plague-sore. The venom of hypocrisy is in danger of breaking out into the plague-sore of scandal. 3dly, Beware of a vile heart of unbelief, Heb 3:12., "Take heed lest there he in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God." Whence is apostacy but from incredulity? Men do not believe the truth, and then they fall from the truth. Unbelieving and unstable go together, Ps. 78:22., "They believed not in God;" ver. 41., "They turned back." A. 2. If you would be pillars in the temple of God, and persevere in sanctity, First, Look that you enter into religion upon a right ground; be well grounded in the distinct knowledge of God; you must know the love of the Father, the merit of the Son, and the efficacy of the Holy

Ghost. Such as know not God aright, will by degrees fall off. The Samaritans sometimes sided with the Jews when they were in favour, but afterwards disclaimed all kindred with them, when Antiochus persecuted the Jews; and no wonder the Samaritans were no more fixed in religion, if you consider what Christ saith of the Samaritans, John 4:22, "Ye worship ye know not what:" they were ignorant of the true God. Let your knowledge of God be clear, and serve him purely out of choice, and then you will persevere, Ps. 119:30, 31., "I have chosen the way of truth, I have stuck unto thy testimonies." Secondly, Get a real work of grace in your heart, Heb. 13:9., "It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace." Nothing will hold out but grace; it is only this anointing abides; paint will fall off. Get an heart-changing work, 1 Cor. 6:11., "But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified." Be not content with baptism of water, without baptism of the Spirit; the reason men persevere not in religion, is for want of a vital principle; a branch must needs wither, that hath no root to grow upon. Thirdly, If you would persevere, be very sincere. Perseverance grows only upon the root of sincerity, Ps. 25:21., "Let integrity and uprightness preserve me." The breastplate of sincerity can never be shot through. How many storms was Job in? the devil set against him,—his wife tempted him to curse God,—his friends accused him of being a hypocrite,—here was enough one would think, to have made him to desist from religion: yet for all this, he perseveres. What preserved him? It was his sincerity, Job 27:6., "My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go; my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live." Fourthly, If you would persevere, be humble, St. Chrysostom calls humility the mother of all the graces. God lets a poor humble

Christian stand, when others of higher parts, and who have higher thoughts of themselves, fall off by apostacy. They are likest to persevere, whom God will give most grace to: "But he gives grace to the humble," 1 Pet. 5:5. They are likest to persevere, who have God dwelling in them: But God dwells in the humble soul, Isa. 57:15. Non requiescet Spiritus Sanctus nisi super humilem, BERN. The lower the tree roots in the earth, the firmer it is; the more the soul is rooted in humility, the more established it is, and is in less danger of falling away. Fifthly, Would you persevere, cherish the grace of faith. Faith doth stabilere animum, 2 Cor. 1:24., "By faith ye stand." 1. Faith knits us to Christ, as the members are knit to the head by nerves and sinews. 2. Faith fills us with love to God,—it works by love, Gal. 5:6.; and he who loves God, will rather die than desert him. The soldier who loves his general, will die in his service. 3. Faith gives us a prospect of heaven, it shews an invisible glory; and he who hath Christ in his heart, and a crown in his eye, will not faint away. O cherish faith! Keep your faith, and your faith will keep you; while the pilot keeps his ship, his ship keeps him. Sixthly, Would we persevere, let us seek God's power to help us; we are kept by the power of God. The child is safest when it is held in the nurse's arms; so are we, when we are held in the arms of free grace. It is not our holding God, but his holding us, preserves us. When a boat is tied to a rock, it is secure; so when we are fast tied to the Rock of Ages, then we are impregnable. O engage God's power to help us to persevere! We engage his power by prayer; let us pray to him to keep us, Ps. 17:5., "Hold up my goings in thy path, that my footsteps slip not." It was a good prayer of Beza, Domine quod cepisti perfici, ne in portu naufragium accidat,—'Lord perfect what thou hast begun

in me, that I may not suffer shipwreck when I am almost at the haven.' Seventhly, If you would persevere, set before your eyes the noble examples of those who have persevered in religion. Quot martyres, quot fideles in cœlis, jam triumphant? What a glorious army of saints and martyrs have gone before us! How constant to the death was St. Paul? Acts 21:13. How persevering in the faith were Ignatius, Polycarp, Athanasius? These were stars in their orbs,—pillars in the temple of God. Let us look on their zeal and courage, and be animated, Heb. 12:1., "Seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us run with patience the race that is set before us." The crown is set at the end of the race; if we win the race, we shall wear the crown.

A BELIEVER'S PRIVILEGE AT DEATH PHIL. 1:21. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. Saint Paul was a great admirer of Christ,—he desired to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2:2. No medicine like the blood of Christ; and in the text, "To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain." I. "For me to live is Christ." We must understand Paul of a spiritual life. "For me to live is Christ," i.e. Christ is my life: so Greg. Nyssen; or thus, my life is made up of Christ; as a wicked man's life is made up of sin, so Paul's life was made up of Christ, he was full of Christ. But that I may give you the sense of the text more fully, take it in these three particulars;

1. Christ is the principle of my life. 2. Christ is the end of my life. 3. Christ is the joy of my life. 1. "For me to live is Christ," i.e. Christ is the principle of my life. I fetch my spiritual life from Christ, as the branch fetcheth its sap from the root, Gal. 2:20., "Christ liveth in me." Jesus Christ is an head of influence; he sends forth life and spirits into me, to quicken me to every holy action. Thus, "For me to live is Christ;" Christ is the principle of my life; from his fulness I live, as the vine-branch lives from the root. 2. "For me to live is Christ," i.e. Christ is the end of my life,—I live not to myself but to Christ. So Grotius and Causabon, Christio servio. "For to me to live is Christ:" all my living is to do service to Christ; Rom. 14:8., "Whether we live, we live unto the Lord," when we lay out ourselves wholly for Christ. As the factor trades for the merchant, so we trade for Christ's interest, we propagate his gospel; the design of our life is to exalt Christ, and make the crown upon his head flourish. Now, it may be said, "For us to live is Christ,"—our whole life is a living to Christ. 3. "For me to live is Christ," i.e. Christ is the joy of my life, Ps. 43:4., "God my exceeding joy," or the cream of my joy. A Christian rejoiceth in Christ's righteousness; he can rejoice in Christ, when worldly joys are gone; when the tulip in a garden withers, a man rejoiceth in his jewels: when relations die, a saint can rejoice in Christ the pearl of price. In this sense, "For me to live is Christ," he is the joy of my life; if Christ were gone, my life would be a death to me.

Use. It should exhort us all to labour to say as the apostle, "For me to live is Christ." Christ is the principle of my life, the end of my life, the joy of my life. "For me to live is Christ;" and then we may comfortably conclude, that to die shall be gain. II. And that brings me to the second part of the text, "And to die is gain." Doct. To a believer death is great gain. A saint can tell what his losses for Christ are, but he cannot tell how great his gains are at death, "To me to die is gain." Death to a believer is crespusculum gloriæ,—the day-break of eternal brightness. To show fully what a believer's gains are at death, were a task too great for an angel,—all hyperboles fall short,—the reward of glory exceeds our very faith: only let me give you some dark views and imperfect lineaments of that infinite glory the saints shall gain at the hour of death; "To me to die is gain." 1. Believers at death shall gain a writ of case from all sins and troubles; they shall be in a state of impeccability. Sin expires with their life. I think sometimes what an happy state that will be, never to have a sinful thought more; and they shall have a quietus est from their troubles. Here David cried out, "My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing," Ps. 31:10. Quid est diu vivere, nisi diu torqueri, AUG. Life begins with a cry, and ends with a groan; but at death all troubles die. 2. Believers at death shall gain the glorious sight of God. They shall see him, 1st, Intellectually with the eyes of their mind, which divines call the beatifical vision; if there were not such an intellectual sight of God, how do the spirits of just men, made perfect, see him?—2dly, They shall behold the glorified body of Jesus Christ; and if it be pleasant to behold the sun, then how blessed a sight will it be to see Christ the Sun of Righteousness clothed with our human nature,

shining in glory above the angels? Through Christ's flesh, as through a transparent glass, some bright rays and beams of the Godhead shall display themselves to glorified eyes; the sight of God through Christ will be very complacential and delightful; the terror of God's essence will be taken away; God's majesty will be mixed with beauty, and sweetened with clemency; it will be infinitely delightful to the saints to see the amiable aspects and smiles of God's face. Which brings me to the third thing. 3. The saints at death shall not only have a sight of God, but shall enjoy the love of God; there shall be no more a vail on God's face, nor his smiles chequered with frowns, but God's love shall discover itself in all its orient beauty and fragrant sweetness. Here the saints pray for God's love, and they have a few drops, but there they shall have as much as their vessel can receive. To know this love that passeth knowledge, this will cause jubilation of spirit, and create such holy raptures of joy in the saints as are superlative, and would soon overwhelm them if God did not make them able to bear. 4. Believers at death shall gain a celestial palace,—an house not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5:1. Here the saints are straitened for room, they have but mean cottages to live in,—but they shall have a royal palace to live in; here is but their sojourning house,—there in heaven is their mansion-house,—an house built high above all the visible orbs,—an house bespangled with light, Col. 1:12.,—enriched with pearls and precious stones, Rev. 21:19. And this is not their landlord's house, but their Father's house, John 14:2.; and this house stands all upon consecrated ground; it is set out by transparent glass to show the holiness of it, Rev. 21:27. 5. Believers at death shall gain the sweet society of glorified saints and angels: this will add something to the felicity of heaven, as every

star adds some lustre to the firmament. 1st, The society of the glorified saints; we shall see them in their souls, as well as in their bodies; their bodies shall be so clear and bright, that we shall see their souls shining through their bodies, as the wine through the glass; and believers at death shall have converse with the saints glorified. And how delightful will that be, when they shall be freed from all their sinful corruptions, pride, envy, passion, censoriousness, which are scars upon them here to disfigure them? In heaven there shall be perfect love among the saints; they shall, as the olive and myrtle, sweetly embrace each other; the saints shall know one another, as Luther speaks. If in the transfiguration Peter knew Moses and Elias, whom he never saw before, Mat. 17:3., then much more, in the glorified state, the saints shall perfectly know one another, though they never saw them before. 2dly, The saints at death shall behold the angels with the glorified eye of their understanding. The wings of the cherubim (representing the angels) were made of fine gold to denote both their sanctity and splendour; the angels are compared to lightning, Mat. 28:3., because of those sparkling beams of majesty, which as lightning shoot from them. And when saints and angels shall meet and sing together in concert in the heavenly choir, what divine harmony, what joyful triumphs will it create! 6. Believers at death shall gain perfection of holiness. Here grace was but in cunabuli,—in its cradle, very imperfect; we cannot write a copy of holiness without blotting; believers are said to receive but primitias Spiritus,—'the first-fruits of the Spirit,' Rom. 8:22. But at death the saints shall arrive at perfection,—their knowledge clear,— their sanctity perfect,—their sun shall be in its full meridian splendour. They need not then pray for increase of grace; they shall love God as much as they would love him, and as much as he desires

to have them love him; they shall be then, in respect of holiness, as the angels of God. 7. At death the saints shall gain a royal magnificent feast. I told you before what a glorious palace they shall have; but a man may starve in a house, if there be no cheer. The saints at death shall have a royal banquet, shadowed out in scripture by a marriage-supper, Rev. 19:9. Bullinger and Gregory the Great understand by that marriage-supper of the Lamb, the stately, magnificent festival the saints shall have in heaven; they shall feed on the tree of life, Rev. 22. They shall have the heavenly nectar and ambrosia,—"the spiced wine, and the juice of the pomegranate," Cant. 8:2. This royal supper of the Lamb will not only satisfy hunger but prevent it, Rev. 7:16., "They shall hunger no more." Nor can there be any surfeit at this feast, because a fresh course will be continually serving; new and fresh delights will spring from God; therefore the tree of life in paradise is said to bear twelve sorts of fruit, Rev. 22:2. 8. Believers at death shall gain honour and dignity, they shall reign as kings; therefore we read of the ensigns of their royalty, their white robes and crowns celestial, 1 Tim. 4:7. We read that the doors of the holy of holies were made "of palm-trees and open flowers, covered with gold," 1 Kings 6:35.: an emblem of that victory and triumph, and that golden garland of honour wherewith God hath invested the saints glorified. When all worldly honour shall lie in the dust,—the mace, the star, the robe of ermine, the imperial diadem,—then shall the saints' honour remain; not one jewel shall be plucked out of their crown; they shall gain at death a blessed eternity. If the saints could have the least suspicion or fear of losing their glory, it would much cool and imbitter their joy; but their crown fadeth not away, 1 Pet. 5:4. As the wicked have a worm that never dies, so the elect have a crown that never fades. EVER, is a short word, but hath no ending.

Infine erit gaudium sine fine, BERN. 2 Cor. 4:18., "The things which are not seen are eternal." Ps. 16:11., "At thy right hand are pleasures for evermore." Who can span eternity? Millions of ages stand but for cyphers in eternity. This is the elah, or highest strain of the saint's glory; ever in Christ's bosom. QUEST. How come the saints to have all this gain? Ans. Believers have a right to all this gain at death upon divers accounts: by virtue of the Father's donation,—the Son's purchase,— the Holy Ghost's earnest,—and faith's acceptance. Therefore the state of future glory is called the saint's proper inheritance, Col. 1:12. They are heirs of God, and have a right to inherit. Use 1st. See the great difference between the death of the godly and the wicked; the godly are gainers at death, the wicked are great losers at death. They lose four things: (1.) They lose the world, and that is a great loss to the wicked; they laid up their treasure upon earth, and to be turned out of it all at once is a great loss. (2.) They lose their souls, Mat. 16:26, 27. The soul was at first a noble piece of coin, which God stamped his own image upon; this celestial spark is more precious than the whole globe of the world, but the sinner's soul is lost; not that the souls of the wicked are annihilated at death, but damnified. (3.) They lose heaven. Heaven is sedes beatorum,—the royal seat of the blessed; it is the region of happiness, the map of perfection. There is that manna which is angels' food; there is the garden of spices, the bed of perfumes, the river of pleasure Sinners, at death, lose all this.

(4.) They lose their hopes; for though they lived wickedly, yet they hoped God was merciful, and they hoped that they should go to heaven. Their hope was not an anchor, but a spider's web. Now, at death they lose their hopes, they see they did but flatter themselves into hell, Job 8:14., "Whose hope shall be cut off." That is sad, to have a man's life and his hope cut off together. Use 2d. If the saints gain such glorious things at death; then how may they desire death? Doth not every one desire preferment? Nemo ante funera fælix. Faith gives a title to heaven, death a possession. Though we should be desirous of doing service here, yet we should be ambitious of being with Christ, Phil. 1:23. We should be content to live, but willing to die. Is it not a blessed thing to be freed from sin, and to lie for ever in the bosom of divine love? Is it not a blessed thing to meet our godly relations in heaven, and to be singing divine anthems of praise among the angels? Doth not the bride desire the marriage day, especially if she were to be matched unto the crown? What is the place we now live in, but a place of banishment from God? We are in a wilderness, while the angels live at court. Here we are combating with Satan, and should not we desire to be out of the bloody field, where the bullets of temptation fly so fast, and to receive a victorious crown? Think what it will be to have always a smiling aspect from Christ's face,—to be brought into the banqueting-house, and have the banner of his love displayed over you! O ye saints, desire death; it is your ascension-day to heaven! Egredere, anima egredere! said Hilarion on his deathbed: "Go forth, my soul, what fearest thou?" Another holy man said, "Lord, lead me to that glory which I have seen as through a glass; haste, Lord, and do not tarry!" Some plants thrive best when they are transplanted: believers, when they are by death transplanted, cannot choose but thrive, because they have Christ's sweet sunbeams shining upon them. And what though the passage through the valley of the shadow

of death be troublesome? who would not be willing to pass a tempestuous sea, if he were sure to be crowned so soon as he came to shore. Use 3d. Comfort in the loss of our dear and pious relations. They, when they die, are not only taken away from the evil to come, but they are great gainers by death,—they leave a wilderness, and go to a paradise,—they change their complaints into thanksgivings,—they leave their sorrows behind, and enter into the joy of their Lord. Why should we weep for their preferment? Believers have not their portion paid till the day of their death: God's promise is his bond to make over heaven in reversion to them; but though they have his bond, they do not receive their portion till the day of death. O rejoice to think of their happiness who die in the Lord! To them "to die is gain;" they are as rich as heaven can make them. Hope is a Christian's anchor which he casts within the vail, Rom. 12:12., "Rejoicing in hope." A Christian's hope is not in this life, but he "hath hope in his death." Prov. 14:32. The best of a saint's comfort begins when his life ends; the wicked have all their heaven here, Luke 6:24., "Wo unto you, rich, you have received your consolation." You may make your acquittance, and write, "Received in full payment;" Luke 16:25., "Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things;" but a saint's happiness is in reversion; "The righteous hath hope in his death." God keeps the best wine till last. If Cato the heathen said, "To me to die is gain," he saw mortality to be a mercy: then, what may a believer say? Eccl. 7:1., "The day of death is better than the day of one's birth." Nemo ante funera fælix. SOLON. A queen of this land said, she preferred her coffin before her cradle. QUEST. 1. What benefits do believers receive at death?

Ans. 1. They have great immunities.—2. Their bodies are united to Christ in the grave till the resurrection.—3. They pass immediately into a state of glory. I. The saints at death have great immunities and freedoms. An apprentice when out of his time is made free: when the saints are out of their time of living, then they are made free,—not made free till death. 1. At death they are freed from a body of sin. There are in the best reliquiæ peccati,—some remainders and relies of corruption, Rom. 7:24., "O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death!" By the body of death is meant the congeries,— the mass and lump of sin. It may well be called a body for its weightiness, and a body of death for its noisomeness. (1.) It weighs us down; sin hinders us from doing good. A Christian is like a bird that would be flying up, but hath a string tied to its legs to hinder it; so he would be flying up to heaven with the wings of desire, but sin hinders him, Rom. 7:15, "For what I would, that I do not." A Christian is like a ship that is under sail, and at anchor; grace would sail forward, but sin is the anchor that holds it back. (2.) Sin is more active in its sphere than grace. How stirring was lust in David, when his grace lay dormant! (3.) Sin sometimes gets the mastery and leads a saint captive, Rom. 7:19., "The evil that I would not, that I do." Paul was like a man carried down the stream, and could not bear up against it. How oft is a child of God overpowered with pride and passion! Therefore Paul calls sin, a law in his members, Rom. 7:24.; it binds as a law; it hath a kind of jurisdiction over the soul as Cæsar had over the senate. (4.) Sin defiles the soul,—it is like a stain to beauty,—it turns the soul's azure brightness into sable. (5.) Sin debilitates us,—it disarms us of our strength, 2 Sam. 3:39., "I am this day weak, though anointed king:" so, though a saint be crowned with grace, yet he is weak, though anointed a spiritual king. (6.) Sin is ever restless, Gal. 5:17., "The flesh lusts against the Spirit." It is an inmate

that is always quarrelling; like Marcellus, that Roman captain, of whom Hannibal said, whether he did beat or was beaten, he would never be quiet. (7.) Sin adheres to us, we cannot get rid of it; it may be compared to a wild fig-tree growing on a wall, though the roots are pulled up, yet there are some fibres, some strings of it in the joints of the stone-work, which cannot be gotten out. (8.) Sin mingles with our duties and graces; we cannot write a copy of holiness without blotting. This makes a child of God weary of his life, and makes him water his couch with his tears, to think sin so strong a party, and he should often offend that God whom he loves; this made Paul cry out Miser ego homo! 'O wretched man that I am!' Hence Paul did not cry out of his affliction, of his prison-chain, but of the body of sin. Now a believer at death shall be freed from sin; he is not taken away in, but from his sins; he shall never have a vain, proud thought more; he shall never grieve the Spirit of God any more; sin brought death into the world, and death shall carry sin out of the world. The Persians had a certain day in the year in which they killed all serpents and venomous creatures: such a day will the day of death be to a believer, it will destroy all his sins, which, like so many serpents have stung him. Death smites a believer as the angel did Peter, he made his chains fall off, so death makes all the chains of sin fall off, Acts 12:7. Believers at death are made perfect in holiness, Heb. 12:23., "The spirits of just men made perfect." At death the souls of believers recover their virgin purity. O what a blessed privilege is this, to be sine macula et ruga,—without spot or wrinkle, Eph. 5:27.,—to be purer than the sunbeams,—to be as free from sin as the angels! This makes a believer so desirous to have his pass to be gone; he would fain live in that pure air where no black vapours of sin arise. 2. At death the saints shall be freed from all the troubles and incumbrances to which this life is subject. "Sin is the seed sown, and

trouble is the harvest reaped." EURIP. Life and trouble are married together; there is more in life to wean us than to tempt us. Parents divide a portion of sorrow to their children, and yet leave enough for themselves, Job 5:7., "Man is born to trouble,"—he is heir to it,—it is his birthright,—you may as well separate weight from lead as trouble from the life of man, Quid est diu vivere, nisi diu torqueri? AUG. King Henry's emblem, a crown hung in a bush of thorns; there is a far greater proportion of bitterness than pleasure in this life, Prov. 7:17., "I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes and cinnamon." For one sweet ingredient there were two bitter; for the cinnamon, there were myrrh and aloes. A man's grace will not exempt him from troubles, Gen. 47:9., "Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been." Though he was a godly patriarch,—though he had met with God, Gen. 32:30.,—he named "the name of the place Peniel, for I have seen God face to face,"—yet he had his troubles; "Few and evil," &c. There are many things to imbitter life and cause trouble, and death frees us from all.—1. Care. The mind is full of perplexed thoughts, how to bring about such a design,—how to prevent such an evil: the Greek word for care, comes from a primitive in the Greek, that signifies to cut the heart in pieces.' Care doth discruciate the mind, waste the spirits; no such bitter bread as the bread of carefulness, Ezek. 12:19. Care is a spiritual canker which eats out the comfort of life; death is the cure of care.—2. Fear. Fear is the ague of the soul which sets it a shaking; 1 John 4:18., "There is torment in fear." Fear is like Prometheus's vulture, it gnaws upon the heart. There is a mistrustful fear,—a fear of want; and a distracting fear,—a fear of danger; and a discouraging fear,—a fear God doth not love us. These fears leave sad impressions upon the mind; now at death a believer is freed from these torturing fears; he now knows he is passed from death to life; he is as far from fear, as the damned are from hope; the grave buries a Christian's fear.—3. Labour, Eccl. 1:8., "All things are full of labour." Some labour in the mine; others

among the Muses; God hath made a law, "In the sweat of thy face thou shalt eat bread," but death gives a believer a quietus est; it takes him off from his day-labour, Rev. 14:13., Blessed are the dead that die in Lord, they rest from their labours.' What needs working when they have their reward? What needs fighting, when the crown is set on their head? They rest from their labours.—4. Suffering: believers are as a lily among thorns; as the dove among the birds of prey. The wicked have an antipathy against the righteous, and secret hatred will break forth into open violence, Gal. 4:29., "He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit." The dragon is described with seven heads and ten horns, Rev. 12:3. He plotteth with the one, and pusheth with the other. But at death the godly shall be freed from the molestations of the wicked; they shall never be pestered with these vermin more, Job 3:17., "There (viz. in the grave) the wicked cease from troubling." Death doth to a believer, as Joseph of Arimathea did to Christ, it takes him down from the cross, and gives him a writ of ease; the eagle that flies high, cannot be stung with the serpent; death gives the soul the wings of the eagle, that it flies above all these venomous serpents here below.—5. Temptation. Though Satan be a conquered enemy, yet he is a restless enemy, 1 Pet. 5:8. He walketh about; the devil is always going his diocese, he hath his snares and his darts; one he tempts with riches, another with beauty. It is no small trouble to be continually followed with temptations; it is as bad as for a virgin to have her chastity daily assaulted; but death will free a child of God from temptation, he shall never be vexed more with the old serpent. After death hath shot its darts at us, the devil shall have done shooting his; though grace puts a believer out of the devil's possession, only death frees him from the devil's temptation.—6. Sorrow. A cloud of sorrow gathers in the heart, and drops into tears, Ps. 31:10., "My life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing." It was a curse, Gen. 3:16., "In sorrow thou shalt bring forth." Many things occasion sorrow; sickness, law-

suits, treachery of friends, disappointment of hopes, loss of estate, Ruth 1:20., "Call me not Naomi, call me Mara:" "I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home again empty." Sorrow is the evil spirit that haunts us; the world is a Bochim; Rachel wept for her children; some grieve that they have no children, and others grieve that their children are undutiful. Thus we spend our years with sighing; it is a valley of tears, but death is the funeral of all our sorrows, Rev. 7:17., "And God shall wipe away all tears." Then Christ's spouse puts off her mourning; how can the children of the bride-chamber mourn, when the bridegroom shall be with them? Mat. 9:15. Thus death gives a believer his quietus est; it frees him from sin and trouble; though the apostle calls death the last enemy, 1 Cor. 15:11., yet it is the best friend: "To me to die is gain." Use 1st. See here that which may make a true saint willing to die; death will set him out of gun-shot,—free him from sin and trouble; there is no cause of weeping to leave a valley of tears; the world is a stage on which sin and misery are acted. Believers are here in a strange country, why then should they not be willing to go out of it? Death beats off their fetters of sin, and sets them free. Who goes weeping from a gaol? Besides our own sins, the sins of others. The world is a place where Satan's seat is; a place where we see God daily dishonoured. Lot—who was a bright star in a dark night—his righteous soul was vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3:7. To see God's sabbaths broken, his truths adulterated, his glory eclipsed, is that which wounds a godly heart. This made David cry out, Ps. 120:5., "Wo is me that I dwell in Mesech, that I sojourn in the tents of Kedar!" Kedar was Arabia, where were Ishmael's posterity; this was a cut to David's heart to dwell there. O then be willing to depart out of the tents of Kedar!

II. The bodies of believers are united to Christ in the grave, and shall rest there till the resurrection. They are said to sleep in Jesus, 1 Thess. 4:14. The dust of believers is part of Christ's body mystical. The grave is a dormitory or place of rest to the saints, where their bodies quietly sleep in Christ, till they are awakened out of their sleep by the trumpet of the archangel. QUEST. 2. But how shall we know that we shall gain all this at death, to be freed from sin and trouble, and to have our bodies united to Christ in the grave? Ans. If we are believers, then we gain all this at death. "To me," saith Paul, "to die is gain:" to me, quatenus, a believer. Are we such? Have we this blessed faith? Faith, wherever it is, is operative. Lapidaries say there is no precious stone but hath virtutem insitam,—some hidden virtue in it: so I may say of faith, it hath some secret virtue in it,—it anchors the soul on Christ,—it hath both a justifying and sanctifying virtue in it,—it fetcheth blood out of Christ's sides to pardon, and water out of his sides to purge,—it works by love,—it constrains to duty,—it makes the head study for Christ, the tongue confess him, the hands work for him. I have read of a father who had three sons, and, being to die, left in his will all his estate to that son who could find his ring with the jewel which had an healing virtue. The case was brought before the judges; the two elder sons counterfeited a ring, but the younger son brought the true ring, which was proved by the virtue of it, whereupon his Father's estate went to him. To this ring I may compare faith: there is a counterfeit faith in the world, but if we can find this ring of faith which hath the healing virtue in it to purify the heart, this is the true faith which gives us an interest in Christ, and entitles us to all these privileges at death, to be freed from sin and sorrow, and to have our bodies united to Christ while they are in the grave.

3. I should now come to the third privilege at death, the souls of believers pass immediately into glory. Where I shall lead you to the top of mount Pisgah, and give you a short view of the glory of heaven. III. At death the souls of believers pass, into glory. Death brings malorum omnium ademptionem,—omnium adeptionem; death is the day-break of eternal brightness. And here I shall lead you to the top of Mount Pisgah, and give you a glimpse of the holy land. QUEST. 1. What is comprehended in glory? Ans. Glory is status omnium bonorum aggregatione perfectus, BOETIUS. It is a perfect state of bliss which consists in the accumulation and heaping together all those good things which immortal souls are capable of. And truly here I am at a loss; all that I can say falls short of the celestial glory! Apelles's pencil cannot delineate it,—angels' tongues cannot express it,—we shall never understand glory fully, till we are in heaven,—only let me give you some dark views, and some imperfect lineaments of that state of glory saints shall arrive at after death. 1. The first and most sublime part of the glory of heaven is the full and sweet fruition of God: ipse Deus sufficit ad præmium, AUG. We are apt to think the happiness of heaven is in being free from pain and misery, but the very quintessence of happiness, is the enjoyment and fruition of God; this is the diamond-ring of glory. God is an infinite inexhaustible fountain of joy; and to have him, is to have all. Now the enjoyment of God implies three things. 1. It implies our seeing of God. 2. Our loving of God.

3. God's loving us. 1st. The enjoying of God implies our seeing of God, 1 John 3:2., "We shall see him as he is:" Here we see him as he is not: mutable, mortal; there as he is. QUEST. 2. How shall we see God? Ans. 1. We shall see him intellectually, with the eyes of our mind. This divines call the beatifical vision: we shall have a full knowledge of God, though not know him fully. If there were not such an intellectual sight of God, then how do the spirits of just men made perfect see God. This sight of God will be very glorious, as when a king on his coronation-day shews himself in all his royalty and magnificence. A. 2. We shall corporally behold the glorified body of Jesus Christ: and if it be a pleasant thing to behold the sun, Eccl. 11:7., then, how blessed a sight will it be to behold the Sun of Righteousness,—to see Christ clothed in our human nature, sitting in glory above the angels! Solomon saith, "the eye is not satisfied with seeing," Eccl. 1:8., but sure the eyes of saints will be satisfied with seeing that orient brightness which shall shine from the beautiful body of Christ. It must needs be satisfying, because through Christ's flesh some rays and beams of the Godhead shall gloriously display themselves. God's excellent majesty would overwhelm us; but through the vail of Christ's flesh we shall behold the divine glory. A. 3. Our seeing God will be transforming. We shall so see him as to be in some measure assimilated and changed into his image, 1 John 3:2., "We shall be like him." If, when Moses was with God on the mount, and had but some imperfect sight of his glory, 'Moses' face shined,' Exod. 34:35., how shall the saints glorified shine, being

always in God's presence, and having some beams of his glory put upon them? "We shall be like him." One that is deformed, may look on beauty, and not be made beautiful; but the saints shall so see God, as that sight shall transform them into his likeness, Ps. 17:15., "When I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy likeness." Not that the saints shall partake of God's essence: for as the iron in the fire is made fiery, yet remains iron still, so the saints, by beholding God's majesty, shall be made glorious creatures, but yet creatures still. A. 4. Our seeing of God in heaven will be unweariable. Let a man see the rarest sight that is, he will soon be cloyed; when he comes into a garden, and sees delicious walks, fair arbours, pleasant flowers, within a little while he grows weary, but it is not so in heaven, there is no surfeit,—ibi nec fames nec fastidium, BERN. The saints will never be weary of their prospect, viz. of seeing God; for, God being infinite, there shall be every moment new and fresh delight springing from God into the souls of the glorified. 2d. The second thing implied in our enjoying God, is our loving of God. It is a saint's grief that his heart is like the frozen ocean,—that he can melt no more in love to God: but in heaven the saints shall be like seraphims, burning in divine love; love is a pleasant affection; "fear hath a torment in it," 1 John 4:18.; love hath joy in it. To love beauty is delightful: God's amazing beauty will attract the saints' love, and it will be their heaven to love him. 3d. The third thing implied in enjoying God, is God's loving us. Were there glory in God, yet, if there were not love, it would much eclipse the joys of heaven: but "God is love," 1 John 4:16. The saints glorified cannot love so much as they are loved. What is their love to God's? What is their star to this sun? God doth love his people on earth, when they are black as well as comely; they have their imperfections;

O how entirely will he love them, when they are without "spot or wrinkle!" Eph. 5:27. 1. This is the felicity of heaven, to be in the sweet embraces of God's love; to be the Hephzibah,—the delight of the King of Glory; to be sunning ourselves in the light of God's countenance. Then the saints shall know "the love of Christ which passeth knowledge," Eph. 3:19. From this glorious manifestation of God's love, will flow infinite joy into the souls of the blessed: therefore heaven is called "entering into the joy of our Lord," Mat. 25:21. The seeing of God, the loving of God, and being beloved of God, will cause a jubilation of spirit, and create such holy raptures of joy in the saints, as is unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1:8. In Deo quadam dulcidene delectatur anima, imo rapitur, AUG. Now the saints spend their years with sighing, they weep over their sins and afflictions,—then their water shall be turned into wine,—then the vessels of mercy shall be filled and run over with joy,—then they shall have their palm-branches and harps in their hands, Rev. 14:2., in token of their triumphs and rejoicing. 2. The second thing comprehended in glory, is the good society there. First, There are the angels; every star adds to the light,—those blessed cherubims will welcome us to paradise. If the angels rejoiced so at the conversion of the elect, how will they rejoice at their coronation! Secondly, There is the company of the saints, Heb. 12:23., "The spirits of just men made perfect." QUEST. 3. Whether shall the saints in glory know each other? Ans. Certainly they shall; for our knowledge in heaven shall not be diminished but increased. We shall not only know our friends and godly relations, but those glorified saints which we never saw before; it must be so; for society without acquaintance is not comfortable, and of this opinion were St. Austin, Anslem, Luther. And indeed the

scripture seems to hint so much to us; for, if Peter in the transfiguration knew Moses and Elias, whom he never saw before, Mat. 17:4., then surely in heaven the saints shall know one another, and be infinitely delighted in each other's company. 3. The third thing comprehended in glory, is perfection in holiness. Holiness is the beauty of God and angels; it makes heaven; what is happiness but the quintessence of holiness? Here a Christian's grace is imperfect, he cannot write a copy of holiness without blotting. He is said to receive but primitias Spiritus,—the 'first fruits of the Spirit,' grace in furi, Rom. 8:23.; but at death believers shall arrive at perfection of grace; then this sun shall be in its meridian splendour; then shall they not need to pray for increase of grace, for they shall be as the angels, their light shall be clear as well as their joy full. 4. The fourth thing in glory is dignity and honour; they shall reign as kings; therefore the saints glorified are said to have their insignia regalia, their ensigns of royalty, their white robes and their crown, 2 Tim. 4:7. Cæsar, after his victories, in token of honour, had a chair of ivory set for him in the senate, and a throne in the theatre; the saints, having obtained their victories over sin and Satan, shall be enthroned with Christ in the empyrean heaven. To sit with Christ denotes safety; to sit on the throne, dignity, Ps. 149:9., "This honour have all the saints." 5. The fifth thing in glory, is the harmony and union among the heavenly inhabitants. The devil cannot get his cloven foot into heaven; he cannot conjure up any storms of contention there; there shall be perfect union; there Calvin and Luther are agreed; there is no jarring string in the heavenly music; there is nothing to make any difference, no pride or envy there. Though one star may differ from another, one may have a greater degree of glory, yet every vessel shall

be full: there shall the saints and angels sit as olive-plants round about their Father's table in love and unity. Then shall they join together in concert,—then shall the loud anthems of praise be sung in the heavenly choir. 6. The sixth thing in glory, is a blessed rest, Heb. 4:9., "There remaineth therefore a rest." Fælix transitus a labore ad requiem. Here we can have no rest, tossed and turned as a ball on racket, 2 Cor. 4:8., "We are troubled on every side." How can a ship rest in a storm? But after death the saints get into their haven. Every thing is quiet in the centre; God is centrum quietativum animæ, as the schoolmen, "the centre where the soul doth sweetly acquiesce." A Christian, after his weary marches and battles, shall put off his bloody armour, and rest himself upon the bosom of Jesus, that bed of perfume; when death hath given the saints the wings of a dove, then they shall fly away to paradise and be at rest. 7. The seventh thing in glory, is eternity, 2 Cor. 4:17., "An eternal weight of glory."—1st, Glory is a weight: the Hebrew word for glory (quod significat pondus) is a weight: God must make us able to bear it.—2dly, An eternal weight. Glory is such a manna as doth not breed worms. If the saints' glory in heaven were but for a time, and they were in fear of losing it it would eclipse and imbitter the joys of heaven; but eternity is written upon their joys; the garland made of flowers of paradise fades not, 1 Pet. 5:4. I have read of a river which they call the day-river, in which time it runs with a full torrent, but at night it is dried up; such are all earthly comforts, they run with a full stream all the daytime of life, but at the night of death they are dried up; but the saints glorified shall drink of the rivers of pleasure for evermore, Ps. 16:11. Eternity is the heaven of heavens; in fine gaudium erit sine fine, BERN. The joys of heaven as overflowing, so everflowing.

QUEST. 4. When do believers enter upon possession of glory? Ans. They pass immediately after death into glory. Some hold, with the Platonists and Lucianists, that the soul dies; but many of the sober heathens believed the soul's immortality. The Romans, when their great men died, caused an eagle to be let loose, and fly about in the air, signifying hereby that the soul was immortal, and did not die with the body. Christ tells us the soul is not capable of killing, Luke 12:4., therefore not of dying. And as the soul doth not die, so neither doth it sleep in the body for a time; if the soul be at death absent from the body, 2 Cor. 5:8., then it cannot sleep in the body. There is an immediate passage from death to glory; it is but winking, and we shall see God, Luke 23:43., "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise." By paradise is meant heaven. The third heaven into which Paul was rapt (which all hold to be the heaven of the blessed) was called paradise, 2 Cor. 12:4. Now saith Christ to the thief on the cross, "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise." His body could not be there, for it was laid in the grave; but it was spoken of his soul, that it should be immediately after death in heaven. Let none be so vain as to talk of purgatory; a soul purged by Christ's blood, needs no fire of purgatory, but goes immediately from a deathbed into a glorified state. Use 1st. See what little cause believers have to fear death, when it brings such glorious benefits; "to me to die is gain!" Why should the saints fear their preferment? Is it not a blessed thing to see God, to love God, and to lie for ever in the bosom of divine love? Is it not a blessed thing to meet our godly relations in heaven? Why should the saints be afraid of their blessings? Is a virgin afraid to be matched unto the crown? Now is but the contract,—at death is the marriagesupper of the Lamb, Rev. 19:9. What hurt doth death, but take us from among fiery serpents, and places us among angels? What hurt

doth it do, but to clothe us with a robe of immortality? Hath he any wrong done him that hath his sackcloth pulled off, and hath cloth of gold put upon him? Fear not dying, ye who cannot live but by dying! Use 2d. You who are real saints, whose hearts are purified by faith, spend much time in musing upon these glorious benefits which you shall have by Christ at death. Thus might you by a contemplative life, begin the life of angels here, and be in heaven before your time. Eudoxius was so affected with the glory of the sun, that he thought he was born only to behold it. What should we contemplate but celestial glory, when we shall see God face to face; David was got above the ordinary sort of men, he was in the altitudes, Ps. 139:18., "I am still with thee." A true saint every day takes a turn in heaven; his thoughts and desires are like cherubims flying up to paradise. Can men of the world so delight in looking upon their bags of gold, and fields of corn, and shall not the heirs of heaven take more delight in contemplating their glory in reversion? Could we send forth faith as a spy, and every day view the glory of the Jerusalem above, how would it rejoice us, as it doth the heir to think of the inheritance which is to come into his hand shortly? Use 3d. Consolation. This is that which may comfort the saints in two cases.—1. Under their wants; they abound only in wants,—the meal is almost spent in the barrel,—but be patient till death, and you shall have a supply of all your wants, you shall have a kingdom, and be as rich as heaven can make you. He who hath the promise of an estate, after the expiring of a few years, though at present he hath nothing to help himself, yet comforts himself with this, that shortly he shall have an estate come into his hand, 1 John 3:2., "It doth not yet appear what we shall be." We shall be enamelled with glory, and be as rich as the angels. 2. A true saint is, (as Luther) hæres crucis; but this may make us go cheerfully through our sufferings; there are

great things laid up in store,—there is glory coming, which eye hath not seen,—we shall drink of the fruit of the vine in the kingdom of heaven. Though now we drink in a wormwood-cup, yet here is sugar to sweeten it: we shall taste of those joys of paradise which exceed our faith, and may be better felt than they can be expressed.
