PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 10
Keeping the Heart in Public Troubles and Dangers


Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 4. Keeping the Heart in Public Troubles and Dangers.

Case 3. The third case that comes next to be spoken to is this; How
public and tender hearts may be relieved and supported when they
are overweighed with the burdensome sense of Zion's troubles? 'I
grant, it is hard for him that preferreth Zion to his chief joy, to keep
his heart that it sink not below the due sense of its troubles; and yet
this ought, and may be done by the use of such heart-establishing
directions as these.
Directions
Direction 1. Settle this great truth in your hearts, that no trouble
befalls Zion, but by the permission of Zion's God; and he permits
nothing out of which he will not bring much good at last to his
people.
There is truly a principle of quietness in the permitting, as in the
commanding will of God. See it in David, 2 Sam. 16:10. "Let him
alone, it maybe God hath bidden him:" And in Christ, John 19:11.
"Thou couldst have no power against me, except it were given thee
from above;" it should much calm our spirits that it is the will of God
to suffer it; and had he not suffered it, it could never have been as it
is.
This very consideration quieted Job, Eli, David, and Hezekiah; that
the Lord did it was enough to them, and why should it not be so to
us? If the Lord will have Zion plowed as a field, and her goodly
stones lie in the dust; if it be his pleasure that Antichrist shall rage
yet longer, and wear out the saints of the Most High; if it be his will
that a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity, by the
Lord God of hosts shall be upon the valley of vision, that the wicked
shall devour the man that is more righteous than he, what are we
that we should contest with God? Fit it is that we should be resigned
up to that will whence we proceeded, and that he that made us
should dispose of us as he pleaseth: he may do what seemeth him
good without our consent: doth poor man stand upon equal ground,
that he should capitulate with his Creator, or that God should render

him an account of any of his matters? It is every way as reasonable
we be content, however God dispose of us, as that we be obedient to
whatever he commands us.
But then, if we pursue this argument further by considering that
God's permissions do all meet at last in the real good of his people,
this will much more quiet our spirits. Do the enemies carry away the
good figs, even the best among the people into captivity? This looks
like a sad providence, but yet God sends them thither for their good,
Jer. 24:5. Doth God take the Assyrian as a staff in his hand to beat
his people with? Those blows are smart, and make them cry; but the
end of his so doing is, "That he may accomplish his whole work upon
mount Zion," Isa. 10:12. If God can bring much good out of the worst
and greatest evil of sin, much more out of temporal afflictions; and it
is as evident that he will, as that he can do so. For it is inconsistent
with the wisdom of a common agent to permit any thing, which he
might prevent if he pleased, to cross his great design and end: and
can it be imagined that the most wise God should do so?
Well then, as Luther told Melancthon, Desinat Philippus csse rector
mundi; so say I to you; Let infinite wisdom, power, and love alone;
for by these all creatures are swayed, and actions guided, in reference
to the church; it is none of our work to rule the world, but to submit
to him that doth: Non cœco impctu volvuntur rotœ; the motions of
providence are all judicious, the wheels are full of eyes; it is enough
that the affairs of Zion are in a good hand.
Direction 2. Ponder this heart-supporting truth, in reference to
Zion's trouble: That how many troubles soever are upon her, yet her
King is in her.
What! hath the Lord forsaken his churches? Hath he sold them into
the enemy's hand? doth he not regard what evils befals them? that
our hearts sink at this rate? Is it not too shameful an undervaluing of
the great God, and too much magnifying of poor, impotent men, to
fear and tremble at creatures, whilst God is in the midst of us? The

church's enemies are many and mighty; let that be granted, yet that
argument with which Caleb and Joshua strove to raise their own
hearts, is of as much force now as it was then: "The Lord is with us,
fear them not," Num. 14:9. The historian tells us, that when
Antigonus over-heard his soldiers reckoning how many their
enemies were, and so discouraging one another; he suddenly steps in
among them with this question, 'And how many (said he) do you
reckon me for?' Discouraged souls, how many do you reckon the
Lord for? Is he not an over match for all his enemies? Is not one
Almighty more than many mighties? Doth his presence stand for
nothing with us? "If God be for us, who can be against us?" Rom.
8:31. What think you, was the reason of that great exploration
Gideon made in Judg. 6? He questions, ver. 12, 13. he desires a sign,
ver. 17. and after that another, ver. 36. and what was the end of all
this, but that he might be sure the Lord was with him, and that he
might but write this motto upon his ensign? "The sword of the Lord,
and of Gideon." So then, if you can be well assured the Lord is with
his people, you will get thereby above all your discouragements: and
that he is so, you need not, with him, desire a sign from heaven; lo,
you have a sign before you, even their marvellous preservation
amidst all their enemies. If God be not with his people, how is it they
are not swallowed up quick? Do their enemies want malice, power, or
opportunity? No, but there is an invisible hand upon them. Well
then, as it is Exod. 33:14. let his presence give us rest; and though the
mountains be hurled into the sea, though heaven and earth mingle
together, fear not, God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved.
Direction 3. Ponder the great advantages attending the people of God
in an afflicted condition. If a low and an afflicted state in the world
be really best for the church, then your dejections are not only
irrational, but ungrateful; indeed, if you estimate the happiness of
the church by its worldly ease, splendour, and prosperity, then such
times will seem bad for it; but if you reckon its glory to consist in its
humility, faith, patience, and heavenly-mindedness, no condition in
the world abounds with advantages for these, as an afflicted
condition doth. It was not persecutions and prisons, but worldliness

and wantonness, that was the poison of the church: neither was it the
earthly glory of its professors, but the bood of its martyrs, that was
the seed of the church. The power of godliness did never thrive better
than in affliction, and never ran lower than in times of greatest
prosperity: when "we are left a poor and an afflicted people, then we
learn to trust in the name of the Lord," Zeph. 3:12. What say ye, sirs?
Is it indeed for the saint's advantage to be weaned from the love of,
and delight in ensnaring worldly vanities! To be quickened, and
pricked forward with more haste to heaven, to have clearer
discoveries of their own hearts, to be taught to pray more fervently,
frequently, spiritually: to look and long for the rest to come, more
ardently? If these be for their advantage, experience teaches us, that
no condition is ordinarily blessed with such fruits as these, like an
afflicted condition.
And is it well done, then, to repine and droop because your Father
consults more the advantage of your souls, than the pleasing of your
humours? Because he will bring you a nearer way to heaven than you
are willing to go? Is this a due requital of his love, who is pleased so
much to concern himself in your welfare? which is more than he will
do for thousands in the world, upon whom he will not lay a rod, or
spend an affliction for their good, Hos. 4:17. Mat. 15:14. But alas! we
judge by sense, and reckon things good or evil, according to what we,
for the present, can taste and feel in them.
Direction 4. Take heed that you overlook not the many precious
mercies which the people of God enjoy amidst all their troubles.
It is a pity that our tears, upon the account of our troubles, should so
blear and blind our eyes, that we should not see our mercies and
grounds of comfort. I will not insist upon the mercy of having your
lives given you for a prey, nor yet upon the many outward comforts,
temporal conveniencies and accommodations, which you enjoy even
above what Christ and his precious servants, of whom the world was
not worthy, ever had.

But what say you to pardon of sin? interest in Christ? the covenant of
promise? and an eternity of happiness, in the presence of God after a
few days are over? O that ever a people entitled to such mercies as
these, should droop under any temporal affliction, or be so much
concerned for the frowns of men, and loss of trifles! you have not the
smiles of great men, but you have the favour of the great God; you
are, it may be, cast back in your estates, but thereby furthered in
spirituals. You cannot live so bravely, plentifully, and easily, as
before; but still you may live as holy and heavenly as ever: will you
then grieve so much for these circumstantials, as to forget your
substantials? Shall light troubles make you forget weighty mercies?
Remember the church's true riches are laid out of the reach of all its
enemies: they may make you poor, but not miserable. What though
God do not distinguish, in his outward dispensations, betwixt his
own and others? Yea, what though his judgments single out the best,
and spare the worst? What though an Abel be killed in love, and a
Cain survive in hatred; a bloody Dionysius die in his bed, and a good
Josiah fall in battle? What though the belly of the wicked be filled
with hidden treasures, and the teeth of the saints broken with gravelstones; yet still here is much matter of praise; for electing love has
distinguished, though common providence did not; and whilst
prosperity and impunity slay the wicked, even slaying and adversity
shall benefit and save the righteous.
Direction 5. Believe, that how low soever the church be plunged
under the waters of adversity, it shall assuredly rise again. Fear not,
for as sure as Christ arose the third day, notwithstanding the seal and
watch that were upon him; so sure the church shall arise out of all
her troubles, and lift up its victorious head over all its enemies: there
is no fear of ruining that people who thrive by their losses, and
multiply by being diminished. O be not too quick to bury the church
before she is dead! stay till Christ hath tried his skill, before you give
it up for lost. The bush may be all in a flame, but shall never be
consumed, and that because of the good will of him that dwelleth in
it.

Direct. 6. Record the famous instances of God's care and tenderness
over his people in former straits. Christ hath not suffered it to be
devoured yet; for above these 1700 years the Christian church hath
lived in affliction, and yet it is not consumed; many a wave of
persecution hath gone over it, and yet it is not drowned; many
designs to ruin it, and hitherto none have prospered; this is not the
first lime that Hamans and Ahithophels have plotted its ruin; that an
Herod hath stretched out his hand to vex it: still it hath been
preserved from, supported under, or delivered out of all its troubles;
and is it not as dear to God as ever? Is he not as able to save it now,
as formerly? Though we know not whence deliverance should arise,
"Yet the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of temptations,"
2 Pet. 2:9.
Direction 7. If you can fetch no comfort from any of the former
arguments, then, in the last place, Try whether you cannot draw
some comfort out of your very troubles. Surely this trouble of yours
is a good argument of your integrity; union is the ground of
sympathy; if you had not some rich adventure in that ship, you would
not tremble as you do, when it is in danger: besides, this frame of
spirit may afford you this argument, that if you be sensible of the
church's troubles, Jesus Christ is much more sensible of, and
solicitous about it, than you can be; and he will have an eye of favour
upon them that mourn for it, Isa. 57:18.

Keeping the Heart in Time of Danger and
Public Distraction
Season 4. 'The fourth special season of expressing our utmost
diligence in keeping our hearts, is the time of danger and public
distraction; in such times the best hearts are but too apt to be
surprized by slavish fear; it is not easy to secure the heart against
distractions in times of common distraction. If Syria be confederate
with Ephraim, how do the hearts of the house of David shake, even
as the trees of the wood, which are shaken with the wind? Isa. 7:2.

When there are ominous signs in the heaven; on the earth distress of
nations, with perplexity; the sea and waves roaring, then the hearts
of men fail for fear, and for looking after those things which are
coming on the earth, Luke 21:25, 26. Even a Paul himself may
"Sometimes complain of fightings within, when there are fears
without," 2 Cor. 7:5.
But, my brethren, these things ought not to be so, saints should be of
a more raised spirit: So was David, when his heart was kept in a good
frame, Psal. 27:1. "The Lord is my light, and my salvation; whom
shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be
afraid?" Let none but the servants of sin be the slaves of fear, let
them that have delighted in evil, fear evil; impius tantum metuit,
quantum nocuit. O let not that which God hath threatened as a
judgment upon the wicked, ever seize upon the breasts of the
righteous. "I will send (saith God) faintness into their hearts in the
land of their enemies, and the sound of a shaking leaf shall chase
them," Lev. 26:36. O what poor-spirited men are these, to fly at a
shaking leaf! which makes a pleasant, and not a terrible noise; and is
in itself a kind of natural music: But to a guilty conscience the
whistling leaves are drums and trumpets. "But God hath not given us
the spirit of fear, but of love, and of a sound mind," 2 Tim. 1:7. A
sound mind as it stands there in opposition to the spirit of fear, is an
unwounded conscience, not infirmed by guilt: And this should make
a man as bold as a lion. I know it cannot be said of a saint what God
spake of Leviathan, that he is made without fear: There is a natural
fear in every man, and it is as impossible to be wholly put off as the
body itself is: It is a preturbation of the mind, arising from the
apprehension of approachingdanger; and as long as dangers can
approach us, we shall find some perturbations within us. It is not my
purpose to commend to you a stoical apathy, nor yet to take you off
from such a degree of cautional, preventive fear as may fit you for
trouble, and be serviceable to your souls; there is a provident fear
that opens our eyes to foresee danger, and quickens to a prudent and
lawful use of means to prevent it: Such was Jacob's fear, Gen. 32:7, 9,
10, &c. But it is the fear of diffidence I persuade you to keep your

hearts from; that tyrannical passion which invades the heart in times
of danger; distracts, weakens, and unfits the heart for duty; drives
men upon unlawful means, and brings a snare with it. Well then, the
fourth case willl be this:
Case 4. How a Christian may keep his heart from distracting and
tormenting fears, in times of great and threatening dangers.
Now there are fourteen excellent rules, or helps, for the keeping the
heart from sinful fear, when imminent dangers threaten us: And the
first is this,
Rules
Rule 1. Look upon all the creatures as in the hand of God, who
manages them in all their motions, limiting, restraining, and
determining them all at his pleasure.
Get this truth well settled by faith in your hearts; it will marvellously
guard them against slavish fears. The first chapter of Ezekiel contains
an admirable scheme, or draught of providence; there you may see
the living creatures who move the wheels, viz. the great affairs and
turnings of things here below, coming unto Christ, who sits upon the
throne, to receive new orders and instructions from him, ver. 24, 25,
26. And in Rev. 6 you read of white, black, and red horses, which are
nothing else but the instruments which God employs in executing his
judgments in the world, as wars, pestilence, and death: But when
these horses are prancing, and trampling up and down the world,
here is that may quiet our hearts, that God hath the reins in his hand.
Wicked men are sometimes like mad horses, they would stamp the
people of God under their feet, but that the bridle of providence is in
their lips, Job 1:11, 12. A lion at liberty is terrible to meet, but who is
afraid of the lion in the keeper's hand?
Rule 2. Remember that this God, in whose hand all the creatures are,
is your Father, and is much more tender over you, than you are, or
can be, over yourselves: "He that toucheth you, toucheth the "apple

of mine eye," Zech. 2:8. Let me ask the most timorous woman,
whether there be not a vast difference between the sight of a drawn
sword in the hand of a bloody ruffian, and the same sword in the
hand of her own tender husband? As great a difference there is in
looking upon creatures by an eye of sense, and looking on them as in
the hand of your God by an eye of faith; that is a sweet scripture to
this purpose, Isa. 54:5. "Thy maker is thy Husband, the Lord of
Hosts is his name:" he is Lord of all the hosts of creatures in the
world: Who would be afraid to pass through an army, though all the
soldiers should turn their swords and guns towards him, if the
general of that army were his friend, or father? I have met with an
excellent story of a religious young man, who being at sea, with many
other passengers in a great storm, and they being half dead with fear,
he only was observed to be very cheerful, as if he had been but little
concerned in that danger: One of them demanding the reason of his
cheerfulness, 'O, (said he) it is because the pilot of the ship is my
father.' Consider Christ, first as the King, and supreme Lord over the
providential kingdom, and then as your Head, Husband, and Friend,
and thou wilt quickly say, "Return unto thy rest, O my soul." This
truth will make you cease trembling, and cause you to sing in the
midst of dangers. Psal. 47:7. "The Lord is King of all the earth, sing
ye praise with understanding;" "(or, as the Hebrew word is,) Every
one that hath understanding," viz. of this heart-reviving and
establishing doctrine of the dominion of our Father over all the
creatures.
Rule 3. Urge upon your hearts the express prohibitions of Christ in
this case: and let your hearts stand in awe of the violations of them.
He hath charged you not to fear, Luke 21:9. "When ye shall hear of
wars and commotions, see that ye be not terrified." And Phil. 1:28.
"In nothing be terrified by your adversaries." Yea, in Matth. 10:26,
28, 31 and within the compass of six verses, our Saviour commands
us thrice, not to fear man. Doth every big word of proud dust and
ashes make thee afraid? Doth the voice of a man make thee tremble?
and shall not the voice of God: If thou art of such a fearful and

timorous spirit, how is it that thou fearest not to disobey the flat
commands of Jesus Christ? Methinks the command of Christ should
have as much power to calm, as the voice of a poor worm to terrify
thy heart. Isa. 51:12, 13. "I, even I, am he that comforteth you: Who
art thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of
the son of man that shall be made as the grass, and forgettest the
Lord thy Maker?" We cannot fear creatures sinfully, till we have
forgotten God; did we remember what he is, and what he hath said,
we should not be of such feeble spirits: Bring thy heart, then, to this
dilemma in times of danger; if I let into my heart the slavish fear of
man, I must let out the reverential awe and fear of God; and dare I
cast off the fear of the Almighty for the frowns of a man? Shall I lift
up proud dust above the great God? Shall I run upon a certain sin, to
shun a probable danger? O keep thy heart by this consideration!
Rule 4. Remember how much needless trouble your vain fears have
brought upon you formerly, and how you have disquieted yourselves
to no purpose.
Isa. 51:13. "And hast feared continually because of the oppressor, as
if he were ready to devour; and where is the fury of the oppressor?"
He seemed ready to devour, but yet you are not devoured: I have not
brought upon you the thing that you feared; you have wasted your
spirits, disordered your souls, and weakened your hands, and all this
to no purpose: You might have all this while enjoyed your peace, and
possessed your souls in patience. And here I cannot but observe a
very deep policy of Satan, managing a design against the soul by
these vain fears: I call them vain, in regard of the frustration of them
by Providence; but certainly they are not in vain, as to the end Satan
aims at in raising them; for herein he acts as soldiers use do in the
siege of a garrison, who on purpose to wear out the besieged by
constant watchings, and thereby unfit them to make resistance when
they storm it in earnest, do every night give them false alarms, which
though they come to nothing, yet doth notably serve this further
design of the enemy. O when will you beware of Satan's devices?

Rule 5. Consider solemnly, That though the things you fear should
really fall out, yet there is more evil in your own fear, than in the
thing feared;
And that not only as the least evil of sin is worse than the greatest
evil of suffering; but as this sinful fear hath really more torment and
trouble in it, than is in that condition you are so much afraid of: fear
is both a multiplying and a tormenting passion; it represents troubles
much greater than they are, and so tortures and wreeks the soul
much worse than when the suffering itself comes. So it was with
Israel at the Red-sea, they cried out, and were sore afraid, till they
put foot in the water, and then a passage was opened through those
waters, which they thought would have drowned them. Thus it is
with us; we look through the glass of carnal fear, upon the waters of
trouble, the swellings of Jordan, cry out, O they are unfordable! me
must needs perish in them: But when we come into the midst of
those floods, indeed we find the promise made good; "God will make
a way to escape," 1 Cor. 10:13. Thus it was with blessed Bilney, when
he would make a trial, by putting his finger to the candle, and not
able to endure that, he cried out, 'What, cannot I bear the burning of
a finger? how then shall I be able to bear the burning of my whole
body to-morrow?' And yet when that morrow came, he could go
cheerfully into the flames, with that scripture in his mouth, Isa. 43:1,
2, 3. "Fear not, for I have redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy
name, thou art mine; when thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee; when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be
burnt."
Rule 6. Consult the many precious promises which are written for
your support and comfort in all dangers.
These are your refuges to which you may fly and be safe; "When the
arrows of danger fly by night, and destruction wasteth at noon day."
There are particular promises suited to particular cases and
exigencies; and there are general promises, reachingall cases and
conditions: Such are these, Rom. 8:28. "All things shall work

together for good," &c. And Eccles. 8:12. "Though a sinner do evil an
hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet it shall be well with
them that fear the Lord." &c. "Could you but believe the promises,
your hearts should be established," 2 Chron. 20:29. Could you but
plead them with God, as Jacob did. Gen. 32:12. "Thou saidst, I will
surely do thee good," &c. they would relieve you in every distress.
Objection. But that promise was made personally, and by name to
him, so are not these to me.
Answer. If Jacob's God be your God, you have as good an interest in
them as he had. The church, a thousand years after that transaction
betwixt God and Jacob, applied that which God spake to him, as if it
had been spoken to themselves, Hos. 12:4. He "found him in Bethel,
and there he spake with us."
Rule 7. Quiet your trembling hearts by recording and consulting your
past experiences of the care and faithfulness of God in former
distresses.
These experiences are food for your faith in a wilderness condition,
Psal. 74:14. By this David kept his heart in time of danger, 1 Sam.
17:37 and Paul his, 2 Cor. 1:10. It was sweetly answered by
Silentiarius, when one told him that his enemies way-laid him to take
away his life, Si Deus mei curam non habit, quid vivo? If God take no
care of me, how have I escaped hitherto? you may plead with God old
experiences to procure new ones; for it is in pleading with God for
new deliverances, as it is in pleading for new pardons. Now mark
how Moses pleads on that account with God, Numb. 14:19. "Pardon, I
beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, as thou hast forgiven them
from Egypt until now." He doth not say as men do, Lord, this is the
first fault, thou hast not been troubled before to sign their pardon:
But, Lord, because thou hast pardoned them so often, I beseech thee
pardon them once again. So in new straits, Lord, thou hast often
heard, helped, and saved in former fears; therefore now help again,

for with thee there is plenteous redemption, and thine arm is not
shortened.
Rule 8. Be well satisfied that you are in the way of your duty, and that
will beget holy courage in times of danger.
"Who will harm you, if you be followers of that which is good?" 1 Pet.
3:13. Or, if any dare attempt it, "you may boldly commit yourselves to
God in well-doing," 1 Pet. 4:19. It was this consideration that raised
Luther's spirit above all fear: 'In the cause of God (said he) I ever am,
and ever shall be stout;' herein I assume this title, Cedo nulli, a good
cause will bear up a man's spirit bravely. Hear the saying of a*
heathen, to the shame of cowardly Christians: 'When the emperor
Vespasian had commanded Fluidius Priscus not to come to the
senate; or if he did, to speak nothing but what he would have him;
the senator returned this noble answer, That as he was a senator, it
was fit he should be at the senate; and if being there he were required
to give his advice, he would speak freely that which his conscience
commanded him; the emperor threatening then that he should die,
he answered, Did I ever tell you that I was immortal? Do you what
you will, and I will do what I ought; it is in your power to put me to
death unjustly, and in me to die constantly.'
Righteousness is a breast-plate, the cause of God will pay all your
expences; let them tremble whom danger finds out of the way of
duty.
Rule 9. Get your consciences sprinkled with the blood of Christ from
all guilt, and that will set your hearts above all fear.
It is guilt upon the conscience that softens and cowardizes our
spirits: "The righteous are bold as a lion," Prov. 28:1. It was guilt in
Cain's conscience that made him cry, "Every one that meets me shall
slay me," Gen. 4:14. A guilty conscience is more terrified with
conceited dangers, than a pure conscience is with real ones. A guilty
sinner carries a witness against himself in his own bosom. It was
