PURITAN GOLD -- The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 13
The Work of Providence for the Saints in This Life

---

The Mystery of Providence. By John Flavel.

Chapter 1. The Work of Providence for the Saints in This Life.

Chapter 1: The Work of Providence for
the Saints
First, I shall undertake the proof and defense of the great truth that
the affairs of the saints in this world are certainly conducted by the
wisdom and care of special Providence. And in doing so I address
myself with cheerfulness to perform, as I am able, a service for that
Providence which has throughout my life ‘performed all things for
me,’ as the text speaks.
There is a twofold consideration of Providence, according to its
twofold object and manner of dispensation; the one in general,
exercised about all creatures, rational and irrational, animate and
inanimate; the other special and peculiar. Christ has a universal
empire over all things (Eph. 1. 22); He is the head of the whole world
by way of dominion, but a head to the Church by way of union and
special influence (John 17. 2). He is ‘the Saviour of all men, especially
of those that believe’ (1 Tim. 4. 10). The Church is His special care
and charge. He rules the world for its good, as a head consulting the
welfare of the body.
Heathens generally denied Providence, and no wonder, since they
denied a God; for the same arguments that prove one will prove the
other. Aristotle, the prince of heathen philosophers, could not by the
utmost search of reason find out how the world originated, and
therefore concludes it was from eternity. The Epicureans did, in a

way, acknowledge a God, but yet denied a Providence, and wholly
excluded Him from any interest or concern in the affairs of the
world, as being inconsistent with the felicity and tranquillity of the
divine Being, to be diverted and cumbered with the care and labour
of government. This assertion is so repugnant to reason that it is a
wonder they did not blush at its absurdity; but I guess the reason,
and one of them (according to Cicero) speaks it out in broad
language: Itaque imposuistis cervicibus nostris sempiternum
dominum, quem dies & noctes timeremus. Quis enim non timeat
omnia providentem, & cogitantem, & animadvertentem, & omnia
ad se pertinere putantem, curiosum & plenum negotii Deum? (If
this is so you have yoked us to an eternal master, such as we would
fear day and night. For who would not be rrightened of a prying
busybody of a God who provides, plans and observes everything and
who considers that everything is his concern?) They foresaw that the
concession of a Providence would impose an eternal yoke upon their
necks, by making them accountable for all they did to a higher
tribunal, so that they must necessarily ‘pass the time of their
sojourning here in fear,’ while all their thoughts, words and ways
were strictly noted and recorded, for the purpose of an account by an
all-seeing and righteous God. They therefore laboured to persuade
themselves that what they had no mind for did not exist. But these
atheistical and foolish conceits fall flat before the undeniable
evidence of this so great and clear a truth.
Now my business here is not so much to deal with professed atheists
who deny the existence of God and consequently deride all evidences
brought from Scripture of the extraordinary events that fall out in
favour of that people that are called His, but rather to convince those
that professedly own all this, yet, never having tasted religion by
experience, suspect, at least, that all these things which we call
special providences to the stains, are but natural events or mere

contingencies. Thus, while they profess to own a God and a
Providence (which profession is but the effect of their education)
they do in the meantime live like atheists, and both think and act as
if there were no such things; and really, I fear this is the case with the
greater part of the men of this generation.
But if it were indeed so, that the affairs of the world in general, and
more especially those of the saints, were not conducted by divine
Providence, but, as they would persuade us, by the steady course of
natural causes, beside which, if at any time we observe any event to
fall out, it is merely casual and contingent, or proceeds from some
hidden and secret cause in nature – if this indeed were so, let them
that are tempted to believe it, give a rational answer to the following
questions:
How comes it to pass that so many signal mercies and deliverances
have befallen the people of God, above the power and against the
course of natural causes, to make way for which there has been an
obvious suspension and stop put to the course of nature?
It is most evident that no natural effect can exceed the power of its
natural cause. Nothing can give to another more than it has in itself,
and it is as clear that whatsoever acts naturally, acts necessarily. Fire
burns to the uttermost of its power; while waters overflow and drown
all that they can. Lions and other rapacious and cruel beasts,
especially when hungry, tear and devour their prey; and arbitrary
and rational agents also act according to the principles and laws of
their natures. A wicked man when his heart is fully set in him, and
his will stands in a full bent of resolution, will certainly, if he has
power in his hand and opportunity to execute his conceived mischief,
give it vent, and perpetrate the wicked devices of his heart. Having
once conceived mischief, and ‘travailing in pain with it,’ according to

the course of nature, he must ‘bring it forth’ (Ps. 7. 14). But if any of
these inanimate, brute, or rational agents, when there is no natural
obstacle or hindrance, have their power suspended, and that when
the effect is near the birth and the design at the very point of
execution, so that though they would, yet cannot hurt; to what, do
you think, is this to be assigned and referred? Yet so it has often been
seen, where God’s interest has been immediately concerned in the
danger and evil of the event. The sea divided itself in its own channel,
and made a wall of water on each side, to give God’s distressed Israel
a safe passage, and that not in a calm, but when its waves roared (Isa.
51. 15). The fire, when blown up to the most intense and vehement
flame, had no power to singe one hair of God’s faithful witnesses,
when at the same instant it had power to destroy their intended
executioners at a greater distance (Dan. 3. 22). Yea, we find it has
sometimes been sufficient to consume, but not to torment the body,
as in that known instance of blessed Bainham, who told his enemies:
‘The flames were to him as a bed of roses.’ The hungry lions put off
their natural fierceness and became gentle and harmless when
Daniel was cast among them for a prey. The like account we are given
of Polycarp, and Dionysius the Areopagite, whom the fire would not
touch, but stood after the manner of the shipman’s sail filled with the
wind about them.
Are these things according to the course and law of nature? To what
secret natural cause can they be ascribed? In like manner we find the
vilest and fiercest of wicked men have been withheld by an invisible
hand of restraint from injuring the Lord’s people. By what secret
cause in nature was Jeroboam’s hand dried up and made inflexible at
the same instant it was stretched out against the man of God (1 Kings
13. 4)? No wild beasts rend and devour their prey more greedily than
wicked men would destroy the people of God that dwell among them,
were it not for this providential restraint upon them. So the Psalmist

expresses his case in the words following my text: ‘My soul is among
lions, and I lie among them that are set on fire.’ The disciples were
sent forth ‘as sheep into the midst of wolves’ (Matt. 10. 16). It will not
avail in this case to object that those miraculous events depend only
upon Scripture testimony, which the atheist is not convinced by, for
beside all that may be alleged for the authority of that testimony
(which is needless to produce to men that own it), what is it less that
every eye sees or may see at this day? Do we not behold a weak,
defenceless handful of men wonderfully and otherwise
unaccountably preserved from ruin in the midst of potent, enraged
and turbulent enemies that fain would, but cannot, destroy them;
when as yet no natural impediment can be assigned why they
cannot?
And if this puzzle us, what shall we say when we see events produced
in the world for the good of God’s chosen, by those very hands and
means which were intentionally employed for their ruin? These
things are as much beside the intentions of their enemies as they are
above their own expectations; yet such things are no rarities in the
world. Was not the envy of Joseph’s brethren, the cursed plot of
Haman, and the decree procured by the envy of the princes against
Daniel, with many more of the same kind, all turned by a secret and
strange hand of Providence to their greater advancement and
benefit? Their enemies lifted them up to all that honour and
preferment they had.
How is it if the saints’ affairs are not ordered by a special divine
Providence that natural causes unite and associate themselves for
their relief and benefit in so strange a manner as they are found to
do?

It is undeniably evident that there are marvellous coincidences of
Providence, confederating and agreeing, as it were, to meet and unite
themselves to bring about the good of God’s chosen. There is a
similar face of things showing itself in several places at the same
time, whenever any work for the good of the Church is come upon
the stage of the world. As when the Messiah, the capital mercy, came
to the temple, then Simeon and Anna were brought there by
Providence as witnesses to it. So in Reformation work, when the
images were pulled down in Holland, one and the same spirit of zeal
possessed them in every city and town, that the work was done in a
night. He that carefully reads the history of Joseph’s advancement to
be the lord of Egypt may number in that story twelve remarkable acts
or steps of Providence by which he ascended to that honour and
authority. If but one of them had failed, in all likelihood the event
had done so too; but every one occurred in its order, exactly keeping
its own time and place. So in the Church’s deliverance from the plot
of Haman, we find no less than seven acts of Providence concurring
strangely to produce it, as if they had all met by appointment and
consent to break that snare for them, one thing so aptly suiting with
and making way for another that every careful observer must needs
conclude that this cannot be the result of accident but wise counsel.
Even as in viewing the accurate structure of the body of a man, the
figure, position, and mutual relationships of the several members
and vessels has convinced some, and is sufficient to convince all, that
it is the work of divine wisdom and power; in like manner, if the
admirable adaptation of the means and instruments employed for
mercy to the people of God are carefully considered, who can but
confess that as there are tools of all sorts and sizes in the shop of
Providence, so there is a most skilful hand that uses them, and that
they could no more produce such effects of themselves than the axe,
saw, or chisel can cut or carve a rough log into a beautiful figure
without the hand of a skilful artificer?

We find, by manifold instances, that there certainly are strong
combinations and predispositions of persons and things to bring
about some issue and design for the benefit of the Church, which
they themselves never thought of. They hold no conference, they do
not communicate their counsels to each other, yet meet together and
work together as if they did, which is as if ten men should all meet
together at one place, and in one hour, about one and the same
business, and that without any previous appointment between
themselves. Can any question that such a meeting of means and
instruments is certainly, though secretly, over-ruled by some wise
invisible agent?
If the concerns of God’s people are not governed by a special
Providence, how is it that the most apt and powerful means
employed to destroy them are rendered ineffectual, while weak,
contemptible means employed for their defence and comfort are
crowned with success?
This could never be if things were wholly swayed by the course of
nature. If we judge by that rule, we must conclude that the more apt
and powerful the means are, the more successful and prosperous
they must needs be; and where they are inept, weak, and
contemptible, nothing can be expected of them. Thus reason lays it,
according to the rules of nature, but Providence crosses its hands, as
Jacob did in blessing the sons of Joseph, and orders quite contrary
issues and events. Such was the mighty power and deep policy used
by Pharaoh to destroy God’s Israel, that to the eye of reason it was as
impossible to survive it as for crackling thorns to abide unconsumed
amidst devouring flames. By this emblem their miraculous
preservation is expressed; the bush was all in a flame, but not
consumed (Exod. 3. 2). The heathen Roman emperors, who made
the world tremble and subdued the nations under them, employed

all their power and policy against the poor, naked, defenceless
Church, to ruin it, yet could not accomplish it (Rev. 12. 3, 4). O the
seas of blood that heathen Rome shed in the ten persecutions! yet the
church lives. And when the dragon gave his power to the beast, (Rev.
13. 2) that is, the state of Rome became antichristian, O what
slaughters were made by the beast in all his dominions, so that the
Holy Ghost represents him as drunken with the blood of the saints
(Rev. 17. 6). And yet all will not do; the gates, that is, the powers and
policies of hell, cannot prevail against it. how manifest is the care
and power of Providence herein! Had half that power been employed
against any other people, it had certainly swallowed them up
immediately, or, in the hundredth part of the time, worn them out.
How soon was the Persian monarchy swallowed up by the Grecian,
and that again by the Roman! Diocletian and Maximinus, in the
height of their persecutions, found themselves so baffled by
Providence that they both resigned the government and lived as
private men. But in this wonderful preservation God makes good
that promise: ‘Though I make a full end of all nations, yet will I not
make a full end of thee’ (Jer. 30. 11), and ‘No weapon formed against
thee shall prosper’ (Isa. 54.17).
On the contrary, how successful have weak and contemptible means
been made for the good of the Church! Thus in the first planting of
Christianity in the world, by what weak and improbable instruments
was it done! Christ did not choose the eloquent orators, or men of
authority in the courts of kings and emperors, but twelve poor
artisans and fishermen; and these not sent together in a troop, but
some to take one country to conquer it, and some another. The most
ridiculous course, in appearance, for such a design as could be
imagined, and yet in how short a time was the Gospel spread and the
Churches planted by them in the several kingdoms of the world! This
the Psalmist foresaw by the Spirit of prophecy when he said: ‘Out of

the mouth of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength, to still
the enemy and the avenger’ (Ps. 8. 2). At the sound of rams’ horns
Jericho is delivered into the hands of Israel (Josh. 6. 20). By three
hundred men, with their pitchers and lamps, the huge host of Midian
is discomfited (Judges 6. 19). The Protestants besieged in Beziers in
France are delivered by a drunken drummer who, going to his
quarters at midnight, rang the alarm-bell of the town, not knowing
what he did; and just then their enemies were making their assault.
And as weak and improbable means have been blessed with success
to the Church in general, so to the preservation of its particular
members also. A spider, by weaving her web over the mouth of an
oven, shall hide a servant of Christ, Du Moulin, from his enemies,
who took refuge there in that bloody Parisian massacre. A hen shall
sustain another many days at the same time by lodging her egg every
day in the place where he had hid himself from the cut-throats.
Examples might be easily multiplied, but the truth is too plain and
obvious to the observation of all ages to need them. And can we but
acknowledge a divine and special Providence overruling these
matters, when we see the most apt and potent means for the
Church’s ruin frustrated, and the most silly and contemptible means
granted success and prospered for its good?
If all things are governed by the course of nature and force of
natural causes, how then comes it to pass that, like a bowl when it
strikes another, men are turned out of the way of evil, along which
they were driving at full speed?
Good men have been going along the way to their own ruin, and did
not know it; but Providence has met them in the way and preserved
them by strange diversions, the meaning of which they did not
understand till the event revealed it. When Paul lay bound at
Caesarea, the high priest and chief of the Jews request Festus that he

might be brought bound to Jerusalem, having laid wait in the way to
kill him; but Festus, though ignorant of the plot, utterly refuses it,
and chooses rather to go with them to Caesarea and judge him there.
By this diversion their bloody design is frustrated (Acts 25. 3, 4).
Possidonius, in the life of Augustine, tells us that the good father,
going to teach the people of a certain town, took a guide with him to
show him the way. The guide mistook the usual road and unwittingly
took a by-path, by which means Augustine escaped ruin by the hands
of the bloody Donatists who, knowing his intention, waylaid him to
kill him on the road.
And as memorable and wonderful are those rubs and diversions
wicked men have met with in the way of perpetrating the evils
conceived and intended in their own hearts. Laban and Esau came
against Jacob with mischievous purposes, but no sooner are they
come near him but the shackles of restraint are immediately clapped
upon them both, so that their hands cannot perform their
enterprises. Balaam runs greedily, for reward, to curse Israel, but
meets with an unexpected check at his very outset; and though that
did not stop him, he tried every way to do them mischief, yet he still
finds himself fettered by an effectual bond of restraint that he can in
no way shake off (Num. 22. 25, 28). Saul, the high priest’s
bloodhound, breathes out threatenings against the Church, and goes
with a bloody commission towards Damascus, to hale the poor flock
of Christ to the slaughter; but when he comes near the place he
meets an unexpected stop on the way, by which the mischief is not
only diverted, but he himself is converted to Christ (Acts 9. 1-4). Who
can fail to see the finger of God in these things!
If there is not an over-ruling Providence ordering all things for the
good of God’s people, how comes it to pass that the good and evil

which is done to them in this world is accordingly repaid into the
bosoms of them that are instrumental therein?
How clear is it to every man’s observation, that the kindnesses and
benefits any have done to the Lord’s people have been rewarded with
full measure into their bosoms! The Egyptian midwives refused to
obey Pharaoh’s inhuman command, and saved the male children of
Israel; for this ‘the Lord dealt well with them and built them houses’
(Exod. 1. 21). The Shunammite was hospitable and careful for Elisha,
and God recompensed it with the desirable enjoyment of a son (2
Kings 4. 9, 17). Rahab hid the spies, and was exempted from the
destruction of Jericho (Heb. 11. 31). Publius, the chief man of the
island of Melita, courteously received and lodged Paul after his
shipwreck; the Lord speedily repaid him for that kindness, and
healed his father, who lay sick at that time of a bloody flux and fever
(Acts 28. 7, 8).
In like manner, we find the evils done to God’s people have been
repaid by a just retribution to their enemies. Pharaoh and the
Egyptians were cruel enemies to God’s Israel, and designed the ruin
of their poor innocent babes; and God repaid it in smiting all the
first-born of Egypt in one night (Exod. 12. 29). Haman erected a
gallows fifty cubits high for good Mordecai, and God so ordered it
that he himself and his ten sons were hanged on it. And indeed it was
but meet that he should eat the fruit of that tree which he himself
had planted (Esther 7. 10). Ahithophel plots against David, and gives
counsel like an oracle how to procure his fall; and that very counsel,
like an overcharged gun, recoils upon himself, and procures his ruin.
Seeing his good counsel rejected (good politically, not morally), it
was now easy for him to guess the outcome, and so his own fate (2
Sam. 17. 23).

Charles IX most inhumanly made the very canals of Paris flow with
Protestant blood, and soon after he died miserably, his blood flowing
from all parts of his body. Stephen Gardiner, who burnt so many of
God’s dear servants to ashes, was himself so scorched up by a terrible
inflammation that his very tongue was black and hung out of his
mouth, and in dreadful torments he ended his wretched days.
Maximinus, that cruel emperor, who set forth his proclamation
engraven in brass for the utter abolishing of the Christian religion,
was speedily smitten like Herod with a dreadful judgment, swarms of
lice preying upon his entrails, and causing such a stench that his
physicians could not endure to come near him, and for refusing to do
so were slain. Hundreds of like instances might easily be produced to
confirm this observation. And who can but see by these things that
‘verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth!’
Yea, so exact have been the retributions of Providence to the enemies
of the Church, that not only the same persons, but the same
members, that have been the instruments of mischief, have been
made the subjects of wrath. The same arm which Jeroboam stretched
out to smite the prophet, God smites. The emperor Aurelian, when
he was ready to subscribe the edict for the persecution of the
Christians, was suddenly cramped in his knuckles that he could not
write. Greenhill, in his exposition upon Ezekiel 11. 13, tells his
hearers that there was one then present in the congregation who was
an eye-witness of a woman scoffing at another for purity and holy
walking, who had her tongue stricken immediately with the palsy,
and died of it within two days. Henry II of France, in a great rage
against a Protestant counsellor, committed him to the hands of one
of his nobles to be imprisoned, and that with these words, that ‘he
would see him burned with his own eyes.’ But, mark the righteous
providence of God, within a few days after, the same nobleman, with

a lance put into his hands by the king, did at a tilting march run the
said king into one of his eyes, from which he died.
Yea, Providence has made the very place of sinning the place of
punishment: ‘In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth,
shall dogs lick thy blood’ (1 Kings 21. 19); and it was exactly fulfilled
(2 Kings 9. 26). Thus Tophet is made a burying-place for the Jews,
till there was no room to bury; and that was the place where they had
offered up their sons to Moloch (Jer. 7. 31, 32). The story of
Nightingale is generally known, which Foxe relates, how he fell out of
the pulpit and broke his neck, while he was abusing that Scripture (1
John 1. 10). And thus the Scriptures are made good by Providence.
‘Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein; and he that rolleth a stone, it
shall return upon him’ (Prov. 26. 27), and ‘with what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again’ (Matt. 7. 2).
If any shall still say that these things may fall out accidentally, and
that many thousands of the Church’s enemies have died in peace,
and their end been like other men, we answer with Augustine: ‘If no
sin were punished here, no Providence would be believed; and if
every sin should be punished here, no judgment would be expected.’
But, that none may think these events to be merely casual and
accidental, we shall enquire yet further.
If these things are merely accidental, how is it that they square and
agree so exactly with the Scriptures in all particulars?
We read: ‘Can two walk together except they be agreed?’ (Amos 3. 3).
If two men travel along one road, it is likely they are agreed to go to
the same place. Providences and Scriptures go all one way, and if
they seem at any time to go different or opposite ways, be sure they
will meet at the journey’s end. There is an agreement between them
so to do.

Does God miraculously suspend the power of natural causes? Why,
this is no accidental thing, but what harmonizes with the Word
‘When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walkest
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee’ (Isa. 43. 2).
Do natural causes unite and associate themselves for the good of
God’s people? Why, this is no more than what is contained in the
promises, and is but the fulfilling of that Scripture: ‘All is yours, for
ye are Christ’s’ (1 Cor. 3. 22); that is, the use, benefit and service of
all the creatures is for you, as your need shall require.
Are the most apt and powerful means employed for their ruin
frustrated? Who can but see the Scriptures fulfilled in, and
expounded by such providences (see Isa. 8. 8-10; 54. 15-17;
expounded by 2 Kings 18. 17, etc.)!
Do you see at any time a rub of Providence diverting the course of
good men from falling into evil, or wicked men from committing
evil? How loudly do such Providences proclaim the truth and
certainty of the Scriptures, which tell us that ‘the way of man is not in
himself, neither is it in him that walketh to direct his steps’ (Jer. 10.
23), and that ‘a man’s heart deviseth his way: but the Lord directeth
his steps’ (Prov. 16. 9)!
Do you see adequate retributions made to those that injure or
befriend the people of God? Why, when you see all the kindness and
love they have shown the saints returned with interest into their
bosoms, how is it possible but you must see the accomplishment of
these Scriptures in such providences! ‘But the liberal soul deviseth
liberal things, and by liberal things he shall stand’ (Isa. 32. 8; 2 Cor.
9. 6).

And when you see the evils men have done, or intended to do to the
Lord’s people, recoiling upon themselves, he is perfectly blind that
does not see the harmony such providences bear with such
Scriptures as Psalm 7. 14-16; 9. 16; and 140. 11, 12.
O what exact proportions do providences and Scriptures hold! Little
do men take notice of it. Why did Cyrus, contrary to all rules of state
policy, freely dismiss the captives, except to fulfil the Scripture (Isa.
45. 13)? So that it was well observed by one that, ‘as God hath
stretched out the expansum or firmament over the natural; so he
hath stretched out his Word over the rational world.’ And as the
creatures on earth are influenced by those heavenly bodies, so are all
creatures in the world influenced by the Word, and do infallibly fulfil
it, when they design to thwart it.
If these things are contingent, how is it that they fall out so
remarkably in the nick of time, which makes them so greatly
observable to all that consider them?
We find a multitude of providences so timed to a minute, that had
they occurred just a little sooner or later, they had mattered little in
comparison with what now they do. Certainly, it cannot be chance,
but counsel, that so exactly works in time. Contingencies keep to no
rules.
How remarkable to this purpose were the tidings brought to Saul,
that ‘the Philistines have invaded the land’ (1 Sam. 23. 27), just as he
was ready to grasp the prey! The angel calls to Abraham, and shows
him another sacrifice just when his hand was giving the fatal stroke
to Isaac (Gen. 22. 10, 11). A well of water is shown to Hagar just when
she had left the child, as not able to see its death (Gen. 21. 16, 19).
Rabshakeh meets with a blasting providence, hears a rumour that
frustrated his design, just when ready to make an assault upon

Jerusalem (Isa. 37. 7, 8). So when Haman’s plot against the Jews was
ripe, and all things ready for execution, ‘on that night could not the
king sleep’ (Esth. 6. 1). When the horns are ready to gore Judah,
immediately carpenters are prepared to fray them away (Zech. 1. 1821).
How remarkable was the relief of La Rochelle by a shoal of fish that
came into the harbour when they were ready to perish with famine,
such as they never observed before, nor after that time! Mr Dod
could not go to bed one night, but has a strong impulse to visit,
though unseasonably, a neighbour gentleman, and just as he came
there, he meets him at his door, with a halter in his pocket, just going
to hang himself. Dr Tate and his wife, in the Irish rebellion, were
flying through the woods with a sucking-child, which was just ready
to expire. The mother going to rest it upon a rock, puts her hand
upon a bottle of warm milk, by which it was preserved. A good
woman, from whose mouth I received it, being driven to a great
extremity, all supplies failing, was exceedingly plunged into
unbelieving doubts and fears, not seeing where supplies should come
from; when, lo! in the nick of time, turning over some things in a
chest, unexpectedly she lights upon a piece of gold, which supplied
her present needs till God opened another door of supply. If these
things fall out by accident, how is it they come in the very nick of
time so exactly, as that it is become proverbial in Scripture, ‘In the
mount of the Lord it shall be seen’ (Gen. 22. 14)?
Lastly, were these things accidental and contingent, how can it be
that they should fall out so immediately upon and consonantly to
the prayers of the saints? So that in many providences they are able
to discern a very clear answer to their prayers, and are sure they
have the petitions they asked (1 John 5. 15).

Thus the sea divided itself just at the time of Israel’s cry to heaven
(Exod. 14. 10). So signal a victory is given to Asa immediately at the
time of that passionate cry to heaven: ‘Help us, O Lord our God’ (2
Chron. 14. 11, 12). Ahithophel goes and hangs himself, just at the
time of that prayer of distressed David (2 Sam. 15. 31). Haman falls
and his plot is broken, just at the time of the fast kept by Mordecai
and Esther (Esth. 4. 16). Our own Speed, in his History of Britain,
tells us that Richard I besieged a castle with his army; they offered to
surrender if he would save their lives; he refuses, and threatens to
hang them all. Upon this an arbalester3 charged his bow with a
square arrow, making first his prayer to God that he would direct the
shot and deliver the innocent from oppression; it struck the king
himself, from which he died, and they were delivered. Abraham’s
servant prayed for success; and see how it was answered (Gen. 24.
45). Peter was cast into prison, and prayer was made for him by the
Church, and see the event (Acts 12. 5, 6, 7, 12). I could easily add to
these the wonderful examples of the return of prayers which was
observed in Luther, and Dr Winter in Ireland, and many more; but I
judge it needless because most Christian have a stock of experience
of their own, and are well assured that many of the providences that
befall them are, and can be no other than the return of their prayers.
And now who can be dissatisfied in this point that wisely considers
these things? Must we not conclude that ‘he withdraweth not his eyes
from the righteous’ (Job 36. 7) and that ‘The eyes of the Lord run to
and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong in the
behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards him’ (2 Chron. 16. 9).
His providences proclaim Him to be a God who hears prayer.

Footnotes

3. Crossbow-man.