PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 11
The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

---

The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation.

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

57

From what has been before us in the previous chapter concerning the election of some to
salvation, it would unavoidably follow, even if Scripture had been silent upon it, that there
must be a rejection of others. Every choice evidently and necessarily implies a refusal, for
where there is no leaving out there can be no choice. If there be some whom God has elected
unto salvation (2Th 2:13), there must be others who are not elected unto salvation. If there are
some that the Father gave to Christ (Joh 6:37), there must be others whom He did not give
unto Christ. If there be some whose names are written in the Lamb’s book of life (Rev 21:27),
there must be others whose names are not written there. That this is the case we shall fully
prove below.
Now all will acknowledge that, from the foundation of the world, God certainly foreknew
and foresaw who would and who would not receive Christ as their Saviour. Therefore, in giving being and birth to those He knew would reject Christ, He necessarily created them unto
damnation. All that can be said in reply to this is, No, while God did foreknow these would reject Christ, yet He did not decree that they should. But this is a begging of the real question at
issue. God had a definite reason why He created men, a specific purpose why He created this
and that individual, and in view of the eternal destination of His creatures, He purposed either
that this one should spend eternity in heaven or that this one should spend eternity in the
Lake of Fire. If then He foresaw that in creating a certain person that that person would despise and reject the Saviour, yet knowing this beforehand He, nevertheless, brought that person
into existence, then it is clear He designed and ordained that that person should be eternally
lost. Again, faith is God’s gift; and the purpose to give it only to some involves the purpose not
to give it to others. Without faith there is no salvation—“He that believeth not shall be
damned” (Mar 16:16)—hence, if there were some of Adam’s descendants to whom He purposed not to give faith, it must be because He ordained that they should be damned.
3. Confirmation from history
Not only is there no escape from these conclusions, but history confirms them. Before the
divine incarnation, for almost two thousand years, the vast majority of mankind were left destitute of even the external means of grace, being favored with no preaching of God’s Word and
with no written revelation of His will. For many long centuries Israel was the only nation to
whom the Deity vouchsafed any special discovery of Himself: “Who in times past suffered all
nations to walk in their own ways” (Act 14:16); “You only [Israel] have I known of all the families of the earth” (Amo 3:2). Consequently, as all other nations were deprived of the preaching
of God’s Word, they were strangers to the faith that cometh thereby (Rom 10:17). These nations were not only ignorant of God Himself, but of the way to please Him, of the true manner
of acceptance with Him, and the means of arriving at the everlasting enjoyment of Himself.
Now if God had willed their salvation, would He not have vouchsafed them the means of
salvation? Would He not have given them all things necessary to that end? But it is an undeniable matter of fact that He did not. If, then, Deity can, consistent with His justice, mercy, and
benevolence, deny to some the means of grace and shut them up in gross darkness and unbelief (because of the sins of their forefathers, generations before), why should it be deemed incompatible with His perfections to exclude some persons, many, from grace itself and from
that eternal life which is connected with it—seeing that He is Lord and sovereign disposer
both of the end to which the means lead, and the means which lead to that end?

58

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Coming down to our own day and to those in our own country, leaving out the almost innumerable crowds of unevangelized heathen, is it not evident that there are many living in
lands where the gospel is preached, lands that are full of churches, who die strangers to God
and His holiness? True, the means of grace were close to their hand, but many of them knew it
not. Thousands are born into homes where they are taught from infancy to regard all Christians as hypocrites and preachers as arch-humbugs. 2 Others are instructed from the cradle in
Roman Catholicism, and are trained to regard Evangelical Christianity as deadly heresy and
the Bible as a book highly dangerous for them to read. Others, reared in “Christian Science”
families, know no more of the true gospel of Christ than do the unevangelized heathen. The
great majority of these die in utter ignorance of the way of peace. Now, are we not obliged to
conclude that it was not God’s will to communicate grace to them? Had His will been otherwise, would He not have actually communicated His grace to them? If, then, it was the will of
God, in time, to refuse to them His grace, it must have been His will from all eternity, since
His will is, as Himself, “the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever” (Heb 13:8). Let it not be
forgotten that God’s providences are but the manifestations of His decrees: what God does in
time is only what He purposed in eternity, His own will being the alone cause of all His acts
and works. Therefore, from His actually leaving some men in final impenitency and unbelief,
we assuredly gather it was His everlasting determination so to do—and consequently that He
reprobated 3 some from before the foundation of the world.
In the Westminster Confession 4 it is said, “God from all eternity did by the most wise and
holy counsel of His own will, freely and unchangeably foreordain whatsoever comes to pass.”
The late Mr. F. W. Grant (1902)—a most careful and cautious student and writer—
commenting on these words, said, “It is perfectly, divinely true that God hath ordained for His
own glory whatsoever comes to pass.” Now if these statements are true, is not the doctrine of
reprobation established by them? What, in human history, is the one thing that does come to
pass every day? What, but that men and women die, pass out of this world into a hopeless eternity, an eternity of suffering and woe. If then God has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass,
then He must have decreed that vast numbers of human beings should pass out of this world
unsaved to suffer eternally in the Lake of Fire. Admitting the general premise, is not the specific conclusion inevitable?

B. What Saith the Scriptures
In reply to the preceding paragraphs the reader may say, All this is simply reasoning, logical
no doubt, but yet mere inferences. Very well, we will now point out that, in addition to the
above conclusions, there are many passages in Holy Writ that are most clear and definite in
their teaching on this solemn subject, passages that are too plain to be misunderstood and too
strong to be evaded. The marvel is that so many good men have denied their undeniable affirmations.

2

arch-humbugs – those who seek to impose most deceitfully upon others; total impostors.
reprobated – judged and condemned.
4
Westminster Confession of Faith – one of the great confessions of the Christian faith, produced in 16451646 by the Westminster Assembly of 121 theologians, appointed by the “Puritan” Long Parliament to
make proposals for reforming the Church of England.
3

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

59

“Joshua made war a long time with all those kings. There was not a city that made peace
with the children of Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they took in
battle. For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should come against Israel in
battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and that they might have no favor, but that he
might destroy them as the LORD commanded Moses” (Jos 11:18-20). What could be plainer
than this? Here was a large number of Canaanites whose hearts the Lord hardened, whom He
had purposed to utterly destroy, to whom He showed “no favor.” Granted that they were wicked, immoral, idolatrous; were they any worse than the immoral, idolatrous cannibals of the
South Sea Islands (and many other places), to whom God gave the gospel through John G. Paton? 5 Assuredly not! Then why did not Jehovah command Israel to teach the Canaanites His
laws and instruct them concerning sacrifices to the true God? Plainly, because He had marked
them out for destruction, and if so, that from all eternity.
“The LORD hath made all things for himself: yea, even the wicked for the day of evil” (Pro
16:4). That the Lord made all, perhaps every reader of this book will allow: that He made all for
Himself is not so widely believed. That God made us—not for our own sakes, but for Himself;
not for our own happiness, but for His glory—is nevertheless repeatedly affirmed in Scripture
(Rev 4:11). But Proverbs 16:4 goes even farther: it expressly declares that the Lord made the
wicked for the day of evil: that was His design in giving them being. But why? Does not Romans 9:17 tell us, “For the scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might shew my power in thee, and that my name might be declared
throughout all the earth”! God has made the wicked that, at the end, He may demonstrate His
power—demonstrate it by showing what an easy matter it is for Him to subdue the stoutest
rebel and to overthrow His mightiest enemy.
“And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity” (Mat 7:23). In the previous chapter it has been shown that the words “know” and “foreknowledge,” when applied to God in the Scriptures, have reference not simply to His
prescience (i.e., His bare knowledge beforehand), but to His knowledge of approbation. When
God said to Israel, “You only have I known of all the families of the earth” (Amo 3:2), it is evident that He meant, “You only had I any favorable regard to.” When we read in Romans 11:2,
“God hath not cast away his people [Israel] which he foreknew,” it is obvious that what was
signified is, “God has not finally rejected that people whom He has chosen as the objects of His
love” (cf. Deu 7:8). In the same way (and it is the only possible way) are we to understand Matthew 7:23. In the Day of Judgment the Lord will say unto many, “I never knew you.” Note, it is
more than simply, “I know you not.” His solemn declaration will be, “I never knew you”—you
were never the objects of My approbation. Contrast this with “I know [love] my sheep, and am
known [loved] of mine” (Joh 10:14). The “sheep,” His elect, the “few,” He does “know”; but the
6
reprobate, the non-elect, the “many,” He knows not—no, not even before the foundation of
the world did He know them; He “never” knew them!

5

John Gibson Paton (1824-1907) – Protestant missionary to the New Hebrides Islands of the South Pacific;
born in Scotland. Convinced of the absolute sovereignty of God to build His church and constantly under
the threat of death, he saw but little fruit from his labors for decades, yet served faithfully.
6
reprobate – one justly condemned by God for his sin and left without redemption.

60

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

C. Romans 9
In Romans 9 the doctrine of God’s Sovereignty in its application to both the elect and the
reprobate is treated of at length. A detailed exposition of this important chapter would be beyond our present scope; all that we can essay 7 is to dwell upon the part of it that most clearly
bears upon the aspect of the subject that we are now considering.
1. “For this same purpose have I raised thee up” (v. 17)
Verse 17. “For the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I raised
thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout
all the earth.” These words refer us back to verses 13 and 14. In verse 13, God’s love to Jacob
and His hatred to Esau are declared. In verse 14 it is asked, “Is there unrighteousness with
God?”; and here in verse 17 the apostle continues his reply to the objection. We cannot do better now than quote from Calvin’s 8 comments upon this verse.
There are here two things to be considered: 1) the predestination of Pharaoh to ruin—
which is to be referred to the past, and yet the hidden, counsel of God; 2) and then the
design of this, which was to make known the name of God. As many interpreters, striving to modify this passage, pervert it, we must observe that for the word, “I have raised
thee up” (or stirred up), in the Hebrew is, “I have appointed”—by which it appears that
9
God, designing to show that the contumacy of Pharaoh would not prevent Him to deliver His people, not only affirms that his fury had been foreseen by Him and that He
had prepared means for restraining it, but that He had also thus designedly ordained it
and, indeed, for this end: that He might exhibit a more illustrious evidence of His own
power.
It will be observed that Calvin gives as the force of the Hebrew word that Paul renders, “For
this cause have I raised thee up”—“I have appointed.” As this is the word on which the doctrine and argument of the verse turns, we would further point out that in making this quotation from Exodus 9:16, the apostle significantly departs from the Septuagint—the version then
in common use, and from which he most frequently quotes—and substitutes a clause for the
verse that is given by the Septuagint: instead of “On this account thou hast been preserved,”
he gives “For this very end have I raised thee up!”
2. Pharaoh
But we must now consider in more detail the case of Pharaoh, which sums up in concrete
example the great controversy between man and his Maker. “For now I will stretch out my
hand, that I may smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the
earth. And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my power; and
that my name may be declared throughout all the earth” (Exo 9:15-16). Upon these words we
offer the following comments.

7

essay – try; attempt.
John Calvin (1509-1564) – Swiss theologian; the father of Reformed and Presbyterian theology. During the
course of his 25-year ministry in Geneva, Calvin lectured and preached an average of five sermons a week
in addition to writing a commentary on nearly every book of the Bible. Born in Noyon, Picardie, France.
9
contumacy – stubborn resistance to authority.
8

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

61

First, we know from Exodus 14 and 15 that Pharaoh was “cut off,” that he was cut off by
God, that he was cut off in the very midst of his wickedness—that he was cut off not by sickness, nor by the infirmities that are incident to old age, nor by what men term an “accident,”
but cut off by the immediate hand of God in judgment.
Second, it is clear that God raised up Pharaoh for this very end: to “cut him off,” which in
the language of the New Testament means “destroyed.” God never does anything without a
previous design. In giving him being, in preserving him through infancy and childhood, in
raising him to the throne of Egypt, God had one end in view. That such was God’s purpose is
clear from His words to Moses before he went down to Egypt, to demand of Pharaoh that Jehovah’s people should be allowed to go a three days’ journey into the wilderness to worship Him.
“And the Lord said unto Moses, When thou goest to return into Egypt, see that thou do all
these wonders before Pharaoh, which I have put in thine hand: but I will harden his heart, that
he shall not let the people go” (Exo 4:21). But not only so, God’s design and purpose was declared long before this. Four hundred years previously God had said to Abraham, “Know of a
surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them: and
they shall afflict them four hundred years; and also that nation, whom they shall serve, will I
judge” (Gen 15:13-14). From these words it is evident (a nation and its king being looked at as
one in the Old Testament) that God’s purpose was formed long before He gave Pharaoh being.
Third, an examination of God’s dealings with Pharaoh makes it clear that Egypt’s king was
indeed a “vessel of wrath fitted to destruction.” Placed on Egypt’s throne, with the reins of
government in his hands, he sat as head of the nation that occupied the first rank among the
peoples of the world. There was no other monarch on earth able to control or dictate to Pharaoh, to such a dizzy height did God raise this reprobate. Such a course was a natural and necessary step to prepare him for his final fate, for it is a divine axiom 10 that “pride goeth before
destruction and a haughty spirit before a fall” (Pro 16:18). Further—and this is deeply important to note and highly significant—God removed from Pharaoh the one outward restraint
that was calculated to act as a check upon him. The bestowing upon Pharaoh of the unlimited
powers of a king was setting him above all legal influence and control. But besides this, God
removed Moses from his presence and kingdom. Had Moses—who not only was skilled in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians, but also had been reared in Pharaoh’s household—been suffered
to remain in close proximity to the throne, there can be no doubt but that his example and
influence had been a powerful check upon the king’s wickedness and tyranny. This, though
not the only cause, was plainly one reason why God sent Moses into Midian, for it was during
his absence that Egypt’s inhuman king framed his most cruel edicts. God designed, by removing this restraint, to give Pharaoh full opportunity to fill up the full measure of his sins and
ripen himself for his fully-deserved, but predestined, ruin.
Fourth, God “hardened ” his heart as He declared He would (Exo 4:21). This is in full accord
with the declarations of Holy Scripture: “The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer
of the tongue, is from the LORD” (Pro 16:1); “The king’s heart is in the hand of the LORD, as
the rivers of water, he turneth it withersoever he will” (Pro 21:1). Like all other kings, Pharaoh’s heart was in the hand of the Lord, and God had both the right and the power to turn it
whithersoever He pleased—and it pleased Him to turn it against all good. God determined to
hinder Pharaoh from granting His request through Moses to let Israel go until He had fully
10

axiom – universally recognized truth.

62

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

prepared him for his final overthrow—and, because nothing short of this would fully fit him,
God hardened his heart.
Finally, it is worthy of careful consideration to note how the vindication of God in His dealings with Pharaoh has been fully attested. Most remarkable it is to discover that we have Pharaoh’s own testimony in favor of God and against himself ! In Exodus 9:15-16, we learn how God
had told Pharaoh for what purpose He had raised him up, and in verse 27 of the same chapter
we are told that Pharaoh said, “I have sinned this time: the LORD is righteous, and I and my
people are wicked.” Mark that this was said by Pharaoh after he knew that God had raised him
up in order to “cut him off,” after his severe judgments had been sent upon him, after he had
hardened his own heart. By this time Pharaoh was fairly ripened for judgment, and fully prepared to decide whether God had injured him or whether he had sought to injure God — and
he fully acknowledged that he had “sinned” and that God was “righteous.” Again, we have the
witness of Moses, who was fully acquainted with God’s conduct toward Pharaoh. He had heard
at the beginning what was God’s design in connection with Pharaoh; he had witnessed God’s
dealings with him; he had observed His “long-sufferance” toward this vessel of wrath fitted to
destruction; and at last he had beheld him cut off in divine judgment at the Red Sea. How then
was Moses impressed? Does he raise the cry of injustice? Does he dare to charge God with unrighteousness? Far from it. Instead, he says, “Who is like unto thee, O LORD, among the gods?
Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders” (Exo 15: 11)!
Was Moses moved by a vindictive spirit as he saw Israel’s arch-enemy “cut off ” by the waters
of the Red Sea? Surely not. But to remove forever all doubt upon this score, it remains to be
pointed out how that saints in heaven, after they have witnessed the sore judgments of God,
join in singing “the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great
and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of
saints” (Rev 15:3). Here then is the climax, and the full and final vindication of God’s dealings
with Pharaoh. Saints in heaven join in singing the song of Moses, in which the servant of God
celebrated Jehovah’s praise in overthrowing Pharaoh and his hosts, declaring that in so acting
God was not unrighteous but just and true. We must believe, therefore, that the Judge of all
the earth did right in creating and destroying this vessel of wrath, Pharaoh.
The case of Pharaoh establishes the principle and illustrates the doctrine of reprobation. If
God actually reprobated Pharaoh, we may justly conclude that He reprobates all others whom
He did not predestinate to be conformed to the image of His Son. This inference the apostle
Paul manifestly draws from the fate of Pharaoh, for in Romans 9, after referring to God’s purpose in raising up Pharaoh (v. 17), he continues, “Therefore” (v. 18). The case of Pharaoh is
introduced to prove the doctrine of reprobation as the counterpart of the doctrine of election.
In conclusion, we would say that, in forming Pharaoh, God displayed neither justice nor injustice, but only His bare sovereignty. As the potter is sovereign in forming vessels, so God is
sovereign in forming moral agents.
3. “Whom he will he hardeneth” (v. 18)
Verse 18. “Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardeneth.” The “therefore” announces the general conclusion that the apostle draws from all
he had said in the three preceding verses in denying that God was unrighteous in loving Jacob
and hating Esau, and specifically it applies the principle exemplified in God’s dealings with
Pharaoh. It traces everything back to the sovereign will of the Creator. He loves one and hates

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

63

another. He exercises mercy toward some and hardens others, without reference to anything
save His own sovereign will.
That which is most repulsive to the carnal mind in the above verse is the reference to hardening: “Whom he will he hardeneth”—and it is just here that so many commentators and expositors have adulterated 11 the truth. The most common view is that the apostle is speaking of
nothing more than judicial hardening, i.e., a forsaking by God because these subjects of His
displeasure had first rejected His truth and forsaken Him. Those who contend for this interpretation appeal to such Scriptures as Romans 1:19-26, “God gave them up,” that is (see context), those who “knew God” yet glorified Him not as God (v. 21). Appeal also is made to 2
Thessalonians 2:10-12.
But it is to be noted that the word “harden” does not occur in either of these passages. But
further, we submit that Romans 9:18 has no reference whatever to judicial “hardening.” The
apostle is not there speaking of those who had already turned their back on God’s truth, but
instead, he is dealing with God’s sovereignty, God’s sovereignty as seen not only in showing
mercy to whom He wills, but also in hardening whom He pleases. The exact words are, “Whom
he will [not: all who have rejected His truth] he hardeneth”—and this, coming immediately
after the mention of Pharaoh, clearly fixes their meaning. The case of Pharaoh is plain enough,
though man by his glosses has done his best to hide the truth.
“Therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth.”
12
This affirmation of God’s sovereign “hardening” of sinners’ hearts—in contradistinction from
judicial hardening—is not alone. Mark the language of John 12:37-40,
“But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him:
that the saying of Esaias [Isaiah] the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake, Lord,
who hath believed our report? and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been revealed?
Therefore they could not believe [why?], because that Esaias said again, He hath blinded
their eyes, and hardened their hearts…”
Why?—because they had refused to believe on Christ? This is the popular belief, but mark the
answer of Scripture:
“…that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be
converted, and I should heal them.”
Now, reader, it is just a question as to whether or not you will believe what God has revealed in
His Word. It is not a matter of prolonged searching or profound study, but a childlike spirit
which is needed in order to understand this doctrine.
4. “Why doeth he yet find fault?” (v. 19)
Verse 19. “Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault ? For who hath resisted
his will?” Is not this the very objection that is urged today? The force of the apostle’s questions
here seem to be this: Since everything is dependent on God’s will, which is irreversible, and
since this will of God—according to which He can do everything as sovereign—can have mercy on whom He wills to have mercy, and can refuse mercy and inflict punishment on whom
He chooses to do so, why does He not will to have mercy on all, so as to make them obedient,
11
12

adulterated – made untrue by incorrect interpretation.
contradistinction – distinction by opposition or contrast.

64

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

and thus put finding of fault out of court? Now, it should be particularly noted that the apostle
does not repudiate the ground on which the objection rests. He does not say God does not find
fault. Nor does he say, Men may resist His will. Furthermore, he does not explain away the objection by saying, You have altogether missapprehended my meaning when I said, “Whom He
will He treats kindly, and whom He wills He treats severely.” But he says, “first, this is an objection you have no right to make; and then, this is an objection you have no reason to make”
(vide 13 Dr. Brown). The objection was utterly inadmissible, for it was a replying against God. It
was to complain about, argue against, what God had done!
“Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find fault? For who hath resisted his will?”
The language that the apostle here puts into the mouth of the objector is so plain and pointed,
that misunderstanding ought to be impossible. “Why doth he yet find fault?” Now, reader,
what can these words mean? Formulate your own reply before considering ours. Can the force
of the apostle’s question be any other than this: If it is true that God “has mercy” on whom He
wills, and also “hardens” whom He wills, then what becomes of human responsibility? In such
a case men are nothing better than puppets, and if this be true then it would be unjust for God
to “find fault” with His helpless creatures. Mark the word then, “Thou wilt say then unto me”:
he states the (false) inference or conclusion that the objector draws from what the apostle had
been saying. And mark, my reader, the apostle readily saw [that] the doctrine he had formulated would raise this very objection, and unless what we have written throughout this book provokes, in some at least (all whose carnal minds are not subdued by divine grace), the same
objection, then it must be either because we have not presented the doctrine that is set forth
in Romans 9, or else because human nature has changed since the apostle’s day.
Consider now the remainder of the verse (19). The apostle repeats the same objection in a
slightly different form—repeats it so that this meaning may not be misunderstood—namely,
“For who hath resisted his will?” It is clear then that the subject under immediate discussion
relates to God’s “will,” i.e., His sovereign ways, which confirms what we have said above upon
verses 17 and 18, where we contended that it is not judicial hardening which is in view (that is,
hardening because of previous rejection of the truth), but sovereign “hardening,” that is, the
14
“hardening” of a fallen and sinful creature for no other reason than that which inheres in the
sovereign will of God—and hence the question, “Who hath resisted his will?” What then does
the apostle say in reply to these objections?
5. “Who art thou that repliest against God” (v. 20)
Verse 20. “Nay but, O man, who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?” The apostle, then, did not say the
objection was pointless and groundless, instead, he rebukes the objector for his impiety. He
reminds him that he is merely a “man,” a creature, and that as such it is most unseemly and
impertinent for him to “reply [argue, or reason] against God.” Furthermore, he reminds him
that he is nothing more than a “thing formed” and, therefore, it is madness and blasphemy to
rise up against the Former Himself.
Ere leaving this verse it should be pointed out that its closing words, “Why hast thou made
me thus,” help us to determine, unmistakably, the precise subject under discussion. In the
13
14

vide – Latin, meaning to see a particular part of a referenced text.
inheres – exist permanently and inseparably in something.

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

65

light of the immediate context, what can be the force of the “thus”? What but as in the case of
Esau: Why hast thou made me an object of “hatred”? What but as in the case of Pharaoh: Why
hast thou made me simply to “harden” me? What other meaning can, fairly, be assigned to it?
It is highly important to keep clearly before us that the apostle’s object throughout this
passage is to treat of God’s sovereignty in dealing with, on the one hand, those whom He loves,
vessels unto honor and vessels of mercy; and also, on the other hand, those whom He “hates”
and “hardens,” vessels unto dishonor and vessels of wrath.
6. “The potter power over the clay” (v. 21)
Verses 21-23. “Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonour? What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to
make his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy,
which he had afore prepared unto glory.” In these verses the apostle furnishes a full and final
reply to the objections raised in verse 19. First, he asks, “Hath not the potter power over the
clay?” etc. It is to be noted the word here translated “power” is a different one in the Greek
from the one rendered “power” in verse 22, where it can only signify His might; but here in
verse 21, the “power” spoken of must refer to the Creator’s rights or sovereign prerogatives.
That this is so, appears from the fact that the same Greek word is employed in John 1:12, “As
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God”—which, as is well
known, means the right or privilege to become the sons of God. The Revised Version (R.V.)15
employs “right” both in John 1:12 and Romans 9:21.
Verse 21. “Hath not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonour?” That the “potter” here is God Himself is certain
from the previous verse, where the apostle asks, “Who art thou that repliest against God?” and
then, speaking in the terms of the figure he was about to use, continues, “Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it,” etc. Some there are who would rob these words of their
force by arguing that, while the human potter makes certain vessels to be used for less honorable purposes than others, nevertheless, they are designed to fill some useful place. But the
apostle does not here say, “Hath not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make
one vessel unto an honorable use and another to a less honorable use,” but he speaks of some
vessels being made unto dishonour. It is true, of course, that God’s wisdom will yet be fully
vindicated, 16 inasmuch as the destruction of the reprobate will promote His glory. In what way,
the next verse tells us.
Summary
Ere passing to the next verse, let us summarize the teaching of this and the two previous
ones. In verse 19 two questions are asked, “Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he yet find
fault? For who hath resisted his will?” To those questions a threefold answer is returned.
15

R.V. – Revised Version translation of the Bible, completed in Britain in 1885.
The best known of the translation committee members were Brooke Foss Westcott and Fenton John Anthony Hort. The Greek text used to translate
the New Testament was not the Textus Receptus used for the KJV, making
the R.V. the forerunner of the entire modern translation movement.
16
vindicated – cleared from criticism; upheld by evidence.

66

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

First, in verse 20 the apostle denies the creature the right to sit in judgment upon the ways
of the Creator: “Nay but, O man who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the thing formed
say to him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?” The apostle insists that the rectitude 17 of God’s will must not be questioned. Whatever He does must be right.
Second, in verse 21 the apostle declares that the Creator has the right to dispose of His
creatures as He sees fit: “Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to make
one vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor?” It should be carefully noted that the word
for “power” here is exousia—an entirely different word from the one translated “power” in the
following verse (“to make known his power”), where it is duaton. In the words, “Hath not the
potter power over the clay?” it must be God’s power justly exercised that is in view, the exercise of God’s rights consistently with His justice, because the mere assertion of His omnipotency would be no such answer as God would return to the questions asked in verse 19.
Third, in verses 22-23 the apostle gives the reasons why God proceeds differently with one
of His creatures from another. On the one hand, it is to “shew his wrath” and to “make his
power known”; on the other hand, it is to “make known the riches of his glory.”
“Hath not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor,
and another unto dishonour?” Certainly God has the right to do this, because He is the Creator. Does He exercise this right? Yes, as verses 13 and 17 clearly show us—“For this same purpose have I raised thee [Pharaoh] up.”
7. “Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction” (v. 22)
Verse 22. “What if God, willing to shew his wrath, and to make his power known, endured
with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.” Here the apostle tells us,
in the second place, why God acts thus, i.e., differently with different ones: having mercy on
some and hardening others, making one vessel “unto honor” and another “unto dishonour.”
Observe that here in verse 22 the apostle first mentions “vessels of wrath,” before he refers in
verse 23 to the “vessels of mercy.” Why is this? The answer to this question is of first importance. We reply, Because it is the “vessels of wrath” who are the subjects in view before the
objector in verse 19. Two reasons are given why God makes some “vessels unto dishonour”:
first, to “shew his wrath,” and secondly, “to make his power known”—both of which were exemplified in the case of Pharaoh.
One point in the above verse requires separate consideration—“Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.” The usual explanation that is given of these words is that the vessels of wrath fit
themselves to destruction, that is, fit themselves by virtue of their wickedness; and it is argued
that there is no need for God to fit them “to destruction,” because they are already fitted by
their own depravity, and that this must be the real meaning of this expression. Now, if by “destruction” we understand punishment, it is perfectly true that the non-elect do “fit themselves,” for every one will be judged “according to his works”; and further, we freely grant that
subjectively the non-elect do fit themselves for destruction. But the point to be decided is, Is
this what the apostle is here referring to? And without hesitation, we reply it is not. Go back to
verses 11-13: did Esau fit himself to be an object of God’s hatred, or was he not such before he
was born? Again, did Pharaoh fit himself for destruction, or did not God harden his heart before the plagues were sent upon Egypt (see Exodus 4:21)?!
17

rectitude – moral uprightness.

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

67

Romans 9:22 is clearly a continuation in thought of verse 21, and verse 21 is part of the
apostle’s reply to the question raised in verse 20: therefore, to fairly follow out the figure, it
must be God Himself Who “fits” unto destruction the vessels of wrath. Should it be asked how
God does this, the answer, necessarily, is, objectively: He fits the non-elect unto destruction by
His fore-ordinating decrees. Should it be asked why God does this, the answer must be, To
promote His own glory, i.e., the glory of His justice, power, and wrath. “The sum of the apostle’s answer here is that the grand object of God, both in the election and the reprobation of
men, is that which is paramount to all things else in the creation of men, namely, His own
glory” (Robert Haldane). 18
8. “He had afore prepared unto glory” (v. 23)
Verse 23. “And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy,
which he had afore prepared unto glory.” The only point in this verse which demands attention is the fact that the “vessels of mercy” are here said to be “afore prepared unto glory.”
Many have pointed out that the previous verse does not say the vessels of wrath were afore
prepared unto destruction, and from this omission they have concluded that we must understand the reference there to the non-elect fitting themselves in time, rather than God ordaining them for destruction from all eternity. But this conclusion by no means follows. We need
to look back to verse 21 and note the figure that is there employed. “Clay” is inanimate matter,
corrupt, decomposed, and therefore a fit substance to represent fallen humanity. As, then, the
apostle is contemplating God’s sovereign dealings with humanity in view of the Fall, He does
not say the vessels of wrath were “afore” prepared unto destruction, for the obvious and sufficient reason that it was not until after the Fall that they became (in themselves) what is here
symbolized by the “clay.” All that is necessary to refute the erroneous conclusion referred to
above is to point out that what is said of the vessels of wrath is not that they are fit for destruction (which is the word that would have been used if the reference had been to them fitting
themselves by their own wickedness), but fitted to destruction; which, in the light of the whole
context, must mean a sovereign ordination to destruction by the Creator. We quote here the
pointed words of Calvin on this passage:
There are vessels prepared for destruction, that is, given up and appointed to destruction;
they are also vessels of wrath, that is, made and formed for this end, that they may be examples of God’s vengeance and displeasure. Though in the second clause the apostle asserts more expressly that it is God Who prepared the elect for glory, as he had simply said
before that the reprobate are vessels prepared for destruction, there is yet no doubt but
that the preparation of both is connected with the secret counsel of God. Paul might have
otherwise said that the reprobate gave up or cast themselves into destruction, but he intimates here that, before they are born, they are destined to their lot.
With this we are in hearty accord. Romans 9:22 does not say the vessels of wrath fitted
themselves, nor does it say they are fit for destruction, instead, it declares they are “fitted to
destruction,” and the context shows plainly it is God Who thus “fits” them, objectively, by His
eternal decrees.
18

Robert Haldane (1764-1842) – British nobleman born in London, attended University of Edinburgh;
served in the Royal Navy; devoted himself and his means wholly to the advancement of Christianity
through preaching, training, and missions. Known for his Exposition of the Epistle to the Romans.

68

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

D. Other Passages
Though Romans 9 contains the fullest setting forth of the doctrine of reprobation, there are
still other passages that refer to it, one or two more of which we will now briefly notice:
“What then? That which Israel seeketh for, that he obtained not, but the election obtained
it, and the rest were hardened” (Rom 11:7 R.V.). Here we have two distinct and clearly defined
classes that are set in sharp antithesis: the “election” and “the rest”; the one “obtained,” the
other is “hardened.” On this verse we quote from the comments of John Bunyan 19 of immortal
memory: “These are solemn words: they sever between men and men—the election and the
rest, the chosen and the left, the embraced and the refused. By ‘rest’ here must needs be understood those not elect, because set the one in opposition to the other, and if not elect, whom
then but reprobate?”
Writing to the saints at Thessalonica, the apostle declared, “For God hath not appointed us
to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ” (1Th 5:9). Now surely it is patent to
any impartial mind that this statement is quite pointless if God has not “appointed” any to
wrath. To say that God “hath not appointed us to wrath” clearly implies that there are some
whom He has “appointed to wrath”; and were it not that the minds of so many professing
Christians are so blinded by prejudice, they could not fail to clearly see this.
“A stone of stumbling, and a rock of offence, even to them who stumble at the word, being
disobedient: whereunto also they were appointed ” (1Pe 2:8). The “whereunto” manifestly
points back to the stumbling at the Word and their disobedience. Here, then, God expressly
affirms that there are some who have been “appointed” (it is the same Greek word as in 1Th
5:9) unto disobedience. Our business is not to reason about it, but to bow to Holy Scripture.
Our first duty is not to understand, but to believe what God has said.
“But these, as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of the things
that they understand not; and shall utterly perish in their own corruption” (2Pe 2:12). Here
again every effort is made to escape the plain teaching of this solemn passage. We are told [by
some] that it is the “brute beasts” who are “made to be taken and destroyed,” and not the persons here likened to them. All that is needed to refute such sophistry is to inquire wherein lies
the point of analogy between the “these” (men) and the “brute beasts”? What is the force of the
“as” but “these as brute beasts”? Clearly, it is that “these” men, as brute beasts, are the ones
who, like animals, are “made to be taken and destroyed”—the closing words confirming this
by reiterating the same sentiment: “and shall utterly perish in their own corruption.”
“For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the
only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ” (Jude 4). Attempts have been made to escape the
obvious force of this verse by substituting a different translation. The R.V. gives: “But there are
certain men crept in privily, even they who were of old written of beforehand unto this condemnation.” But this altered rendering by no means gets rid of that which is so distasteful to
our sensibilities. The question arises, Where were these “of old written of beforehand”? Certainly not in the Old Testament, for nowhere is there any reference there to wicked men creep19

John Bunyan (1628-1688) – English minister, preacher, and one of the most influential writers of the 17th
century. Beloved author of The Pilgrim’s Progress, The Holy War, and numerous others. Born at Elstow near
Bedford, England.

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

69

ing into Christian assemblies. If “written of ” be the best translation of prographo, the reference can only be to the book of the divine decrees. So whichever alternative be selected, there
can be no evading the fact that certain men are “before of old” marked out by God “unto condemnation.”
“And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, every one whose name hath not been
written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb that hath been slain”
(Rev 13:8 R.V.; cf. Rev 17:8). Here, then, is a positive statement affirming that there are those
whose names were not written in the book of life.
Here, then, are no less than ten passages that most plainly imply or expressly teach the fact
of reprobation. They affirm that the wicked are made for the day of evil; that God fashions
some vessels unto dishonor and by His eternal decree (objectively) fits them unto destruction;
that they are like brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed, being of old ordained unto this
condemnation. Therefore, in the face of these Scriptures, we unhesitatingly affirm (after nearly twenty years careful and prayerful study of the subject) that the Word of God unquestionably teaches both predestination and reprobation, or to use the words of Calvin, “Eternal
election is God’s predestination of some to salvation, and others to destruction.”

E. Guarding against Abuse of the Doctrine
Having thus stated the doctrine of reprobation, as it is presented in Holy Writ, let us now
mention one or two important considerations to guard it against abuse and prevent the reader
from making any unwarranted deductions.
First, the doctrine of reprobation does not mean that God purposed to take innocent creatures, make them wicked, and then damn them. Scripture says, “God hath made man upright:
but they have sought out many inventions” (Ecc 7:29). God has not created sinful creatures in
order to destroy them, for God is not to be charged with the sin of His creatures. The responsibility and criminality is man’s.
God’s decree of reprobation contemplated Adam’s race as fallen, sinful, corrupt, guilty.
From it God purposed to save a few as the monuments of His sovereign grace; the others He
determined to destroy as the exemplification of His justice and severity. In determining to destroy these others, God did them no wrong. They had already fallen in Adam, their legal representative; they are therefore born with a sinful nature, and in their sins He leaves them. Nor
can they complain. This is as they wish: they have no desire for holiness; they love darkness
rather than light. Where, then, is there any injustice if God “gives them up to their own
heart’s lusts” (Psa 81:12).
Second, the doctrine of reprobation does not mean that God refuses to save those who earnestly seek salvation. The fact is that the reprobate have no longing for the Saviour: they see
in Him no beauty that they should desire Him. They will not come to Christ; why then should
God force them to? He turns away none who do come; where then is the injustice of God foredetermining their just doom? None will be punished but for their iniquities; where then is the
supposed tyrannical cruelty of the divine procedure? Remember that God is the Creator of the
wicked, not of their wickedness; He is the author of their being, but not the infuser 20 of their
sin.
20

infuser – one who pours something into another.

70

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

God does not (as we have been slanderously reported to affirm) compel the wicked to sin, as
the rider spurs on an unwilling horse. God only says, in effect, that awful word, “Let them
alone” (Mat 15:14). He needs only to slacken the reins of providential restraint, and withhold
the influence of saving grace, and apostate man will only too soon and too surely, of his own
accord, fall by his iniquities. Thus the decree of reprobation neither interferes with the bent of
man’s own fallen nature, nor serves to render him the less inexcusable.
Third, the decree of reprobation in nowise conflicts with God’s goodness. Though the nonelect are not the objects of His goodness in the same way or to the same extent as the elect are,
yet are they not wholly excluded from a participation of it. They enjoy the good things of providence (temporal blessings) in common with God’s own children, and very often to a higher
degree. But how do they improve them? Does the (temporal) goodness of God lead them to
repent? Nay, verily, they do but despise His “goodness, and forbearance, and longsuffering,”
and “after thy hardness and impenitent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day
of wrath” (Rom 2:4-5). On what righteous ground, then, can they murmur against not being
the objects of His benevolence in the endless ages yet to come? Moreover, if it did not clash
with God’s mercy and kindness to leave the entire body of the fallen angels (2Pe 2:4) under the
guilt of their apostasy, still less can it clash with the divine perfections to leave some of fallen
mankind in their sins and punish them for them.
Finally, let us interpose this necessary caution: It is utterly impossible for any of us, during
the present life, to ascertain who are among the reprobate. We must not now so judge any
man, no matter how wicked he may be. The vilest sinner may, for all we know, be included in
the election of grace and be one day quickened by the Spirit of grace. Our marching orders are
plain, and woe unto us if we disregard them: “Preach the gospel to every creature” (Mar
16:15). When we have done so, our skirts are clear. If men refuse to heed, their blood is on
their own heads; nevertheless, “we are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are
saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are a savor of death unto death; and to the other
we are a savor of life unto life” (2Co 2:15-16).

F. Passages that Seem to Speak against the Doctrine
We must now consider a number of passages that are often quoted with the purpose of
showing that God has not fitted certain vessels to destruction or ordained certain ones to condemnation.
First, we cite Ezekiel 18:31, “Why will ye die, O house of Israel?” On this passage we cannot
do better than quote from the comments of Augustus Toplady: 21
This is a passage very frequently, but very idly, insisted upon by Arminians, 22 as if it were
a hammer that would at one stroke crush the whole fabric to powder. But it so happens
that the “death” here alluded to is neither spiritual nor eternal death, as is abundantly
evident from the whole tenor of the chapter. The death intended by the prophet is a po21

Augustus Montague Toplady (1740-1778) – Anglican cleric and hymn writer; best remembered as the author of the hymn “Rock of Ages.” Born in Surrey, England.
22
Arminians – those who follow the system of doctrine espoused by Jacobus Arminius (1560-1609), Dutch
theologian. He rejected the Reformers’ understanding of predestination, teaching instead that God’s predestination of individuals was based on His foreknowledge of their accepting or rejecting Christ by their
own free will.

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

71

litical death; a death of national prosperity, tranquillity, and security. The sense of the
question is precisely this: What is it that makes you in love with captivity, banishment,
and civil ruin. Abstinence from the worship of images might, as a people, exempt you
from these calamities, and once more render you a respectable nation. Are the miseries
of public devastation so alluring as to attract your determined pursuit? Why will ye die?
die as the house of Israel, and considered as a political body? Thus did the prophet argue
the case, at the same time adding, “For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth
saith the Lord God, wherefore, turn yourselves, and live ye.” This imports: First, the national captivity of the Jews added nothing to the happiness of God. Second, if the Jews
turned from idolatry, and flung away their images, they should not die in a foreign, hostile country, but live peaceably in their own land and enjoy their liberties as an independent people.”
To the above we may add: political death must be what is in view in Ezekiel 18:31-32, for the
simple but sufficient reason that they were already spiritually dead !
Matthew 25:41 is often quoted to show that God has not fitted certain vessels to destruction:
“Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels.” This
is, in fact, one of the principal verses relied upon to disprove the doctrine of reprobation. But
we submit that the emphatic word here is not for, but devil. This verse (see context) sets forth
the severity of the judgment that awaits the lost. In other words, the above Scripture expresses
the awfulness of the everlasting fire rather than the subjects of it—if the fire be “prepared for
the devil and his angels,” then how intolerable it will be! If the place of eternal torment into
which the damned shall be cast is the same as that in which God’s arch-enemy will suffer, how
dreadful must that place be!
Again, if God has chosen only certain ones to salvation, why are we told that God “now
commandeth all men everywhere to repent” (Act 17:30)? That God commandeth “all men” to
repent is but the enforcing of His righteous claims as the moral governor of the world. How
could He do less, seeing that all men everywhere have sinned against Him? Furthermore, that
God commandeth all men everywhere to repent argues the universality of creature responsibility. But this Scripture does not declare that it is God’s pleasure to “give repentance” (Act
5:31) everywhere. That the apostle Paul did not believe God gave repentance to every soul is
clear from his words in 2 Timothy 2:25: “In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth.”
Again, we are asked, if God has “ordained” only certain ones unto eternal life, then why do
we read that He “will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth” (1Ti
2:4)? The reply is that the words “all” and “all men,” like the term “world,” are often used in a
general and relative sense. Let the reader carefully examine the following passages: Mark 1:5;
John 6:45; 8:2; Acts 21:28; 22:15; 2 Corinthians 3:2, etc.—and he will find full proof of our assertion. 1 Timothy 2:4 cannot teach that God wills the salvation of all mankind, or otherwise
all mankind would be saved—“What his soul desireth even that he doeth” (Job 23:13)!
Again, we are asked, Does not Scripture declare, again and again, that God is no “respecter
of persons” (Rom 2:11 etc.)? We answer, it certainly does, and God’s electing grace proves it.
The seven sons of Jesse, though older and physically superior to David, are passed by, while the
young shepherd-boy is exalted to Israel’s throne. The scribes and lawyers pass unnoticed, and
ignorant fishermen are chosen to be the apostles of the Lamb. Divine truth is hidden from the

72

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

wise and prudent, and is revealed to babes instead. The great majority of the wise and noble
are ignored, while the weak, the base, the despised, are called and saved. Harlots and publicans
are sweetly compelled to come in to the gospel feast, while self-righteous Pharisees are suffered to perish in their immaculate morality. Truly, God is “no respecter” of persons, or He
would not have saved me.
That the doctrine of reprobation is a “hard saying” to the carnal mind is readily acknowledged; yet, is it any “harder” than that of eternal punishment ? That it is clearly taught in
Scripture we have sought to demonstrate, and it is not for us to pick and choose from the
truths revealed in God’s Word. Let those who are inclined to receive those doctrines that
commend themselves to their judgment, and who reject those that they cannot fully understand, remember those scathing words of our Lord’s, “O fools, and slow of heart to believe all
that the prophets have spoken” (Luk 24:25): fools because slow of heart; slow of heart, not dull
of head!
Once more we would avail ourselves of the language of Calvin:
But, as I have hitherto only recited such things as are delivered without any obscurity or
ambiguity in the Scriptures, let persons who hesitate not to brand with ignominy23
those oracles of heaven, beware of what kind of opposition they make. For if they pretend ignorance, with a desire to be commended for their modesty, what greater instance
of pride can be conceived than to oppose one little word to the authority of God! as, “It
appears otherwise to me,” or “I would rather not meddle with this subject.” But if they
openly censure, what will they gain by their puny attempts against heaven? Their petulance, 24 indeed, is no novelty; for in all ages there have been impious and profane men,
who have virulently opposed this doctrine. But they shall feel the truth of what the Spirit long ago declared by the mouth of David, that God “is clear when he judgest” (Psa
51:4). David obliquely hints at the madness of men who display such excessive presumption amidst their insignificance, as not only to dispute against God, but to arrogate 25 to
themselves the power of condemning Him. In the meantime, he briefly suggests that
God is unaffected by all the blasphemies that they discharge against heaven, but that He
dissipates the mists of calumny 26 and illustriously displays His righteousness; our faith,
also, being founded on the divine Word, and therefore, superior to all the world, from its
exaltation looks down with contempt upon those mists.

G. Classic Theologians
In closing this chapter, we propose to quote from the writings of some of the standard theologians since the days of the reformation, not that we would buttress our own statements by
an appeal to human authority, however venerable or ancient, but in order to show that what
we have advanced in these pages is no novelty of the twentieth century, no heresy of the “latter
days,” but, instead, a doctrine that has been definitely formulated and commonly taught by
many of the most pious and scholarly students of Holy Writ.
23

ignominy – dishonor; disgrace.
petulance – arrogant speech.
25
arrogate – to claim for one’s self without right.
26
calumny – false accusation; malicious misrepresentation.
24

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

73

“Predestination we call the decree of God by which He has determined in Himself what He
would have to become of every individual of mankind. For they are not all created with a similar destiny, but eternal life is foreordained for some and eternal damnation for others. Every
man, therefore, being created for one or the other of these ends, we say, he is predestinated
either to life or to death”—from John Calvin’s Institutes. 27
We ask our readers to mark well the above language. A perusal of it should show that what
the present writer has advanced in this chapter is not “hyper-Calvinism,” but real Calvinism, 28
pure and simple. Our purpose in making this remark is to show that those who, not acquainted with Calvin’s writings, in their ignorance condemn as ultra-Calvinism that which is simply
a reiteration of what Calvin himself taught—a reiteration because that prince of theologians as
well as his humble debtor have both found this doctrine in the Word of God itself.
Martin Luther 29 in his most excellent work De Servo Arbitrio (Free Will a Slave), wrote: “All
things whatsoever arise from, and depend upon, the divine appointments, whereby it was preordained who should receive the Word of Life, and who should disbelieve it; who should be delivered from their sins, and who should be hardened in them; who should be justified, and who
should be condemned. This is the very truth that razes the doctrine of free will from its foundations, to wit, that God’s eternal love of some men and hatred of others is immutable and
cannot be reversed.”
John Fox, 30 whose Book of Martyrs was once the best known work in the English language
(alas that is not so today, when Roman Catholicism is sweeping upon us like a great destructive tidal wave!), wrote: “Predestination is the eternal decreement of God, purposed before in
Himself, what should befall all men, either to salvation, or damnation.”
31
The Westminster Larger Catechism (1647), adopted by the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church, declares, “God, by an eternal and immutable decree, out of His mere love, for
the praise of His glorious grace, to be manifested in due time, hath elected some angels to glory, and in Christ hath chosen some men to eternal life, and the means thereof; and also, according to His own will (whereby He extendeth or withholdeth favor as He pleases), hath
passed by, and foredained the rest to dishonour and wrath, to be for their sin inflicted, to the
praise of the glory of His justice.”
John Bunyan, author of The Pilgrim’s Progress, wrote a whole volume on “Reprobation.”
From it we make one brief extract: “Reprobation is before the person cometh into the world,
27

Institutes of the Christian Religion (1536), Book III, Chapter XXI, entitled “Eternal Election, or God’s Predestination of Some to Salvation and of Others to Destruction.” Other excerpts available from CHAPEL
LIBRARY: Self-denial, Prayer, and The Mediator.
28
Calvinism – system of doctrine delineated during the Protestant Reformation in which God infallibly saves
those He has marked out for salvation, entirely by His grace, without any effect from human merit or decision.
29
Martin Luther (1483-1546) – German Roman Catholic monk, theologian, university professor, and church
reformer whose ideas inspired the Protestant Reformation, challenging the papacy by holding that the Bible is the only infallible religious authority.
30
John Foxe (1516/17-1587) – English historian and martyrologist; author of Actes and Monuments (popularly
known as Foxe's Book of Martyrs), an account of Christian martyrs throughout Western history.
31
Westminster Larger Catechism – question and answer format for teaching doctrine written by the Westminster Assembly after it finished its work on the Westminster Confession of Faith (1646), designed to assist fathers in teaching their families.

74

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

or hath done good or evil. This is evidenced by Romans 9:11. Here you find twain in their
mother’s womb, and both receiving their destiny, not only before they had done good or evil,
but before they were in a capacity to do it, they being yet unborn—their destiny, I say, the one
unto, the other not unto the blessing of eternal life; the one elect, the other reprobate; the one
chosen, the other refused.” In his Sighs from Hell, John Bunyan also wrote: “They that do continue to reject and slight the Word of God are such, for the most part, as are ordained to be
damned.”
Commenting upon Romans 9:22, “What if God willing to shew his wrath, and to make his
power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction,”
Jonathan Edwards 32 says, “How awful doth the majesty of God appear in the dreadfulness of
His anger! This we may learn to be one end of the damnation of the wicked.” 33
Augustus Toplady, author of “Rock of Ages” and other sublime hymns, wrote: “God, from all
eternity decreed to leave some of Adam’s fallen posterity in their sins, and to exclude them
from the participation of Christ and His benefits.” And again, “We, with the Scriptures, assert
that there is a predestination of some particular persons to life, for the praise of the glory of
divine grace; and also a predestination of other particular persons to death for the glory of divine justice—which death of punishment they shall inevitably undergo, and that justly, on account of their sins.”
34
George Whitefield, that stalwart of the eighteenth century, used by God in blessing to so
many, wrote: “‘Without doubt, the doctrine of election and reprobation must stand or fall together…I frankly acknowledge I believe the doctrine of Reprobation, that God intends to give
saving grace, through Jesus Christ, only to a certain number; and that the rest of mankind,
after the fall of Adam, being justly left to God to continue in sin, will at last suffer that eternal
death which is its proper wages.”
“Fitted to destruction” (Rom 9:22). After declaring this phrase admits of two interpreta35
tions, Dr. Hodge —perhaps the best known and most widely read commentator on Romans—
says, “The other interpretation assumes that the reference is to God and that the Greek word
for ‘fitted’ has its full participle force: prepared (by God) for destruction.” This, says Dr. Hodge,
“Is adopted not only by the majority of Augustinians, but also by many Lutherans.”
Were it necessary, we are prepared to give quotations from the writings of Wycliffe, Huss,
Ridley, Hooper, Cranmer, Ussher, John Trapp, Thomas Goodwin, Thomas Manton (Chaplain to
Cromwell), John Owen, Witsius, John Gill (predecessor of Spurgeon), and a host of others. We
mention this simply to show that many of the most eminent saints in bye-gone days, the men
32

Jonathan Edwards (1703-1758) – American Congregational preacher; regarded as America’s greatest evangelical theologian and well-known for his preaching in the Great Awakening along with George Whitefield. Author of Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God, A Treatise Concerning Religious Affections, and
numerous other titles.
33
Cited by the author: 1743, Vol. 4, 306.
34
George Whitefield (1714-1770) – English evangelist; born in Gloucester, England; studied at Oxford University with the Wesleys. When opposition to his preaching closed church doors to him, he led the way in
preaching outdoors. He was mightily used of God in England and the American Colonies during the
“Great Awakening.”
35
Charles Hodge (1797-1878) – Presbyterian theologian, most influential of the 19th century. Taught theology
at Princeton Seminary. Best known for his commentary on Romans (1837) and three volume Systematic
Theology. Born in Philadelphia, PA.

5. The Sovereignty of God in Reprobation

75

most widely used of God, held and taught this doctrine, which is so bitterly hated in these last
days, when men will no longer “endure sound doctrine”; hated by men of lofty pretentions, but
who, notwithstanding their boasted orthodoxy 36 and much advertised piety, are not worthy to
unfasten the shoes of the faithful and fearless servants of God of other days.
“O the depth of the riches both of wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of the Lord? or who
hath been his counsellor? Or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompensed unto
him again? For of him, and through him, and to him, 37 are all things: to whom be glory forever, Amen” (Rom 11:33-36). 

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions reinforce understanding and application.

1. Regarding reprobation, describe the difference between God’s foreknowledge and His decree.
2. What do Pharaoh and clay teach about reprobation in Romans 9:17-23?
3. What are the key points 38 of Proverbs 16:4; Matthew 7:23; Romans 11:7; 1 Thessalonians 5:9;
1 Peter 2:8; Jude 4; Revelation 13:8?
4. Does the doctrine of reprobation conflict with God’s goodness? Why?
5. What are the key points of Matthew 25:41; Acts 17:30; 1 Timothy 2:4?

36

orthodoxy – literally, “right belief”; orthodoxy generally means the body of doctrines that are essential to
the Christian faith; this implies consistency in belief and worship with the revelation of Holy Scripture.
37
“Of him,” His will is the origin of all existence; “through” or “by him,” He is the Creator and Controller of
all; “to him,” all things promote His glory in their final end.—A.W.P.
38
See chapter 2 Questions for clarification regarding what is a “key point.”

6
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD
IN OPERATION
“For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things:
to whom be glory for ever. Amen.”—Romans 11:36

A. Introduction
1. Is God governing?
Has God foredained 1 everything that comes to pass? Has He decreed that what is, was to
have been? In the final analysis, this is only another way of asking, Is God now governing the
world and everyone and everything in it? If God is governing the world, then is He governing it
according to a definite purpose, or aimlessly and at random? If He is governing it according to
some purpose, then when was that purpose made? Is God continually changing His purpose
and making a new one every day, or was His purpose formed from the beginning? Are God’s
actions, like ours, regulated by the change of circumstances, or are they the outcome of His
eternal purpose? If God formed a purpose before man was created, then is that purpose going
to be executed according to His original designs, and is He now working toward that end?
What saith the Scriptures? They declare God is One “who worketh all things after the counsel
of his own will” (Eph 1:11).
Few who read this book are likely to call into question the statement that God knows and
foreknows all things, but perhaps many would hesitate to go further than this. Yet is it not
self-evident that if God foreknows all things, He also has foredained all things? Is it not clear
that God foreknows what will be because He has decreed what shall be? God’s foreknowledge is
not the cause of events, rather are events the effects of His eternal purpose. When God has decreed a thing shall be, He knows it will be! In the nature of things, there cannot be anything
known as what shall be unless it is certain to be, and there is nothing certain to be unless God
has ordained it shall be. Take the crucifixion as an illustration. On this point the teaching of
Scripture is as clear as a sunbeam. Christ, as the Lamb Whose blood was to be shed, was “foreordained before the foundation of the world” (1Pe 1:20). Having then “ordained” the slaying of
the Lamb, God knew He would be “led to the slaughter,” and therefore made it known accordingly through Isaiah the prophet. The Lord Jesus was not “delivered” up by God foreknowing it
before it took place, but by His fixed counsel and fore-ordination (Act 2:23). Foreknowledge of
future events, then, is founded upon God’s decrees; hence, if God foreknows everything that is to
be, it is because He has determined in Himself from all eternity everything that will be: “Known
1

foredained – ordained, decreed, or determined beforehand.