PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 28
On the Voice

---

Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 8. On the Voice.

LECTURE VIII

ON THE VOICE
OUR FIRST rule with regard to the voice would be--do not think too
much about it, for recollect the sweetest voice is nothing without
something to say, and however well it may be managed, it will be like
a well-driven cart with nothing in it, unless you convey by it
important and seasonable truths to your people. Demosthenes was
doubtless right in giving a first, second, and third place to a good
delivery; but of what value will that be if a man has nothing to
deliver? A man with a surpassingly excellent voice who is destitute of
a well-informed head, and an earnest heart, will be "a voice crying in
the wilderness;" or, to use Plutarch's expression, "Vox et praeterea
nihil." Such a man may shine in the choir, but he is useless in the
pulpit. Whitfield's. voice, without his heart-power, would have left no
more lasting effects upon his hearers than Paganini's fiddle. You are
not singers but preachers: your voice is but a secondary matter; do
not be fops with it, or puling invalids over it, as so many are. A
trumpet need not be made of silver, a ram's-horn will suffice; but it
must be able to endure rough usage, for trumpets are for war's
conflicts, not for the drawing-rooms of fashion.
On the other hand, do not think too little of your voice, for its
excellence may greatly conduce to the result which you hope to
produce. Plato, in confessing the power of eloquence, mentions the
tone of the speaker. "So strongly," says he, "does the speech and the
tone of the orator ring in my ears, that scarcely in the third or fourth
day do I recollect myself, and perceive where on the earth I am; and
for a while I am willing to believe myself living in the isles of the
blessed." Exceedingly precious truths may be greatly marred by
being delivered in monotonous tones. I once heard a most esteemed
minister, who mumbled sadly, compared to "a humble bee in a
pitcher," a vulgar metaphor no doubt, but so exactly descriptive, that
it brings to my mind the droning sound at this instant most
distinctly, and reminds me of the parody upon Gray's Elegy:
"Now fades the glimmering subject from the sight,

And all the air a sleepy stillness holds,
Save where the parson hums his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the slumb'ring folds."
What a pity that a man who from his heart delivered doctrines of
undoubted value, in language the most appropriate, should commit
ministerial suicide by harping on one string, when the Lord had
given him an instrument of many strings to play upon! Alas! alas! for
that dreary voice, it hummed and hummed like a mill-wheel to the
same unmusical tune, whether its owner spake of heaven or hell,
eternal life or everlasting wrath. It might be, by accident, a little
louder or softer, according to the length of the sentence, but its tone
was still the same, a dreary waste of sound, a howling wilderness of
speech in which there was no possible relief, no variety, no music,
nothing but horrible sameness.
When the wind blows through the Æolian harp, it swells through all
the chords, but the heavenly wind, passing through some men,
spends itself upon one string, and that, for the most part, the most
out of tune of the whole. Grace alone could enable hearers to edify
under the drum--drum--drum of some divines. I think an impartial
jury would bring in a verdict of justifiable slumbering in many cases
where the sound emanating from the preacher lulls to sleep by its
reiterated note. Dr. Guthrie charitably traces the slumbers of a
certain Scotch congregation to bad ventilation in the meeting-house;
this has something to do with it, but a bad condition of the valves of
the preacher's throat might be a still more potent cause. Brethren, in
the name of everything that is sacred, ring the whole chime in your
steeple, and do not dun your people with the ding-dong of one poor
cracked bell.
When you do pay attention to the voice, take care not to fall into the
habitual and common affectations of the present day. Scarcely one
man in a dozen in the pulpit talks like a man. This affectation is not
confined to Protestants, for the Abbé Mullois remarks, "Everywhere
else, men speak: they speak at the bar and the tribune; but they no

longer speak in the pulpit, for there we only meet with a factitious
and artificial language, and a false tone. This style of speaking is only
tolerated in the church, because, unfortunately, it is so general there;
elsewhere it would not be endured. What would be thought of a man
who should converse in a similar way in a drawing-room? He would
certainly provoke many a smile. Some time ago there was a warder at
the Pantheon--a good sort of fellow in his way--who, in enumerating
the beauties of the monument, adopted precisely the tone of many of
our preachers, and never failed thereby to excite the hilarity of the
visitors, who were as much amused with his style of address as with
the objects of interest which he pointed out to them. A man who has
not a natural and true delivery, should not be allowed to occupy the
pulpit; from thence, at least, everything that is false should be
summarily banished. . . . In these days of mistrust everything that is
false should be set aside: and the best way of correcting one's self in
that respect, as regards preaching, is frequently to listen to certain
monotonous and vehement preachers. We shall come away in such
disgust, and with such a horror of their delivery, that we shall prefer
condemning ourselves to silence rather than imitate them. The
instant you abandon the natural and the true, you forego the right to
be believed, as well as the right of being listened to." You may go all
round, to church and chapel alike, and you will find that by far the
larger majority of our preachers have a holy tone for Sundays. They
have one voice for the parlour and the bedroom, and quite another
tone for the pulpit; so that, if not double-tongued sinfully, they
certainly are so literally. The moment some men shut the pulpit
door, they leave their own personal manhood behind them, and
become as official as the parish beadle. There they might almost
boast with the Pharisee, that they are not as other men are, although
it would be blasphemy to thank God for it. No longer are they carnal
and speak as men, but a whine, a broken hum-haw, an ore rotundo,
or some other graceless mode of noise-making, is adopted, to
prevent all suspicion of being natural and speaking out of the
abundance of the heart. When that gown is once on, how often does
it prove to be the shroud of the man's true self, and the effeminate
emblem of officialism!

There are two or three modes of speech which I dare say you will
recognise as having frequently heard. That dignified, doctorial,
inflated, bombastic style, which I just now called the ore rotundo, is
not quite so common now as it used to be, but it is still admired by
some. [Unfortunately, the Lecturer could not here be reported by any
known form of letter-press, as he proceeded to read a hymn with a
round, rolling swelling voice.] When a reverend gentleman was once
blowing off steam in this way, a man in the aisle said he thought the
preacher "had swallowed a dumpling," but another whispered, "No,
Jack, he ain't swaller'd un; he's got un in his mouth a-wobblin." I can
imagine Dr. Johnson talking in that fashion at Bolt Court; and from
men to whom it is natural it rolls with Olympian grandeur, but in the
pulpit away for ever with all imitation of it; if it comes naturally, well
and good, but to mimic it is treason to common decency: indeed, all
mimicry is in the pulpit near akin to an unpardonable sin.
There is another style, at which I beseech you not to laugh. [Giving
another illustration], a method of enunciation said to be very
ladylike,
mincing,
delicate,
servant-girlified,
dawdling,
Dundrearyish, I know not how else to describe it. We have, most of
us, had the felicity of hearing these, or some others, of the extensive
genus of falsettos, high-stilts, and affectations. I have heard many
different varieties, from the fulness of the Johnsonian to the thinness
of the little genteel whisper; from the roaring of the Bulls of Bashan
up to the chip, chip, chip of a chaffinch. I have been able to trace
some of our brethren to their forefathers--I mean their ministerial
forefathers, from whom they first of all gathered these heavenly,
melodious, sanctified, in every way beautiful, but I must honestly
add detestable modes of speech. The undoubted order of their
oratorical pedigree is as follows: Chip, which was the son of Lisp,
which was the son of Simper, which was the son of Dandy, which was
the son of Affectation; or Wobbler, which was the son of Grandiose,
which was the son of Pomposity, the same was the father of many
sons. Understand, that where even these horrors of sound are
natural, I do not condemn them--let every creature speak in its own
tongue; but the fact is, that in nine cases out of ten, these sacred

brogues, which I hope will soon be dead languages, are unnatural
and strained. I am persuaded that these tones and semitones and
monotones are Babylonian, that they are not at all the Jerusalem
dialect; for the Jerusalem dialect has this one distinguishing mark,
that it is a man's own mode of speech, and is the same out of the
pulpit as it is in it. Our friend of the affected ore rotundo school was
never known to talk out of the pulpit as he does in, or to say in the
parlour in the same tone which he uses in the pulpit: "Will you be so
good as to give me another cup of tea; I take sugar, if you please." He
would make himself ludicrous if he did so, but the pulpit is to be
favoured with the scum of his voice, which the parlour would not
tolerate. I maintain that the best notes a man's voice is capable of
should be given to the proclamation of the gospel, and these are such
as nature teaches him to use in earnest conversation. Ezekiel served
his Master with his most musical and melodious powers, so that the
Lord said, "Thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath
a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument." Although this,
alas! was of no use to Israel's hard heart, as nothing will be but the
Spirit of God, yet it well became the prophet to deliver the word of
the Lord in the best style of voice and manner.
In the next place, if you have any idiosyncrasies of speech, which
are disagreeable to the ear, correct them, if possible.1 It is admitted
that this is much more easy for the teacher to inculcate than for you
to practise. Yet to young men in the morning of their ministry, the
difficulty is not insuperable. Brethren from the country have a
flavour of their rustic diet in their mouths, reminding us irresistibly
of the calves of Essex, the swine of Berkshire, or the runts of Suffolk.
Who can mistake the Yorkshire or Somersetshire dialects, which are
not merely provincial pronunciations, but tones also? It would be
difficult to discover the cause, but the fact is clear enough, that in
some counties of England men's threats seem to be furred up, like
long-used teakettles, and in others, they ring like brass music, with a
vicious metallic sound. Beautiful these variations of nature may be in
their season and place, but my taste has never been able to
appreciate them. A sharp discordant squeak, like a rusty pair of

scissors, is to be got rid of at all hazards; so also is a thick,
inarticulate utterance in which no word is complete, but nouns,
adjectives, and verbs are made into a kind of hash. Equally
objectionable is that ghostly speech in which a man talks without
using his lips, ventriloquising most horribly: sepulchral tones may fit
a man to be an undertaker, but Lazarus is not called out of his grave
by hollow moans. One of the surest ways to kill yourself is to speak
from the throat instead of the mouth. This misuse of nature will be
terribly avenged by her; escape the penalty by avoiding the offence. It
may be well in this place to urge you as soon as you detect yourself
interposing hum-haw pretty plentifully in your discourse, to purge
yourself of the insinuating but ruinous habit at once. There is no
need whatever for it, and although those who are now its victims may
never be able to break the chain, you, who are beginners in oratory,
must scorn to wear the galling yoke. It is even needful to say, open
your mouths when you speak, for much of inarticulate mumbling is
the result of keeping the mouth half closed. It is not in vain that the
evangelists have written of our Lord, "He opened His mouth and
taught them." Open wide the doors from which such goodly truth is
to march forth. Moreover, brethren, avoid the use of the nose as an
organ of speech, for the best authorities are agreed that it is intended
to smell with. Time was, when the nasal twang was the correct thing,
but in this degenerate age you had better obey the evident suggestion
of nature, and let the mouth keep to its work without the interference
of the olfactory instrument. Should an American student be present
he must excuse my pressing this remark upon his attention. Abhor
the practice of some men, who will not bring out the letter "r;" such a
habit is "vewy wuinous and wediculous, vewy wetched and
wepwehensible." Now and then a brother has the felicity to possess a
most winning and delicious lisp. This is perhaps among the least of
evils, where the brother himself is little and winning, but it would
ruin any being who aimed at manliness and force. I can scarcely
conceive of Elijah lisping to Ahab, or Paul prettily chipping his words
on Mars' Hill. There may be a peculiar pathos about a weak and
watery eye, and a faltering style; we will go further, and admit that
where these are the result of intense passion, they are sublime; but

some possess them by birth, and use them rather too freely: it is, to
say the least, unnecessary for you to imitate them. Speak as educated
nature suggests to you, and you will do well; but let it be educated,
and not raw, rude, uncultivated nature. Demosthenes took, as you
know, unbounded pains with his voice, and Cicero, who was
naturally weak, made a long journey into Greece to correct his
manner of speaking. With far nobler themes, let us not be less
ambitious to excel. "Deprive me of everything else," says Gregory, of
Nazianzen, "but leave me eloquence, and I shall never regret the
voyages which I have made in order to study it."
Always speak so as to be heard. I know a man who weighs sixteen
stone, and ought to be able to be heard half-a-mile, who is so
gracelessly indolent, that in his small place of worship you can
scarcely hear him in the front of the gallery. What is the use of a
preacher whom men cannot hear? Modesty should lead a voiceless
man to give place to others who are more fitted for the work of
proclaiming the messages of the King. Some men are loud enough,
but they are not distinct; their words overlap each other, play at leapfrog, or trip each other up. Distinct utterance is far more important
than wind-power. Do give a word a fair chance, do not break its back
in your vehemence, or run it off its legs in your haste. It is hateful to
hear a big fellow mutter and whisper when his lungs are quite strong
enough for the loudest speech; but at the same time, let a man shout
ever so lustily, he will not be well heard unless he learns to push his
words forward with due space between. To speak too slowly is
miserable work, and subjects active-minded hearers to the disease
called, the "horrors." It is impossible to hear a man who crawls along
at a mile an hour. One word to-day and one to-morrow is a kind of
slow-fire which martyrs only could enjoy. Excessively rapid speaking,
tearing and raving into utter rant, is quite as inexcusable; it is not,
and never can be powerful, except with idiots, for it turns what
should be an army of words into a mob, and most effectually drowns
the sense in floods of sound. Occasionally, one hears an infuriated
orator of indistinct utterance, whose impetuosity hurries him on to

such a confusion of sounds, that at a little distance one is reminded
of Lucan's lines:
"Her gabbling tongue a muttering tone confounds,
Discordant and unlike to human sounds;
It seem'd of dogs the bark, of wolves the howl,
The doleful screeching of the midnight owl;
The hiss of snakes, the hungry lion's roar,
The bound of billows beating on the shore;
The groan of winds among the leafy wood,
And burst of thunder from the rending cloud!
'Twas these, all these in one."
It is an infliction not to be endured twice, to hear a brother who
mistakes perspiration for inspiration, tear along like a wild horse
with a hornet in its ear till he has no more wind, and must needs
pause to pump his lungs full again; a repetition of this indecency
several times in a sermon is not uncommon, but is most painful.
Pause soon enough to prevent that "hough, hough," which rather
creates pity for the breathless orator than sympathy with the subject
in hand. Your audience ought not to know that you breathe at all-the process of respiration should be as unobserved as the circulation
of the blood. It is indecent to let the mere animal function of
breathing cause any hiatus in your discourse.
Do not as a rule exert your voice to the utmost in ordinary
preaching. Two or three earnest men, now present, are tearing
themselves to pieces by needless bawling; their poor lungs are
irritated, and their larynx inflamed by boisterous shouting, from
which they seem unable to refrain. Now it is all very well to "Cry
aloud and spare not," but "Do thyself no harm" is apostolical advice.
When persons can hear you with half the amount of voice, it is as
well to save the superfluous force for times when it may be wanted.
"Waste not, want not" may apply here as well as elsewhere. Be a little
economical with that enormous volume of sound. Do not give your
hearers head-aches when you mean to give them heart-aches: you

aim to keep them from sleeping in their pews, but remember that it
is not needful to burst the drums of their ears. "The Lord is not in the
wind." Thunder is not lightning: Men do not hear in proportion to
the noise created; in fact, too much noise stuns the ear, creates
reverberations and echoes, and effectually injures the power of your
sermons. Adapt your voice to your audience; when twenty thousand
are before you, draw out the stops and give the full peal, but not in a
room which will only hold a score or two. Whenever I enter a place to
preach, I unconsciously calculate how much sound is needed to fill it,
and after a few sentences my key is pitched. If you can make the man
at the end of the chapel hear, if you can see that he is catching your
thought, you may be sure that those nearer can hear you, and no
more force is needed, perhaps a little less will do--watch and see.
Why speak so as to be heard in the Street when there is nobody there
who is listening to you? Whether indoors or out, see that the most
remote hearers can follow you, and that will be sufficient. By the way,
I may observe, that brethren should, out of mercy to the weak,
always attend carefully to the force of their voices in sick rooms, and
in congregations where some are known to be very infirm. It is a
cruel thing to sit down by a sick man's bedside, and shout out "THE
LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." If you act so thoughtlessly, the poor man
will say as soon as you are down stairs, "Dear me! how my head
aches. I am glad the good man is gone, Mary; that is a very precious
Psalm and so quiet like, but he read it out like thunder and lightning,
and almost stunned me!" Recollect, you younger and unmarried
men, that soft whispers will suit the invalid better than roll of drum
and culverin.
Observe carefully the rule to vary the force of your voice. The old
rule was, to begin very softly, gradually rise higher, and bring out
your loudest notes at the end. Let all such regulations be blown to
pieces at the cannon's mouth; they are impertinent and misleading.
Speak softly or loudly, as the emotion of the moment may suggest,
and observe no artificial and fanciful rules. Artificial rules are an
utter abomination. As M. de Cormorin satirically puts it, "Be
impassioned, thunder, rage, weep, up to the fifth word, of the third

sentence, of the tenth paragraph, of the tenth leaf. How easy that
would be! Above all, how very natural!" In imitation of a popular
preacher, to whom it was unavoidable, a certain minister was
accustomed in the commencement of his sermon to speak in so low a
key, that no one could possibly hear him. Everybody leaned forward,
fearing that something good was being lost in the air, but their
straining was in vain; a holy mutter was all they could discern. If the
brother could not have spoken out none should have blamed him,
but it was a most absurd thing to do this when in a short time he
proved the power of his lungs by filling the whole structure by
sonorous sentences. If the first half of his discourse was of no
importance, why not omit it? and if of any value at all, why not
deliver it distinctly? Effect, gentlemen, that was the point aimed at;
he knew that one who spake in that fashion had produced great
effects, and he hoped to rival him. If any of you dare commit such a
folly for such a detestable object, I heartily wish you had never
entered this Institution. I tell you most seriously, that the thing
called "effect," is hateful, because it is untrue, artificial, tricky, and
therefore despicable. Never do anything for effect, but scorn the
stratagems of little minds, hunting after the approval of connoisseurs
in preaching, who are a race as obnoxious to a true minister as
locusts to the Eastern husbandman. But I digress: be clear and
distinct at the very first. Your exordia are too good to be whispered to
space. Speak them out boldly, and command attention at the very
outset by your manly tones. Do not start at the highest pitch as a
rule, for then you will not be able to rise when you warm with the
work; but still be outspoken from the first. Lower the voice when
suitable even to a whisper; for soft, deliberate, solemn utterances are
not only a relief to the ear, but have a great aptitude to reach the
heart. Do not be afraid of the low keys, for if you throw force into
them they are as well heard as the shouts. You need not speak in a
loud voice in order to be heard well. Macaulay says of William Pitt,
"His voice, even when it sank to a whisper, was heard to the remotest
benches of the House of Commons." It has been well said that the
most noisy gun is not the one which carries a ball the furthest: the
crack of a rifle is anything but noisy. It is not the loudness of your

voice, it is the force which you put into it that is effective. I am
certain that I could whisper so as to be heard throughout every
corner of our great Tabernacle, and I am equally certain that I could
holloa and shout so that nobody could understand me. The thing
could be done here, but perhaps the example is needless, as I fear
some of you perform the business with remarkable success. Waves of
air may dash upon the ear in such rapid succession that they create
no translatable impression on the auditory nerve. Ink is necessary to
write with, but if you upset the ink bottle over the sheet of paper you
convey no meaning thereby; so is it with sound. Sound is the ink, but
management is needed, not quantity, to produce an intelligible
writing upon the ear. If your sole ambition be to compete with-Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,
Whose throat surpass'd the force of fifty tongues,"
then bawl yourselves into Elysium as rapidly as possible, but if you
wish to be understood, and so to be of service, shun the reproach of
being "impotent and loud." You are aware that shrill sounds travel
the farthest: the singular cry which is used by travellers in the wilds
of Australia, owes its remarkable power to its shrillness. A bell will be
heard much farther off than a drum; and, very singularly, the more
musical a sound is the farther it travels. It is not the thumping of the
piano which is needed, but the judicious sounding of the best keys.
You will therefore feel at liberty to ease the strain very frequently in
the direction of loudness, and you will be greatly relieving both the
ears of the audience and your own lungs. Try all methods, from the
sledge-hammer to the puff-ball. Be as gentle as a zephyr and as
furious as a tornado. Be, indeed, just what every common-sense
person is in his speech when he talks naturally, pleads vehemently,
whispers confidentially, appeals plaintively, or publishes distinctly.
Next to the moderation of lung-force, I should place the rule,
modulate your tones. Alter the key frequently and vary the strain
constantly. Let the bass, the treble, and the tenor, take their turn. I
beseech you to do this out of pity to yourself and to those who hear

you. God has mercy upon us and arranges all things to meet our
cravings for variety; let us have mercy upon our fellow creatures, and
not persecute them with the tedium of sameness. It is a most
barbarous thing to inflict upon the tympanum of a poor fellowcreature's ear the anguish of being bored and gimbleted with the
same sound for half an hour. What swifter mode of rendering the
mind idiotic or lunatic could be conceived than the perpetual
droning of a beetle, or buzzing of a blue-bottle, in the organ of
hearing? What dispensation have you by which you are to be
tolerated in such cruelty to the helpless victims who sit under your
drum-drum ministrations? Kind nature frequently spares the drone's
unhappy victims the full effect of his tortures by steeping them in
sweet repose. This, however, you do not desire; then speak with
varied voice. How few ministers remember that monotony causes
sleep. I fear the charge brought by a writer in the Imperial Review is
true to the letter of numbers of my brethren. "We all know how the
noise of running water, or the murmur of the sea, or the sighing of
the south wind among the pines, or the moaning of wood-doves,
induces a delicious dreamy languor. Far be it from us to say that the
voice of a modern divine resembles, in the slightest degree, any of
these sweet sounds, yet the effect is the same, and few can resist the
drowsy influences of a lengthy dissertation, delivered without the
slightest variation of tone or alteration of expression. Indeed, the
very exceptional use of the phrase 'an awakening discourse,' even by
those most familiar with such matters, conveys the implication that
the great majority of pulpit harangues are of a decidedly soporific
tendency. It is an ill case when the preacher
"Leaves his hearers perplex'd-Twixt the two to determine:
'Watch and pray,' says the text,
'Go to sleep,' says the sermon."
However musical your voice may be in itself, if you continue to sound
the same chord perpetually, your hearers will perceive that its notes
are by distance made more sweet. Do in the name of humanity cease

intoning and take to rational speaking. Should this argument fail to
move you, I am so earnest about this point, that if you will not follow
my advice out of mercy to your hearers, yet do it out of mercy to
yourselves; for as God in His infinite wisdom has been pleased
always to append a penalty to every sin against His natural as well as
moral laws, so the evil of monotony is frequently avenged by that
dangerous disease called dysphonia clericorum, or, "Clergyman's
sore throat." When certain of our brethren are so beloved by their
hearers that they do not object to pay a handsome sum to get rid of
them for a few months, when a journey to Jerusalem is
recommended and provided for, bronchitis of a modified order is so
remarkably overruled for good, that my present argument will not
disturb their equanimity. But such is not our lot; to us bronchitis
means real misery, and therefore, to avoid it, we would follow any
sensible suggestion. If you wish to ruin your throats you can speedily
do so, but if you wish to preserve them, note what is now laid before
you. I have often in this room compared the voice to a drum. If the
drummer should always strike in one place on the head of his drum,
the skin would soon wear into a hole; but how much longer it would
have lasted him if he had varied his thumping and had used the
entire surface of the drum-head! So it is with a man's voice. If he uses
always the same tone, he will wear a hole in that part of the throat
which is most exercised in producing that monotony, and very soon
he will suffer from bronchitis. I have heard surgeons affirm, that
Dissenting bronchitis differs from the Church of England article.
There is an ecclesiastical twang which is much admired in the
Establishment, a sort of steeple-in-the-throat grandeur, an
aristocratic, theologic, parsonic, supernatural, infra-human
mouthing of language and rolling over of words. It may be illustrated
by the following specimen: "He that hath yaws to yaw let him yaw,"
which is a remarkable, if not impressive, rendering of a Scripture
text. Who does not know the hallowed way of pronouncing-"Dearly
beloved brethren, the Scripture moveth us in divers places"? It rolls
in my ears now like Big Ben--coupled with boyish memories of
monotonous peals of "The Prince Albert, Albert Prince of Wales, and
all the Royal Family. . . . Amen." Now, if a man who talks so

unnaturally does not get bronchitis, or some other disease, I can only
say that throat diseases must be very sovereignly dispensed. At the
Nonconformist hobbies of utterance I have already struck a blow,
and I believe it is by them that larynx and lungs become delicate, and
good men succumb to silence and the grave. Should you desire my
authority for the threat which I have held out to you, I shall give you
the opinion of Mr. Macready, the eminent tragedian, who, since he
looks at the matter from an impartial but experimental standpoint, is
worthy of a respectful hearing. "Relaxed throat is usually caused, not
so much by exercising the organ, as by the kind of exercise; that is,
not so much by long or loud speaking, as by speaking in a feigned
voice. I am not sure that I shall be understood in this statement, but
there is not one person in, I may say, ten thousand, who in
addressing a body of people, does so in his natural voice; and this
habit is more especially observable in the pulpit. I believe that
relaxation of the throat results from violent efforts in these affected
tones, and that severe irritation, and often ulceration, is the
consequence. The labour of a whole day's duty in a church is nothing,
in point of labour, compared with the performance of one of
Shakespeare's leading characters, nor I should suppose, with any of
the very great displays made by our leading statesmen in the Houses
of Parliament; and I feel very certain that the disorder, which you
designate as 'Clergyman's sore throat,' is attributable generally to the
mode of speaking, and not to the length of time or violence of effort
that may be employed. I have known several of my former
contemporaries on the stage suffer from sore throat, but I do not
think, among those eminent in their art, that it could be regarded as
a prevalent disease." Actors and barristers have much occasion to
strain their vocal powers, and yet there is no such thing as a counsel's
sore throat, or a tragedian's bronchitis; simply because these men
dare not serve the public in so slovenly a manner as some preachers
serve their God. Samuel Fenwick, Esq., M.D., in a popular treatise
upon "Diseases of the Throat and Lungs," has most wisely said,
"From what was stated respecting the physiology of the vocal chords,
it will be evident that continued speaking in one tone is much more
fatiguing than frequent alterations in the pitch of the voice; because

by the former, one muscle or set or muscles alone is strained, whilst
by the latter, different muscles are brought into action, and thus
relieve one another. In the same way, a man raising his arm at right
angles to his body, becomes fatigued in five or ten minutes, because
only one set of muscles has to bear the weight; but these same
muscles can work the whole day if their action is alternated with that
of others. Whenever, therefore, we hear a clergyman droning
through the church service, and in the same manner and tone of
voice reading, praying, and exhorting, we may be perfectly sure that
he is giving ten times more labour to his vocal chords than is
absolutely necessary."
This may be the place to reiterate an opinion which I have often
expressed in this place, of which I am reminded by the author whom
I have quoted. If ministers would speak oftener, their throats and
lungs would be less liable to disease. Of this I am quite sure; it is
matter of personal experience and wide observation, and I am
confident that I am not mistaken. Gentlemen, twice a week
preaching is very dangerous, but I have found five or six times
healthy, and even twelve or fourteen not excessive. A costermonger
set to cry cauliflowers and potatoes one day in the week would find
the effort most laborious, but when he for six successive days fills
streets and lanes and alleys with his sonorous din, he finds no
dysphonia pomariorum, or "Costermonger's sore throat," laying him
aside from his humble toils. I was pleased to find my opinion, that
infrequent preaching is the root of many diseases, thus plainly
declared by Dr. Fenwick: "All the directions which have been here
laid down will, I believe, be ineffectual without regular daily practice
of the voice. Nothing seems to have such a tendency to produce this
disease as the occasional prolonged speaking, alternating with long
intervals of rest, to which clergymen are more particularly subject.
Anyone giving the subject a moment's consideration will readily
understand this. If a man, or any other animal, be intended for any
unusual muscular exertion, he is regularly exercised in it, day by day,
and labour is thus rendered easy which otherwise it would be almost
impossible to execute. But the generality of the clerical profession

undergo a great amount of muscular exertion in the way of speaking
only on one day of the week, whilst in the remaining six days they
scarcely ever raise their voice above the usual pitch. Were a smith or
a carpenter thus occasionally to undergo the fatigue connected with
the exercise of his trade, he would not only be quite unfitted for it,
but he would lose the skill he had acquired. The example of the most
celebrated orators the world has seen proves the advantages of
regular and constant practice of speaking; and I would on this
account most strongly recommend all persons subject to this
complaint to read aloud once or twice a day, using the same pitch of
voice as in the pulpit, and paying especial attention to the position of
the chest and throat, and to clear and proper articulation of the
words." Mr. Beecher is of the same opinion, for he remarks,
"Newsboys show what out-of-door practice will do for a man's lungs.
What would the pale and feeble-speaking minister do who can
scarcely make his voice reach two hundred auditors if he were set to
cry newspapers? Those New York newsboys stand at the head of a
street, and send down their voices through it, as an athlete would roll
a ball down an alley. We advise men training for speaking
professions to peddle wares in the streets for a little time. Young
ministers might go into partnership with newsboys awhile, till they
got their mouths open and their larynx nerved and toughened."
Gentlemen, a needful rule is--always suit your voice to your matter.
Do not be jubilant over a doleful subject, and on the other hand, do
not drag heavily where the tones ought to trip along merrily, as
though they were dancing to the tune of the angels in heaven. This
rule I shall not enlarge upon, but rest assured it is of the utmost
importance, and if obediently followed, will always secure attention,
provided your matter is worth it. Suit your voice to your matter
always, and, above all, in everything be natural. Away for ever with
slavish attention to rules and models. Do not imitate other people's
voices, or, if from an unconquerable propensity you must follow
them, emulate every orator's excellencies, and the evil will be
lessened. I am myself, by a kind of irresistible influence, drawn to be
an imitator, so that a journey to Scotland or Wales will for a week or

two materially affect my pronunciation and tone. Strive against it. I
do, but there it is, and the only cure I know of is to let the mischief
die a natural death. Gentlemen, I return to my rule--use your own
natural voices. Do not be monkeys, but men; not parrots, but men of
originality in all things. It is said that the most becoming way for a
man to wear his beard is that in which it grows, for both in colour
and form it will suit his face. Your own modes of speech will be most
in harmony with your methods of thought and your own personality.
The mimic is for the playhouse, the cultured man in his sanctified
personality is for the sanctuary. I would repeat this rule till I wearied
you if I thought you would forget it; be natural, be natural, be natural
evermore. An affectation of voice, or an imitation of the manner of
Dr. Silvertongue, the eminent divine, or even of a well-beloved tutor
or president will inevitably ruin you. I charge you throw away the
servility of imitation and rise to the manliness of originality.
We are bound to add--endeavour to educate your voice. Grudge no
pains or labour in achieving this, for as it has been well observed,
"However prodigious may be the gifts of nature to her elect, they can
only be developed and brought to their extreme perfection by labour
and study." Think of Michael Angelo working for a week without
taking off his clothes, and Handel hollowing out every key of his
harpsichord, like a spoon, by incessant practice. Gentlemen, after
this, never talk of difficulty or weariness. It is almost impossible to
see the utility of Dermosthenes' method of speaking with stones in
his mouth, but any one can perceive the usefulness of his pleading
with the boisterous billows, that he might know how to command a
hearing amidst the uproarious assemblies of his countrymen; and in
his speaking as he ran up hill that his lungs might gather force from
laborious use the reason is as obvious as the self-denial is
commendable. We are bound to use every possible means to perfect
the voice by which we are to tell forth the glorious gospel of the
blessed God. Take great care of the consonants, enunciate every one
of them clearly; they are the features and expression of the words.
Practise indefatigably till you give every one of the consonants its
due; the vowels have a voice of their own, and therefore they can

speak for themselves. In all other matters exercise a rigid discipline
until you have mastered your voice, and have it in hand like a welltrained steed. Gentlemen with narrow chests are advised to use the
dumb-bells every morning, or better still, those clubs which the
College has provided for you. You need broad chests, and must do
your best to get them. Do not speak with your hands in your
waistcoat pockets so as to contract your lungs, but throw the
shoulders back, as public singers do. Do not lean over a desk while
speaking, and never hold the head down on the breast while
preaching. Upward rather than downward let the body bend. Off
with all tight cravats and button-up waistcoats; leave room for the
full play of the bellows and the pipes. Observe the statues of the
Roman or Greek orators, look at Raphael's picture of Paul, and,
without affectation, fall naturally into the graceful and appropriate
attitudes there depicted, for these are best for the voice. Get a friend
to tell you your faults, or better still, welcome an enemy who will
watch you keenly and sting you savagely. What a blessing such an
irritating critic will be to a wise man, what an intolerable nuisance to
a fool! Correct yourself diligently and frequently, or you will fall into
errors unawares, false tones will grow, and slovenly habits will form
insensibly; therefore criticise yourself with unceasing care. Think
nothing little by which you may be even a little more useful. But,
gentlemen, never degenerate in this business into pulpit fops, who
think gesture and voice to be everything. I am sick at heart when I
hear of men taking a whole week to get up a sermon, much of the
getting up consisting in repeating their precious productions before a
glass! Alas! for this age, if graceless hearts are to be forgiven for the
sake of graceful manners. Give us all the vulgarities of the wildest
back-woods' itinerant rather than the perfumed prettinesses of
effeminate gentility. I would no more advise you to be fastidious with
your voices than I would recommend you to imitate Rowland Hill's
Mr. Taplash with his diamond ring, his richly-scented pocket
handkerchief, and his eyeglass. Exquisites are out of place in the
pulpit, they should be set up in a tailor's window, with a ticket, "This
style complete, including MSS., £10 l0s."

Perhaps here may be the place to observe that it were well if all
parents were more attentive to the teeth of their children, since
faulty teeth may cause serious damage to a speaker. There are men,
whose articulation is faulty, who should at once consult the dentist (I
mean, of course, a thoroughly scientific and experienced one); for a
few false teeth or some other simple arrangement would be a
permanent blessing to them. My own dentist very sensibly remarks
in his circular, "When a portion or the whole of the teeth are lost, a
contraction of the muscles of the face and throat follows, the other
organs of the voice which have been accustomed to the teeth are
impaired, and put out of their common play, producing a break,
languor, or depression, as in a musical instrument which is deficient
in a note. It is vain to expect perfect symphony, and proportional and
consistent accent on the key, tone, and pitch of the voice, with
deficiencies in its organs, and of course the articulation becomes
defective; such defect adds much to the labour of speaking, to say the
least, and in most cases lisping, a too hasty or sudden drop, or a faint
delivery, is the result; from more serious deficiencies a mumbling
and clattering is almost sure to follow." Where this is the mischief,
and the cure is within reach, we are bound for our works' sake to
avail ourselves of it. Teeth may seem unimportant, but be it
remembered, that nothing is little in so great a calling as ours. I shall
in succeeding remarks mention even smaller matters, but it is with
the deep impression that hints upon insignificant things may be of
unknown value in saving you from serious neglects or gross errors.
Lastly, I would say with regard to your throats--take care of them.
Take care always to clear them well when you are about to speak, but
do not be constantly clearing them while you are preaching. A very
esteemed brother of my acquaintance always talks in this way--"My
dear friends--hem--hem--this is a most--hem--important subject
which I have now--hem--hem--to bring before you, and--hem--hem-I have to call upon you to give me--hem--hem--your most serious-hem--attention." Avoid this most zealously. Others, from want of
clearing the throat, talk as if they were choked up, and were just
about to expectorate; it were far better to do so at once than to sicken

the hearer by repeated unpleasant sounds. Snuffling and sniffing are
excusable enough when a man has a cold, but they are extremely
unpleasant, and when they become habitual, they ought to be
indicted under the "Nuisances Act." Pray excuse me, it may appear
vulgar to mention such things, but your attention to the plain and
free observations made in this lecture room may save many remarks
at your expense hereafter.
When you have done preaching take care of your throat by never
wrapping it up tightly. From personal experience I venture with
some diffidence to give this piece of advice. If any of you possess
delightfully warm woollen comforters, with which there may be
associated the most tender remembrances of mother or sister,
treasure them--treasure them in the bottom of your trunk, but do not
expose them to any vulgar use by wrapping them round your necks.
If any brother wants to die of influenza let him wear a warm scarf
round his neck, and then one of these nights he will forget it, and
catch such a cold as will last him the rest of his natural life. You
seldom see a sailor wrap his neck up. No, he always keeps it bare and
exposed, and has a turn-down collar, and if he has a tie at all, it is but
a small one loosely tied, so that the wind can blow all round his neck.
In this philosophy I am a firm believer, having never deviated from it
for these fourteen years, and having before that time been frequently
troubled with colds, but very seldom since. If you feel that you want
something else, why, then grow your beards! A habit most natural,
scriptural, manly, and beneficial. One of our brethren, now present,
has for years found this of great service. He was compelled to leave
England on account of the loss of his voice, but he has become as
strong as Samson now that his locks are unshorn. If your throats
become affected consult a good physician, or if you cannot do this,
give what attention you please to the following hint. Never purchase
"Marsh-mallow Rock," "Cough-no-more Lozenges," "Pulmonic
Wafers," Horehound, Ipecacuanha, or any of the ten thousand
emollient compounds. They may serve your turn for a time by
removing present uneasiness, but they ruin the throat by their
laxative qualities. If you wish to improve your throat take a good

share of pepper--good Cayenne pepper, and other astringent
substances, as much as your stomach can bear. Do not go beyond
that, because you must recollect that you have to take care of your
stomach as well as your throat, and if the digesting apparatus be out
of order, nothing can be right. Common sense teaches you that
astringents must be useful. Did you ever hear of a tanner making a
piece of hide into leather by laying it to soak in sugar? Neither would
tolu, ipecacuanha, or treacle serve his purpose, but the very reverse;
if he wants to harden and strengthen the skin, he places it in a
solution of oak-bark, or some astringent substance which draws the
material together and strengthens it. When I began to preach at
Exeter Hall my voice was weak for such a place--as weak as the usual
run of voices, and it had frequently failed me altogether in street
preaching, but in Exeter Hall (which is an unusually difficult place to
preach in, from its excessive width in proportion to its length), I
always had a little glass of Chili vinegar and water just in front of me,
a draught of which appeared to give a fresh force to the throat
whenever it grew weary and the voice appeared likely to break down.
When my throat becomes a little relaxed I usually ask the cook to
prepare me a basin of beef-tea, as strong with pepper as can be
borne, and hitherto this has been a sovereign remedy. However, as I
am not qualified to practise in medicine, you will probably pay no
more attention to me in medical matters than to any other quack. My
belief is that half the difficulties connected with the voice in our early
days will vanish as we advance in years, and find in use a second
nature. I would encourage the truly earnest to persevere; if they feel
the Word of the Lord like fire in their bones, even stammering may
be overcome, and fear, with all its paralysing results, may be
banished. Take heart, young brother, persevere, and God, and
nature, and practice, will help you.
-----1"Take care of anything awkward or affected either in your gesture,
phrase, or pronunciation."--John Wesley.