PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 28
Sermons — Their Matter


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 5. Sermons — Their Matter.

LECTURE V
SERMONS--THEIR MATTER
SERMONS should have real teaching in them, and their doctrine
should be solid, substantial, and abundant. We do not enter the
pulpit to talk for talk's sake; we have instructions to convey
important to the last degree, and we cannot afford to utter pretty
nothings. Our range of subjects is all but boundless, and we cannot,
therefore, be excused if our discourses are threadbare and devoid of
substance. If we speak as ambassadors for God, we need never
complain of want of matter, for our message is full to overflowing.

The entire gospel must be presented from the pulpit; the whole faith
once delivered to the saints must be proclaimed by us. The truth as it
is in Jesus must be instructively declared, so that the people may not
merely hear, but know, the joyful sound. We serve not at the altar of
"the unknown God," but we speak to the worshippers of him of
whom it is written, "they that know thy name will put their trust in
thee." To divide a sermon well may be a very useful art, but how if
there is nothing to divide? A mere division maker is like an excellent
carver with an empty dish before him. To be able to deliver an
exordium which shall be appropriate and attractive, to be at ease in
speaking with propriety during the time allotted for the discourse,
and to wind up with a respectable peroration, may appear to mere
religious performers to be all that is requisite; but the true minister
of Christ knows that the true value of a sermon must lie, not in its
fashion and manner, but in the truth which it contains. Nothing can
compensate for the absence of teaching; all the rhetoric in the world
is but as chaff to the wheat in contrast to the gospel of our salvation.
However beautiful the sower's basket it is a miserable mockery if it
be without seed. The grandest discourse ever delivered is an
ostentatious failure if the doctrine of the grace of God be absent from
it; it sweeps over men's heads like a cloud, but it distributes no rain
upon the thirsty earth; and therefore the remembrance of it to souls
taught wisdom by an experience of pressing need is one of
disappointment, or worse. A man's style may be as fascinating as that
of the authoress of whom one said, "that she should write with a
crystal pen dipped in dew upon silver paper, and use for pounce the
dust of a butterfly's wing"; but to an audience whose souls are in
instant jeopardy, what will mere elegance be but "altogether lighter
than vanity"?
Horses are not to be judged by their bells or their trappings, but by
limb and bone and blood; and sermons, when criticised by judicious
hearers, are largely measured by the amount of gospel truth and
force of gospel spirit which they contain. Brethren, weigh your
sermons. Do not retail them by the yard, but deal them out by the
pound. Set no store by the quantity of words which you utter, but

strive to be esteemed for the quality of your matter. It is foolish to be
lavish in words and niggardly in truth. He must be very destitute of
wit who would be pleased to hear himself described after the manner
of the world's great poet, who says, "Gratiano speaks an infinite deal
of nothing, more than any man in all Venice: his reasons are as two
grains of wheat hidden in two bushels of chaff; you shall seek all day
ere you find them; and when you have them they are not worth the
search."
Rousing appeals to the affections are excellent, but if they are not
backed up by instruction they are a mere flash in the pan, powder
consumed and no shot sent home. Rest assured that the most fervid
revivalism will wear itself out in mere smoke, if it be not maintained
by the fuel of teaching. The divine method is to put the law in the
mind, and then write it on the heart; the judgment is enlightened,
and then the passions subdued. Read Hebrews viii. 10, and follow the
model of the covenant of grace. Gouge's note on that place may with
fitness be quoted here:-- "Ministers are herein to imitate God, and, to
their best endeavour, to instruct people in the mysteries of godliness,
and to teach them what to believe and practise, and then to stir them
up in act and deed, to do what they are instructed to do. Their labour
otherwise is like to be in vain. Neglect of this course is a main cause
that men fall into many errors as they do in these days." I may add
that this last remark has gained more force in our times; it is among
uninstructed flocks that the wolves of popery make havoc; sound
teaching is the best protection from the heresies which ravage right
and left among us.
Sound information upon scriptural subjects your hearers crave for,
and must have. Accurate explanations of Holy Scripture they are
entitled to, and if you are "an interpreter, one of a thousand," a real
messenger of heaven, you will yield them plenteously. Whatever else
may be present, the absence of edifying, instructive truth, like the
absence of flour from bread, will be fatal. Estimated by their solid
contents rather than their superficial area, many sermons are very
poor specimens of godly discourse. I believe the remark is too well

grounded that if you attend to a lecturer on astronomy or geology,
during a short course you will obtain a tolerably clear view of his
system; but if you listen, not only for twelve months, but for twelve
years, to the common run of preachers, you will not arrive at
anything like an idea of their system of theology. If it be so, it is a
grievous fault, which cannot be too much deplored. Alas! the
indistinct utterances of many concerning the grandest of eternal
realities, and the dimness of thought in others with regard to
fundamental truths, have given too much occasion for the criticism!
Brethren, if you are not theologians you are in your pastorates just
nothing at all. You may be fine rhetoricians, and be rich in polished
sentences; but without knowledge of the gospel, and aptness to teach
it, you are but a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. Verbiage is
too often the fig-leaf which does duty as a covering for theological
ignorance. Sounding periods are offered instead of sound doctrine,
and rhetorical flourishes in the place of robust thought. Such things
ought not to be. The abounding of empty declamation, and the
absence of food for the soul, will turn a pulpit into a box of bombast,
and inspire contempt instead of reverence. Unless we are instructive
preachers, and really feed the people, we may be great quoters of
elegant poetry, and mighty retailers of second-hand windbags, but
we shall be like Nero of old, fiddling while Rome was burning, and
sending vessels to Alexandria to fetch sand for the arena while the
populace starved for want of corn.
We insist upon it, that there must be abundance of matter in
sermons, and next, that this matter must be congruous to the text.
The discourse should spring out of the text as a rule, and the more
evidently it does so the better; but at all times, to say the least, it
should have a very close relationship thereto. In the matter of
spiritualising and accommodation very large latitude is to be
allowed; but liberty must not degenerate into license, and there must
always be a connection, and something more than a remote
connection--a real relationship between the sermon and its text. I
heard the other day of a remarkable text, which was appropriate or
inappropriate, as you may think. A squire of a parish had given away

a number of flaming scarlet cloaks to the oldest matrons of the
parish. These resplendent beings were required to attend the parish
church on the following Sunday, and to sit in front of the pulpit, from
which one of the avowed successors of the apostles edified the saints
from the words, "Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of
these." It is reported that on a subsequent occasion, when the same
benefactor of the parish had given a bushel of potatoes to every man
who had a family, the topic on the following Sunday was, "And they
said, It is manna." I cannot tell whether the matter in that case was
congruous to the selection of the text; I suppose it may have been, for
the probabilities are that the whole performance was foolish
throughout. Some brethren have done with their text as soon as they
have read it. Having paid all due honour to that particular passage by
announcing it, they feel no necessity further to refer to it. They touch
their hats, as it were, to that part of Scripture, and pass on to fresh
fields and pastures new. Why do such men take a text at all? Why
limit their own glorious liberty? Why make Scripture a horsing-block
by which to mount upon their unbridled Pegasus? Surely the words
of inspiration were never meant to be boothooks to help a Talkative
to draw on his seven-leagued boots in which to leap from pole to
pole.
The surest way to maintain variety is to keep to the mind of the Holy
Spirit in the particular passage under consideration. No two texts are
exactly similar; something in the connection or drift of the passage
gives to each apparently identical text a shade of difference. Keep to
the Spirit's track and you will never repeat yourself or be short of
matter: his paths drop fatness. A sermon, moreover, comes with far
greater power to the consciences of the hearers when it is plainly the
very word of God--not a lecture about the Scripture, but Scripture
itself opened up and enforced. It is due to the majesty of inspiration
that when you profess to be preaching from a verse you do not thrust
it out of sight to make room for your own thinkings.
Brethren, if you are in the habit of keeping to the precise sense of the
Scripture before you, I will further recommend you to hold to the

ipsissima verba, the very words of the Holy Ghost; for, although in
many cases topical sermons are not only allowable, but very proper,
those sermons which expound the exact words of the Holy Spirit are
the most useful and the most agreeable to the major part of our
congregations. They love to have the words themselves explained
and expounded. The many are not always sufficiently capable of
grasping the sense apart from the language--of gazing, so to speak,
upon the truth disembodied; but when they hear the precise words
reiterated again and again, and each expression dwelt upon after the
manner of such preachers as Mr. Jay, of Bath, they are more edified,
and the truth fixes itself more firmly upon their memories. Let your
matter, then, be copious, and let it grow out of the inspired word, as
violets and primroses spring up naturally from the sod, or as the
virgin honey drops from the comb.
Take care that your deliverances are always weighty, and full of
really important teaching. Build not with wood, hay, and stubble,
but with gold, silver, and precious stones. It is scarcely needful to
warn you against the grosser degradations of pulpit eloquence, or the
example of the notorious orator Henley might be instanced. That
loquacious adventurer, whom Pope has immortalized in his
"Dunciad," was wont to make the passing events of the week the
themes of his buffoonery on week days, and theological topics
suffered the same fate on Sundays. His forte lay in his low wit and in
tuning his voice and balancing his hands. The satirist says of him,
"How fluent nonsense trickles from his tongue." Gentlemen, it were
better never to have been born, than to have the like truthfully said of
us; we are on peril of our souls bound to deal with the solemnities of
eternity and with no earth-born topics. There are, however, other
and more inviting methods of wood and hay-building, and it behoves
you not to be duped by them. This remark is necessary, especially to
those gentlemen who mistake high flying sentences for eloquence,
and latinized utterances for great depth of thought. Certain
homiletical instructors, by their example, if not by their precepts,
encourage rhodomontade and great swelling words, and, therefore,
are most perilous to young preachers. Think of a discourse

commencing with such an amazing and stupendous assertion as the
following, which by its native grandeur will strike you at once with a
sense of the sublime and beautiful: "MAN IS MORAL." This genius
might have added, "A cat has four feet." There would have been as
much novelty in the one information as the other. I remember a
sermon by a would-be profound writer which quite stunned the
reader with grenadier words of six-feet length, but which, when
properly boiled down, came to as much essence of meat as this--Man
has a soul, his soul will live in another world, and therefore he should
take care that it occupies a happy place. No one can object to the
teaching, but it is not so novel as to need a blast of trumpets and a
procession of bedizened phrases to introduce it to public attention.
The art of saying commonplace things elegantly, pompously,
grandiloquently, bombastically, is not lost among us, although its
utter extinction were "a consummation devoutly to be wished."
Sermons of this sort have been held up as models, and yet they are
mere bits of bladder which would lie on your finger-nail, blown out
until they remind you of those coloured balloons which itinerant
dealers carry about the streets to sell at a halfpenny a-piece for the
delectation of the extremely juvenile; the parallel, I am sorry to say,
holding good a little further, for in some cases these discourses
contain just a tinge of poison by way of colouring, which some of the
weaker sort have found out to their cost. It is infamous to ascend
your pulpit and pour over your people rivers of language, cataracts of
words, in which mere platitudes are held in solution like
infinitesimal grains of homoeopathic medicine in an Atlantic of
utterance. Better far give the people masses of unprepared truth in
the rongh, like pieces of meat from a butcher's block, chopped off
anyhow, bone and all, and even dropped down in the sawdust, than
ostentatiously and delicately hand them out upon a china dish a
delicious slice of nothing at all, decorated with the parsley of poetry,
and flavoured with the sauce of affectation.
It will be a happy circumstance if you are so guided by the Holy Spirit
as to give a clear testimony to all the doctrines which constitute or
lie around the gospel. No truth is to be kept back. The doctrine of

reserve, so detestable in the mouths of Jesuits, is not one whit the
less villainous when accepted by Protestants. It is not true that some
doctrines are only for the initiated; there is nothing in the Bible
which is ashamed of the light. The sublimest views of divine
sovereignty have a practical bearing, and are not, as some think,
mere metaphysical subtleties; the distinctive utterances of Calvinism
have their bearing upon every-day life and ordinary experience, and
if you hold such views, or the opposite, you have no dispensation
permitting you to conceal your beliefs. Cautious reticence is, in nine
cases out of ten, cowardly betrayal. The best policy is never to be
politic, but to proclaim every atom of the truth so far as God has
taught it to you. Harmony requires that the voice of one doctrine
shall not drown the rest, and it also demands that the gentler notes
shall not be omitted because of the greater volume of other sounds.
Every note appointed by the great minstrel must be sounded; each
note having its own proportionate power and emphasis, the passage
marked with forte must not be softened, and those with piano must
not be rolled out like thunder, but each must have its due hearing. All
revealed truth in harmonious proportion must be your theme.
Brethren, if you resolve in your pulpit utterances to deal with
important verities, you must not for ever hover around the mere
angles of truth. Those doctrines which are not vital to the soul's
salvation, nor even essential to practical Christianity, are not to be
considered upon every occasion of worship. Bring in all the features
of truth in due proportion, for every part of Scripture is profitable,
and you are not only to preach the truth, but the whole truth. Do not
insist perpetually upon one truth alone. A nose is an important
feature in the human countenance, but to paint a man's nose alone is
not a satisfactory method of taking his likeness: a doctrine may be
very important, but an exaggerated estimate of it may be fatal to an
harmonious and complete ministry. Do not make minor doctrines
main points. Do not paint the details of the background of the gospel
picture with the same heavy brush as the great objects in the
foreground of it. For instance, the great problems of sublapsarianism
and supralapsarianism, the trenchant debates concerning eternal

filiation, the earnest dispute concerning the double procession, and
the pre or post millenarian schemes, however important some may
deem them, are practically of very little concern to that godly widow
woman, with seven children to support by her needle, who wants far
more to hear of the loving-kindness of the God of providence than of
these mysteries profound; if you preach to her on the faithfulness of
God to his people, she will be cheered and helped in the battle of life;
but difficult questions will perplex her or send her to sleep. She is,
however, the type of hundreds of those who most require your care.
Our great master theme is the good news from heaven; the tidings of
mercy through the atoning death of Jesus, mercy to the chief of
sinners upon their believing in Jesus.
We must throw all our strength of judgment, memory, imagination,
and eloquence into the delivery of the gospel; and not give to the
preaching of the cross our random thoughts while wayside topics
engross our deeper meditations. Depend upon it, if we brought the
intellect of a Locke or a Newton, and the eloquence of a Cicero, to
bear upon the simple doctrine of "believe and live," we should find
no surplus strength. Brethren, first and above all things, keep to
plain evangelical doctrines; whatever else you do or do not preach, be
sure incessantly to bring forth the soul-saving truth of Christ and
him crucified. I know a minister whose shoe-latchet I am unworthy
to unloose, whose preaching is often little better than sacred
miniature painting--I might almost say holy trifling. He is great upon
the ten toes of the beast, the four faces of the cherubim, the mystical
meaning of badgers' skins, and the typical bearings of the staves of
the ark, and the windows of Solomon's temple: but the sins of
business men, the temptations of the times, and the needs of the age,
he scarcely ever touches upon. Such preaching reminds me of a lion
engaged in mouse-hunting, or a man-of-war cruising after a lost
water-butt. Topics scarcely in importance equal to what Peter calls
"old wives' fables," are made great matters of by those microscopic
divines to whom the nicety of a point is more attractive than the
saving of souls. You will have read in Todd's "Student,'s Manual" that
Harcatius, king of Persia, was a notable mole-catcher; and Briantes,

king of Lydia, was equally au fait at filing needles; but these
trivialities by no means prove them to have been great kings: it is
much the same in the ministry, there is such a thing as meanness of
mental occupation unbecoming the rank of an ambassador of
heaven.
Among a certain order of minds at this time the Athenian desire of
telling or hearing some new thing appears to be predominant. They
boast of new light, and claim a species of inspiration which warrants
them in condemning all who are out of their brotherhood, and yet
their grand revelation relates to a mere circumstantial of worship, or
to an obscure interpretation of prophecy; so that, at sight of their
great fuss and loud cry concerning so little, we are reminded of
"Ocean into tempest toss'd
To waft a feather or to drown a fly."
Worse still are those who waste time in insinuating doubts
concerning the authenticity of texts, or the correctness of Biblical
statements concerning natural phenomena. Painfully do I call to
mind hearing one Sabbath evening a deliverance called a sermon, of
which the theme was a clever enquiry as to whether an angel did
actually descend, and stir the pool at Bethesda, or whether it was an
intermitting spring, concerning which Jewish superstition had
invented a legend. Dying men and women were assembled to hear
the way of salvation, and they were put off with such vanity as this!
They came for bread, and received a stone; the sheep looked up to
the shepherd, and were not fed. Seldom do I hear a sermon, and
when I do I am grievously unfortunate, for one of the last I was
entertained with was intended to be a justification of Joshua for
destroying the Canaanites, and another went to prove that it was not
good for man to be alone. How many souls were converted in answer
to the prayers before these sermons I have never been able to
ascertain, but I shrewdly suspect that no unusual rejoicing disturbed
the serenity of the golden streets.

Believing my next remark to be almost universally unneeded, I bring
it forward with diffidence--do not overload a sermon with too much
matter. All truth is not to be comprised in one discourse. Sermons
are not to be bodies of divinity. There is such a thing as having too
much to say, and saying it till hearers are sent home loathing rather
than longing. An old minister walking with a young preacher,
pointed to a cornfield, and observed, "Your last sermon had too
much in it, and it was not clear enough, or sufficiently well-arranged;
it was like that field of wheat, it contained much crude food, but none
fit for use. You should make your sermons like a loaf of bread, fit for
eating, and in convenient form." It is to be feared that human heads
(speaking phrenologically) are not so capacious for theology as they
once were, for our forefathers rejoiced in sixteen ounces of divinity,
undiluted and unadorned, and could continue receiving it for three
or four hours at a stretch, but our more degenerate, or perhaps more
busy, generation requires about an ounce of doctrine at a time, and
that must be the concentrated extract or essential oil, rather than the
entire substance of divinity. We must in these times say a great deal
in a few words, but not too much, nor with too much amplification.
One thought fixed on the mind will be better than fifty thoughts
made to flit across the ear. One tenpenny nail driven home and
clenched will be more useful than a score of tin-tacks loosely fixed, to
be pulled out again in an hour.
Our matter should be well arranged according to the true rules of
mental architecture. Not practical inferences at the basis and
doctrines as the topstones; not metaphors in the foundations, and
propositions at the summit; not the more important truths first and
the minor teachings last, after the manner of an anticlimax; but the
thought must climb and ascend; one stair of teaching leading to
another; one door of reasoning conducting to another, and the whole
elevating the hearer to a chamber from whose windows truth is seen
gleaming in the light of God. In preaching, have a place for
everything, and everything in its place. Never suffer truths to fall
from you pell-mell. Do not let your thoughts rush as a mob, but make

them march as a troop of soldiery. Order, which is heaven's first law,
must not be neglected by heaven's ambassadors.
Your doctrinal teaching should be clear and unmistakable. To be so
it must first of all be clear to yourself. Some men think in smoke and
preach in a cloud. Your people do not want a luminous haze, but the
solid terra firma of truth. Philosophical speculations put certain
minds into a semi-intoxicated condition, in which they either see
everything double, or see nothing at all. The head of a certain college
in Oxford was years ago asked by a stranger what was the motto of
the arms of that university. He told him that it was "Dominus
illuminatio mea." But he also candidly informed the stranger that, in
his private opinion, a motto more appropriate might be, "Aristoteles
meæ tenebræ." Sensational writers have half crazed many honest
men who have conscientiously read their lucubrations out of a notion
that they ought to be abreast of the age, as if such a necessity might
not also require us to attend the theatres in order to be able to judge
the new plays, or frequent the turf that we might not be too bigoted
in our opinions upon racing and gambling. For my part, I believe that
the chief readers of heterodox books are ministers, and that if they
would not notice them they would fall still-born from the press. Let a
minister keep clear of mystifying himself, and then he is on the road
to becoming intelligible to his people. No man can hope to be felt
who cannot make himself understood. If we give our people refined
truth, pure Scriptural doctrine, and all so worded as to have no
needless obscurity about it, we shall be true shepherds of the sheep,
and the profiting of our people will soon be apparent.
Endeavour to keep the matter of your sermonising as fresh as you
can. Do not rehearse five or six doctrines with unvarying monotony
of repetition. Buy a theological barrel-organ, brethren with five tunes
accurately adjusted, and you will be qualified to practise as an ultraCalvinistic preacher at Zoar and Jireh if you also purchase at some
vinegar factory a good supply of bitter, acrid abuse of Arminians, and
duty-faith men. Brains and grace are optional, but the organ and the
wormwood are indispensable. It is ours to perceive and rejoice in a

wider range of truth. All that these good men hold of grace and
sovereignty we maintain as firmly and boldly as they; but we dare not
shut our eyes to other teachings of the word, and we feel bound to
make full proof of our ministry, by declaring the whole counsel of
God. With abundant themes diligently illustrated by fresh metaphors
and experiences, we shall not weary, but, under God's hand, shall
win our hearers' ears and hearts.
Let your teachings grow and advance; let them deepen with your
experience, and rise with your soul-progress. I do not mean preach
new truths; for, on the contrary, I hold that man happy who is so well
taught from the first that, after fifty years of ministry, he has never
had to recant a doctrine or to mourn an important omission; but I
mean, let our depth and insight continually increase, and where
there is spiritual advance it will be so. Timothy could not preach like
Paul. Our earlier productions must be surpassed by those of our riper
years; we must never make these our models; they will be best
burned, or only preserved to be mourned over because of their
superficial character. It were ill, indeed, if we knew no more after
being many years in Christ's school; our progress may be slow, but
progress there must be, or there will be cause to suspect that the
inner life is lacking or sadly unhealthy. Set it before you as most
certain that you have not yet attained, and may grace be given you to
press forward towards that which is yet beyond. May you all become
able ministers of the New Testament, and not a whit behind the very
chief of preachers, though in yourselves you will still be nothing.
The word "sermon" is said to signify a thrust, and, therefore, in
sermonising it must be our aim to use the subject in hand with
energy and effect, and the subject must be capable of such
employment. To choose mere moral themes will be to use a wooden
dagger; but the great truths of revelation are as sharp swords. Keep
to doctrines which stir the conscience and the heart. Remain
unwaveringly the champions of a soul-winning gospel. God's truth is
adapted to man, and God's grace adapts man to it. There is a key
which, under God, can wind up the musical box of man's nature; get

it, and use it daily. Hence I urge you to keep to the old-fashioned
gospel, and to that only, for assuredly it is the power of God unto
salvation.
Of all I would wish to say this is the sum; my brethren, preach
CHRIST, always and evermore. He is the whole gospel. His person,
offices, and work must be our one great, all-comprehending theme.
The world needs still to be told of its Saviour, and of the way to reach
him. Justification by faith should be far more than it is the daily
testimony of Protestant pulpits; and if with this master-truth there
should be more generally associated the other great doctrines of
grace, the better for our churches and our age. If with the zeal of
Methodists we can preach the doctrine of Puritans a great future is
before us. The fire of Wesley, and the fuel of Whitfield, will cause a
burning which shall set the forests of error on fire, and warm the
very soul of this cold earth. We are not called to proclaim philosophy
and metaphysics, but the simple gospel. Man's fall, his need of a new
birth, forgiveness through an atonement, and salvation as the result
of faith, these are our battle-axe and weapons of war. We have
enough to do to learn and teach these great truths, and accursed be
that learning which shall divert us from our mission, or that wilful
ignorance which shall cripple us in its pursuit. More and more am I
jealous lest any views upon prophecy, church government, politics,
or even systematic theology, should withdraw one of us from
glorying in the cross of Christ. Salvation is a theme for which I would
fain enlist every holy tongue. I am greedy after witnesses for the
glorious gospel of the blessed God. O that Christ crucified were the
universal burden of men of God. Your guess at the number of the
beast, your Napoleonic speculations, your conjectures concerning a
personal Antichrist--forgive me, I count them but mere bones for
dogs; while men are dying, and hell is filling, it seems to me the
veriest drivel to be muttering about an Armageddon at Sebastopol or
Sadowa or Sedan, and peeping between the folded leaves of destiny
to discover the fate of Germany. Blessed are they who read and hear
the words of the prophecy of the Revelation, but the like blessing has
evidently not fallen on those who pretend to expound it, for

generation after generation of them have been proved to be in error
by the mere lapse of time, and the present race will follow to the
same inglorious sepulchre. I would sooner pluck one single brand
from the burning than explain all mysteries. To win a soul from
going down into the pit is a more glorious achievement than to be
crowned in the arena of theological controversy as Doctor
Sufficientissimus; to have faithfully unveiled the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ will be in the final judgment accounted worthier
service than to have solved the problems of the religious Sphinx, or
to have cut the Gordian knot of apocalyptic difficulty. Blessed is that
ministry of which CHRIST IS ALL.
