PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 14 The Continuous Activity of Indwelling Sin

Chapter 2

CONTINUOUS ACTIVITY OF INDWELLING SIN 1. The First Principle for Mortification: It Must Be Continuous Having laid this foundation, a brief confirmation of the fore-mentioned principal deductions will lead me to what I chiefly intend: Principle I: The choicest believers, who are assuredly freed from the condemning power of sin, ought yet to make it their business all their days to mortify the indwelling power of sin.

The apostle says, “Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth” (Col 3:5). To whom is he speaking? Such as were “risen with Christ” (3:1); such as were “dead” with Him (v. 3); such as have Christ as their “life,” and shall “appear with him in glory” (v. 4). Mortify! Make it your daily work. Be always at it while you live; cease not a day from this work. Be killing sin or it will be killing you! Your being dead with Christ by identification and your being quickened with Him will not excuse you from this work (Rom 6:3-4). Our Savior tells us how His Father deals with every branch in Him that bears fruit, every true and living branch: “He purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit” (Joh 15:2). He prunes it, and that not for a day or two, but all the while it is a branch in this world. And the apostle tells you what was his practice: “I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection” (1Co 9:27). “I do it,” he says, “daily. It is the work of my life. I omit it not. This is my business.” And if this was the work and business of Paul—who was so incomparably exalted in grace, revelations, enjoyments, privileges, consolations, above the ordinary measure of believers—how may we possibly defend an exemption from this work and duty while we are in this world? Mortification must continue throughout the believer’s life on earth. Some brief account of the reasons that this is so may be given.

2. Reasons Mortification Must Be Continuous a. Indwelling sin always abides Indwelling sin always abides while we are in this world; therefore it is always to be mortified. I meddle not now with the vain, foolish, and ignorant disputes of men about perfectly keeping the commands of God, about perfection in this life, about being wholly and perfectly dead to sin. It is more than probable that the men who hold those abominations never knew what belonged to the keeping of any of God’s commands, and are so much below perfection of

8

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

degrees, that they never attained to a perfection of parts in obedience or universal obedience in sincerity. Therefore many in our day who have talked of perfection have been wiser and have affirmed it to consist in knowing no difference between good and evil—not that they are perfect in the things we call good but that all is alike to them. The height of wickedness is their perfection. Others have found out a new way to perfection by denying original, indwelling sin, and modifying the spirituality of the Law of God to men’s carnal hearts. They have sufficiently shown themselves to be ignorant of the life of Christ and the power of it in believers, so they have invented a new righteousness that the gospel knows not of, being vainly puffed up by their fleshly minds. For us—who dare not be wise above what is written, nor boast by other men’s lives of what God has not done for us—we say that indwelling sin lives in us in some measure and degree while we are in this world. We dare not speak as though we “had already attained, either were already perfect” (Phi 3:12). Our “inward man is [to be] renewed day by day” while we live on this earth (2Co 4:16). According to the renovations of the new are the breaches and decays of the old. While we are here, we “know [but] in part” (1Co 13:12), having a remaining darkness to be gradually removed by our growth “in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ” (2Pe 3:18). “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit…so that ye cannot do the things that ye would” (Gal 5:17). And we are therefore defective in our obedience as well as in our light (1Jo 1:8). We have a “body of…death” (Rom 7:24), from which we are not delivered but by the death of our bodies (Phi 3:21). Now, it being our duty to mortify, to be killing of sin while it is in us, we must be at work. He that is appointed to kill an enemy, if he leave striking before the other ceases living, does but half his work (Gal 6:9; Heb 12:1; 2Co 7:1).

b. Activity of indwelling sin Sin does not only still abide in us, but is still acting, still laboring, to bring forth the deeds of the flesh. When sin lets us alone we may let sin alone; but as sin is never less quiet than when it seems to be most quiet, and its waters are for the most part deep when they are still, so ought our efforts against it to be vigorous at all times and in all conditions, even where there is least suspicion of it. Sin does not only abide in us, but the “law in my members [is still] warring against the law of my mind” (Rom 7:23); and “the spirit that dwelleth in us lusteth to envy” (Jam 4:5). It is always in continual work: “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit” (Gal 5:17); lust is still tempting and conceiving sin (Jam 1:14). In every moral action sin is always either inclining to evil, hindering from that which is good, or discomposing the spirit from communion with God. It inclines to evil: “The evil which I would not, that I do,” says the apostle (Rom 7:19). From what source is that? Why, because “in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth no good thing” (7:18). And it hinders from good: “The good that I would [do, that] I do not” (7:19)—that is, upon the same account, either I do it not, or not as I should, all my holy things being defiled by this sin. “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit… so that ye cannot do the things that ye would” (Gal 5:17). And it discomposes our spirit, and thence is called “the sin which doth so easily beset us” (Heb 12:1)—on which account are those grievous complaints that the apostle makes of it (Rom 7). So sin is always acting, always conceiving, always seducing and tempting.

2. Continuous Activity of Indwelling Sin

9

Who can say that he ever had anything to do with God or for God, in which indwelling sin had not a hand in the corrupting of what he did? And sin will continue this practice more or less all our days. If, then, sin will be always acting, and we will not always be mortifying, we are lost creatures. He that stands still and suffers his enemies to double blows upon him without resistance will undoubtedly be conquered in the end. If sin be subtle, watchful, strong, and always at work in the business of killing our souls, and we be slothful, negligent, and foolish in proceeding to the ruin thereof, can we expect a comfortable outcome? There is not a day but sin foils or is foiled, prevails or is prevailed on; and it will be so while we live in this world. I shall discharge him from this duty who can bring sin to a cessation of arms in this warfare. If it will spare him any one day, in any one duty (provided he be a person that is acquainted with the spirituality of obedience and the subtlety of sin), then let him say to his soul regarding this duty: “Soul, take your rest.” The saints, whose souls desire deliverance from its perplexing rebellion, know there is no safety against it but in a constant warfare.

c. Results of sin Sin will not only be striving, acting, rebelling, troubling, disquieting, but if let alone, if not continually mortified, it will bring forth great, cursed, scandalous, soul-destroying sins. The apostle tells us what the works and fruits of it are: “Now the works of the flesh are manifest, 16 which are these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, Envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like” (Gal 5:19-21). You know what it did in David and many others. Sin aims always at the utmost: every time it rises up to tempt or entice, if it might have its own course, it would go out to the utmost sin in that kind. Every unclean thought or glance would be adultery if it could; every covetous desire would be oppression; every thought of unbelief would be atheism, if sin could fully develop. Men may come to the point that sin may not be heard speaking a scandalous word in their hearts—that is, provoking to any great sin with scandal in its mouth—but yet every rise of lust, if it could have its course, would come to the height of villainy. It is like the grave that is never satisfied (Pro 30:15-16). And herein lies no small share of the deceitfulness of sin by which it prevails to the hardening of men, and so to their ruin (Heb 3:13). It is modest, as it were, in its first motions and proposals; but having once got footing in the heart by them it constantly makes good its ground and presses on to some further advances in the same kind. This new acting and pressing forward makes the soul take little notice of what an entrance to a falling off from God is already made. It thinks all is indifferently well if there be no further progress. Now, so far as the soul is made insensible of any sin—that is, as to such a sense as the gospel requires—so far it is hardened. But sin is still pressing forward, and that because it has no bounds but that it proceeds to its ultimate goal: the utter abandonment of God and opposition to Him. That it proceeds towards its height by degrees, making good the ground it has got by hardening the heart, is not from its nature but its deceitfulness. Now, nothing can prevent this but mortification, which withers the root and strikes at the head of sin every hour, so that sin is crossed in whatever it aims at. There is not the best saint in the world but if he should give over this duty would fall into as many cursed sins as ever any did of his kind. 16

lasciviousness – moral looseness; inclined to lust or sexual desires.

10

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

d. The Spirit given to contend against sin This is one main reason why the Spirit and the new nature are given to us: so that we may have a principle within by which to oppose sin and lust. “The flesh lusteth against the Spirit.” Well, and what then? Why, “The Spirit [also lusteth] against the flesh” (Gal 5:17). There is a propensity in the Spirit and the spiritual new nature to be acting against the flesh, as well as in the flesh to be acting against the Spirit. It is our participation of the divine nature that gives us an escape from the pollutions that are in the world through lust (2Pe 1:4-5). There is a law of the mind as well as a law of the members (Rom 7:23). Now, first, this is the most unjust and unreasonable thing in the world: when two combatants are engaged, to bind one and keep him from doing his utmost, and to leave the other at liberty to wound him at his pleasure. Secondly, this is the most foolish thing in the world: to bind Him Who fights for our eternal condition, and to let him alone who seeks and violently attempts our everlasting ruin. The contest is for our lives and souls. Not to be daily employing the Spirit and new nature for the mortifying of sin is to neglect that excellent assistance which God has given us against our greatest enemy. If we neglect to make use of what we have received God may justly hold His hand from giving us more. His graces as well as His gifts are bestowed on us to use, exercise, and trade with. Not to be daily mortifying sin is to sin against the goodness, kindness, wisdom, grace, and love of God, Who has furnished us with a principle for doing it.

e. Negligence of mortification Negligence in this duty casts the soul into a perfectly contrary condition to that which the apostle affirms was his: “Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day” (2Co 4:16). In such negligence, the inward man perishes and the outward man is renewed day by day. Sin becomes as the house of David, and grace as the house of Saul. Exercise and success are the two main cherishers of grace in the heart. When suffered to lie still it withers and decays. The things of it are ready to die (Rev 3:2), and sin gets ground towards the hardening of the heart (Heb 3:13). This is what I intend: by the omission of this duty grace withers, lust flourishes, and the frame of the heart grows worse and worse. And the Lord knows what desperate and fearful results it has had with many. Where sin gets a considerable victory through the neglect of mortification, it breaks the bones of the soul (Psa 31:10; 51:8) and makes a man weak, sick, and ready to die (Psa 38:3-5) so that he cannot look up (Psa 40:12; Isa 33:24). When poor creatures will take blow after blow, wound after wound, foil 17 after foil, and never rouse up themselves to a vigorous opposition, can they expect anything but to be “hardened through the deceitfulness of sin” (Heb 3:13) and that their souls should bleed to death (2Jo 1:8)? Indeed, it is a sad thing to consider the fearful results of this neglect that lie under our eyes every day. See we not those whom we knew—humble, melting, broken-hearted Christians; tender and fearful to offend; zealous for God and all His ways, His Sabbaths and ordinances— grown, through a neglect of watching unto this duty earthly, carnal, cold, wrathful, complying with the men of the world and things of the world, to the scandal of religion and the fearful temptation of them that know them? The truth is that, between placing mortification in a rig17

foil – defeat.

2. Continuous Activity of Indwelling Sin

11

id, stubborn frame of spirit—which is for the most part earthly, legal, censorious, partial, consistent with wrath, envy, malice, and pride—on the one hand, and pretenses of liberty, grace, and I know not what on the other, true evangelical mortification is almost lost amongst us, of which we will say more later.

f. The first principle of mortification It is our duty to be “perfecting holiness in the fear of God” (2Co 7:1), to be growing in grace every day (1Pe 2:2; 2Pe 3:18), to be renewing our “inward man…day by day” (2Co 4:16). Now, this cannot be done without the daily mortifying of sin. Sin sets its strength against every act of holiness and against every degree we grow to. Let not that man think he makes any progress in holiness who walks not over the bellies 18 of his lusts. He who does not kill sin in this way takes no steps toward his journey’s end. He who finds not opposition from sin—and who sets not himself in every particular to its mortification—is at peace with sin, not dying to it. This then is the first general principle of our ensuing discourse: Notwithstanding the meritorious mortification (if I may so speak) of all and every sin in the cross of Christ; 19 notwithstanding the real foundation of universal mortification laid in our first conversion, by conviction of sin, humiliation for sin, and the implantation of a new principle opposite to it and destructive of it—yet sin does so remain, so act, and work in the best of believers while they live in this world, that the constant daily mortification of it is all their days required of them.

3. The Sad Absence of Mortification Before I proceed to the consideration of the next principle, I cannot but by the way com20 plain of many professors of these days who, instead of bringing forth such great and evident fruits of mortification as are expected, scarce bear any leaves of it. There is, indeed, a broad light fallen upon the men of this generation, and with it many spiritual gifts communicated, which, with some other considerations, have incredibly enlarged the number of professors and 21 profession; both are exceedingly multiplied and increased. Hence there is a noise of religion and religious duties in every corner, preaching in abundance; and that not in an empty, light, trivial, and vain manner as formerly, but to a good proportion showing spiritual gift—so that if you will measure the number of believers by light, gifts, and profession, the church may have cause to say, “Who hath begotten me these?” (Isa 49:21). But now if you will take the measure of them by this great discriminating grace of Christians—that is, mortification of sin—perhaps you will find their number not so multiplied. Where almost is that professor who owes his conversion to these days of light—and so talks and professes at such a rate of spirituality as few in former days, in any measure, were acquainted with (I will not judge them, but perhaps they are boasting of what the Lord has done in them)—that does not give evidence of a miserably unmortified heart? If vain spending of 18

walks not over the bellies – Ancient kings caused conquered enemy leaders to lie down on their backs and would walk on them as a symbol of victory; figurative speech for conquering and mortifying one’s lusts. 19 meritorious mortification…Christ – Through the cross of Christ, those who believe are dead to sin’s reigning power, which is the foundation of our sanctification. 20 professors – those who profess faith in Christ but may not be truly regenerate. 21 hence – for this reason.

12

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

time, idleness, unprofitability in men’s places, envy, strife, variance, emulations, wrath, pride, worldliness, selfishness (1Co 1), be badges of Christians, we have them on us and amongst us in abundance. And if it be so with them who have much light (and which, we hope, is saving), what shall we say of some who would be accounted religious and yet despise gospel light, and for the duty we have in hand, know no more of it but what consists in men’s denying themselves sometimes in outward enjoyments (which is one of the outmost branches of it), which yet they will seldom practice? May the good Lord send out a spirit of mortification to cure our distempers, 22 or we are in a sad condition! There are two evils that certainly attend every unmortified professor: the first in himself and the other in respect of others.

a. The evil of lack of mortification in a professing Christian Let him pretend what he will, the professor without mortification has slight 23 thoughts of sin, at least of sins of daily weakness. The root of an unmortified course is the digestion of sin without bitterness in the heart. When a man has so imagined an apprehension of grace and mercy as to be able to swallow and digest daily sins without bitterness, that man is at the very brink of turning the grace of God into lasciviousness and being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin (Jud 1:4; Heb 3:13). Neither is there a greater evidence of a false and rotten heart in the world than to walk in such a condition. To use the blood of Christ, which is given to cleanse us (1Jo 1:7; Ti 2:14); to use the exaltation of Christ, which is to give us repentance (Act 5:31); to use the doctrine of grace, which teaches us to deny all ungodliness (Ti 2:11-12)—in order to support sin, is a rebellion that in the end will break the bones. At this door have gone out from us most of the professors who have left the faith in the days wherein we live. For a while, most of them were under convictions that motivated them to duties and brought them to profession; so they “escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ” (2Pe 2:20). But having got an acquaintance with the doctrine of the gospel, and being weary of duty (for which they had no principle), they began to encourage themselves in many neglects from the doctrine of grace. Now, when once this evil had laid hold of them, they speedily tumbled into perdition.

b. The evil influence of lack of mortification on unbelievers The lack of mortification has an evil influence on unbelievers by a twofold account. 1). It hardens them by convincing them that they are in as good condition as the best professors. Whatever they see in such a professor is so stained for lack of this mortification that it is of no value to the observer. They have a zeal for religion, but it is accompanied with a lack of forbearance and universal righteousness. They deny prodigality 24 but live in worldliness; or they “separate” from the world but live wholly to themselves, taking no care to exercise lovingkindness in the earth; or they talk spiritually and live vainly; or they mention communion with God but are in every way conformed to the world; or they boast of forgiveness of sin yet never forgive others. And with such considerations do poor creatures harden their hearts in their unregeneracy. 22

distempers – diseases, that is, our sinful inclinations. slight – superficial; shallow. 24 prodigality – reckless extravagance in material things. 23

2. Continuous Activity of Indwelling Sin

13

2). The professor who lacks mortification deceives unbelievers, in making them believe that if they can come up to the professor’s condition it shall be well with them. And so unbelievers are easily tempted to strive for some reputation in religion, and even go far beyond such professors in outward religion, and yet come short of eternal life. But of these things and all the evils of an unmortified life we will consider later.
