PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 8 of 10
The Dream Visions — Chapters 83 through 90


In this section Enoch recounteth two dream visions he received in his youth. The first foretelleth the great flood. The second, known as the Animal Apocalypse, setteth forth the entire history of the world from Adam to the coming of the Messiah, using the symbols of bulls, sheep, and shepherds. Let us hear this remarkable text.

CHAPTER 83

Verse 1. And now, my son Methuselah, I will show thee all my visions which I have seen, recounting them before thee.
Verse 2. Two visions I saw before I took a wife, and the one was quite unlike the other. The first when I was learning to write, and the second before I took thy mother.
Verse 3. I saw a terrible vision. And regarding it I prayed to the Lord.
Verse 4. I had laid me down in the house of my grandfather Mahalalel, when I saw in a vision how the heaven collapsed and was borne off and fell to the earth.
Verse 5. And when it fell to the earth, I saw how the earth was swallowed up in a great abyss, and mountains were suspended on mountains, and hills sank down on hills, and high trees were rent from their stems, and were hurled down and sunk in the abyss.
Verse 6. And thereupon a word fell into my mouth, and I lifted up my voice to cry aloud, and said: The earth is destroyed.

CHAPTER 84

Verse 1. And my grandfather Mahalalel waked me as I lay near him, and said unto me: Why dost thou cry so, my son, and why dost thou make such lamentation?
Verse 2. And I recounted to him the whole vision which I had seen, and he said unto me: A terrible thing hast thou seen, my son. And thy dream-vision is weighty regarding the secrets of all the sin of the earth; it must sink into the abyss and be destroyed with a great destruction.
Verse 3. And now, my son, arise and make petition to the Lord of glory, since thou art a believer, that a remnant may remain on the earth and that He may not destroy the whole earth.
Verse 4. And I lifted my hands in righteousness and blessed the Holy and Great One, and spoke with the breath of my mouth, and with the tongue of flesh, which God hath made for the children of the flesh of men, that they should speak therewith.
Verse 5. And I said: Blessed be Thou, O Lord, King, great and mighty in Thy greatness, Lord of the whole creation of the heaven, King of kings and God of the whole world. Thy power and kingship and greatness abide for ever and ever, and throughout all generations Thy dominion.

CHAPTER 85

Verse 1. And after this I saw another dream, and I will show the whole dream to thee, my son.
Verse 2. And Enoch lifted up his voice and spake to his son Methuselah: To thee, my son, will I speak. Hear my words and incline thine ear to the dream-vision of thy father.
Verse 3. Before I took thy mother Edna, I saw in a vision on my bed, and behold a bull came forth from the earth, and that bull was white.
Verse 4. And after it came forth a heifer, and along with this latter came forth two bulls, one of them black and the other red.
Verse 5. And that black bull gored the red one and pursued him over the earth, and thereupon I could no longer see that red bull.

This is the beginning of the Animal Apocalypse. The white bull is Adam, the heifer is Eve, and the two young bulls are Cain and Abel. The black bull goring the red signifieth Cain slaying Abel.

CHAPTER 86

Verse 1. And I looked again and saw, and behold I saw many stars descend and cast themselves down from heaven to that first star.
Verse 2. And they became bulls amongst those cattle and pastured with them.
Verse 3. And I looked at them and saw, and behold they all let out their privy members, like horses, and began to cover the cows of the bulls, and they all became pregnant and bare elephants, camels, and asses.
Verse 4. And all the bulls were afraid of them and were terrified at them, and began to bite with their teeth and to devour, and to gore with their horns.

These falling stars are the Watchers who descended to corrupt the earth, and their monstrous offspring represent the giants born to them.

CHAPTER 87

Verse 1. And I saw till seven beings like white men came, and they seized the first of those stars and hurled them into an abyss of the earth, narrow and deep.
Verse 2. And one of them drew a sword, and gave it to those elephants and camels and asses. Then they began to smite each other, and the whole earth quaked because of them.
Verse 3. And I looked in the vision, and behold one of those four who had come forth seized that first star, and bound it hand and foot, and cast it into an abyss.

CHAPTER 88

Verse 1. And one of those four went to that white bull and instructed him in a secret, without his being terrified. He was born a bull and became a man, and built for himself a great vessel, and dwelt thereon, and three bulls dwelt with him in that vessel, and it was covered over.
Verse 2. And again I raised mine eyes towards heaven and saw a lofty roof, with seven water torrents thereon, and those torrents flowed with much water into an enclosure.
Verse 3. And I saw again, and behold fountains were opened on the surface of that great enclosure, and the water began to swell and rise upon the surface, and I saw that enclosure till all its surface was covered with water.
Verse 4. And the water, the darkness, and the mist increased upon it; and I looked at the height of that water, and that water had risen above the height of that enclosure, and was streaming over that enclosure, and it stood upon the earth.
Verse 5. And all the cattle of that enclosure were gathered together until I saw how they sank and were swallowed up and perished in that water.
Verse 6. But that vessel floated on the water, while all the oxen and elephants and camels and asses sank to the bottom with all the animals, so that I could no longer see them, and they were not able to escape, but perished and sank into the depths.

CHAPTER 89

This is the longest chapter of the Dream Visions, tracing Israel's history from Noah to the building of Solomon's temple. After the flood, white bulls are born again, signifying the patriarchs. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob appear as bulls, but Jacob's children become sheep — for Israel is now the flock of God.

Verse 1. And one of those four went to a white bull and taught him a mystery, trembling as he was. He was born a bull, but became a man, and built for himself an ark, and therein he dwelt.
Verse 2. And three white bulls came forth after the flood. And they began to beget wild beasts and birds, and there arose different kinds of them.
Verse 3. And I saw till those sheep were born from that white bull, and they began to multiply. And one of them was selected and taken up, and he was offered as a sacrifice instead of the sheep.
Verse 4. And Moses was a sheep who led the flock out of the land of the wolves. And the wolves pursued them, but the Lord of the sheep saved His flock and delivered them.
Verse 5. And they came to a goodly land, and the Lord of the sheep gave them shepherds to guard them. But the shepherds began to slay more than their due, and the sheep cried out to their Lord.

CHAPTER 90

Verse 1. And I saw till a great sword was given to the sheep, and the sheep proceeded against all the beasts of the field to slay them, and all the beasts and the birds of the heaven fled before their face.
Verse 2. And I saw that man, who wrote the book according to the command of the Lord, till he opened that book concerning the destruction which those twelve last shepherds had wrought, and showed that they had destroyed much more than their predecessors.
Verse 3. And I saw till the Lord of the sheep came unto them and took in His hand the staff of His wrath, and smote the earth, and the earth clave asunder, and all the beasts and all the birds of the heaven fell from among those sheep, and were swallowed up in the earth, and it covered them.
Verse 4. And I saw till a great sword was given to the sheep, and the sheep proceeded against all the beasts of the field to slay them, and the beasts and birds of heaven fled before their face.
Verse 5. And I saw till a throne was erected in the pleasant land, and the Lord of the sheep sat Himself thereon, and the other took the sealed books and opened those books before the Lord of the sheep.
Verse 6. And I saw those sheep, how they burned, and their bones were consumed. And I stood looking till those old houses were folded up, and all the pillars were carried off, and all the beams became invisible.
Verse 7. And the Lord of the sheep brought a new house greater and loftier than that first, and set it up in the place of the first which had been folded up. All its pillars were new, and its ornaments were new and larger than those of the first, the old one which He had taken away.
Verse 8. And all the sheep were within it, and I saw all the sheep that had been left, and all the beasts on the earth, and all the birds of the heaven, falling down and doing homage to those sheep and making petition to them and obeying them in everything.
Verse 9. And I saw till there was born a great animal, and it was a white bull with great horns, and all the beasts of the field and all the birds of the air feared him and made petition to him all the time.
Verse 10. And I saw till all their generations were transformed, and they all became white bulls; and the first among them became a lamb, and that lamb became a great animal and had great black horns on its head. And the Lord of the sheep rejoiced over it and over all the oxen.
Verse 11. And I slept in their midst, and I awoke and saw everything.
Verse 12. This is the vision which I saw while I slept, and I awoke and blessed the Lord of righteousness and gave Him glory.

Thus endeth the Dream Visions. In Part 9 we shall hear the Epistle of Enoch, with its warnings to sinners and blessings for the righteous.
