PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 13
Of Christ'S Prophetical Office — Of Christ'S Kingly Office

---

OF CHRIST'S PROPHETICAL OFFICE
DEUT. 18:15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, &c.
Having spoken of the person of Christ, we are next to speak of the
offices of Christ,—Prophetical, Priestly, Regal.
I. Prophetical. "The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet."
Enunciatur hic locus de Christo,—it is spoken of Christ. There are
several names given to Christ as a Prophet: He is called 'the
Counsellor,' Isa. 9:6. In uno Christo Angelus fœderis completur,
FAGIUS. 'The Messenger of the covenant,' Mal. 3:1. 'A Lamp,' 2 Sam.
22:29. 'The Morning-star,' Rev. 22:16. Jesus Christ is the great
Prophet of his church. The woman of Samaria, gave a shrewd guess,
John 4:16. He is the best teacher, he makes all other teaching
effectual, Luke 24:45., "Then opened he their understanding." He did
not only open the scriptures, but opened their understanding. He
teacheth to profit, Isa. 48:17., "I am the Lord thy God, who teacheth
thee to profit."
QUEST. How doth Christ teach?
Ans. 1. Externally, by his word, Ps. 119:105., "Thy word is a lamp to
my feet." Such as pretend to have a light or revelation above the
word, or contrary to it, never had their teaching from Christ, Isa.
8:20.
A. 2. Christ teacheth these sacred mysteries, inwardly, by the Spirit,
John 16:13. The world knows not what it is, 1 Cor. 2:14., "The natural
man receives not the things of God, neither can he know them." He

knows not what it is to be transformed by the renewing of the mind,
Rom. 12:2., or what the inward workings of the Spirit mean; these
are riddles and paradoxes to him. He may have more insight into the
things of the world than a believer, but he doth not see the deep
things of God. A swine may see an acorn under a tree, but he cannot
see a star; he who is taught of Christ sees the arcana imperii,—the
secrets of the kingdom of heaven.
QUEST. What are the lessons Christ teacheth?
Ans. 1. He teacheth us to see into our own hearts. Take the most
mercurial wits, the greatest politicians that understand the mysteries
of state, yet they know not the mysteries of their own hearts, they
cannot believe there is that evil in them as is, 2 Kings 8:13., "Is thy
servant a dog?" Grande profundum est homo, AUG. The heart is a
great deep, which is not easily fathomed. But Christ when he
teacheth, removes the veil of ignorance, and lights a man into his
own heart; and now he sees swarms of vain thoughts,—he blusheth
to see how sin mingles with his duties,—his stars are mixed with
clouds,—he prays, as Austin, that God would deliver him from
himself.
A. 2. The second lesson Christ teacheth, is the vanity of the creature.
A natural man sets up his happiness here, worships the golden
image; but he that Christ hath anointed with his eye-salve, hath a
spirit of discerning, he looks upon the creature in its night-dress,
sees it to be empty and unsatisfying, not commensurate to an
heaven-born soul. Solomon had put all the creatures into a limbeck,
and when he came to extract the spirit and quintessence, all was
vanity, Eccl. 2:11. The apostle calls it a show or apparition, 1 Cor.
7:31., having no intrinsical goodness.

A. 3. The third lesson is the excellency of things unseen. Christ gives
the soul a sight of glory, a prospect of eternity, 2 Cor. 4:18., "We look
not at things which are seen, but at things which are not seen."
Moses saw him who is 'invisible,' Heb. 9:27. And the Patriarchs saw a
better country, viz. an heavenly, Heb. 11:16. where delights of angels,
rivers of pleasure, the flower of joy, fully ripe and blown.
QUEST. How doth Christ's teaching differ from other teaching?
Ans. Several ways:
1. Christ teacheth the heart. Others may teach the ear, Christ the
heart. Acts 16:14., "Whose heart the Lord opened." All that the
dispensers of the word can do is but to work knowledge, Christ works
grace; they can but give you the light of the truth, Christ gives you the
love of the truth; they can only teach you what to believe, Christ
teacheth how to believe.
2. Christ gives us a taste of the word. Ministers may set the food of
the word before you, and carve it out to you; but it is only Christ
causeth you to taste it, 1 Pet. 2:3., "If so be ye have tasted that the
Lord is gracious;" Ps. 34:8., "Taste and see that the Lord is good." It
is one thing to hear a truth preached, another thing to taste it; one
thing to read a promise, another thing to taste it. David had got a
taste of the word, Ps. 119:102, 103., "Thou hast taught me: How
sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my
mouth." The apostle calls it the savour of knowledge, 2 Cor. 2:14. The
light of knowledge is one thing, the savour another. Christ makes us
taste a savouriness in the word.
3. Christ, when he teacheth, makes us obey. Others may instruct, but
cannot command obedience; they teach to be humble, but men
remain proud. The Prophet had been denouncing judgments against

the people of Judah, but they would not hear, Jer. 44:17., "We will do
whatsoever goeth out of our own mouth, to bake cakes to the queen
of heaven." Men come quasi armed in a coat of mail that the sword of
the word will not enter; but when Christ comes to teach, he removes
this obstinacy; he not only informs the judgment, but inclines the
will. He doth not only come with the light of his word, but the rod of
his strength, and makes the stubborn sinner yield to him. His grace
is irresistible.
4. Christ teacheth easily. Others teach with difficulty. Difficulty in
finding out a truth, and in inculcating it, Isa. 28:10., "Precept (must
be) upon precept, and line upon line." Some may teach all their lives,
and the word take no impression. They complain, as Isa. 49:4., "I
have spent my labour in vain," plowed on rocks; but Christ the great
Prophet teacheth with ease. He can with the least touch of his Spirit
convert; he can say, "Let there be light;" with a word he conveys
grace.
5. Christ when he teacheth, makes men willing to learn. Men may
teach others, but they have no mind to learn, Prov. 1:7., "Fools
despise instruction;" they rage at the word, as if a patient should rage
at the physician when he brings him a cordial, thus backward are
men to their own salvation. But Christ makes his people a 'willing
people,' Ps. 110:3. They prize knowledge, and hang it as a jewel upon
their ear. Those that Christ teacheth, say, as Isa. 2:3., "Come let us go
up to the mountain of the Lord, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in them;" and, as Acts 10:33., "We are all here present
before God, to hear all things commanded."
6. Christ, when he teacheth, doth not only illuminate, but animate.
He doth so teach, as he doth quicken, John 8:12., "I am the light of
the world;" he that follows me shall have luamen vitæ—the light of

life. By nature we are dead, therefore unfit for teaching; who will
make an oration to the dead? But Christ teacheth them that are dead,
he gives the light of life. As when Lazarus was dead, Christ said,
"Come forth," and he made the dead to hear, "Lazarus came forth;"
so when Christ saith to the dead soul, come forth of the grave of
unbelief, he hears Christ's voice, and comes forth, it is the light of
life. The philosophers say, calor et lux concrescunt,—light and heat
increase together. 'Tis true here, where Christ comes with his light,
there is the heat of the spiritual life going along with it.
Use 1st. Of information. 1. See here an argument of Christ's Divinity:
had he not been God, he could never have known the mind of God, or
revealed to us those arcani cæli,—those deep mysteries, which no
man or angel could find out. Who but God can anoint the eyes of the
blind, and give not only light, but sight? Who but he, who hath the
key of David, can open the heart? Who but God can bow the iron
sinew of the will? He only who is God can enlighten the conscience,
and make the stony heart bleed.
2. See what a cornucopia, or plenty of wisdom is in Christ, who is the
great doctor of his church, and gives saving knowledge to all the
elect. The body of the sun must needs be full of clarity and
brightness, which enlightens the whole world: Christ is the great
luminary, "in whom are hid all treasures of knowledge," Col. 2:3. The
middle lamp of the sanctuary gave light to all the other lamps: Christ
diffuseth his glorious light to others. We are apt to admire the
learning of Aristotle and Plato: Alas! what is this poor spark of light
to that which is in Christ, from whose infinite wisdom both men and
angels light their lamp.
3. See the misery of man in the state of nature. Before Christ come to
be their prophet they are inveloped with ignorance and darkness.

Men know nothing in a salvifical sanctified manner, they know
nothing as they ought to know, 1 Cor. 8:2. This is sad. 1. Men in the
dark cannot discern colours: so in the state of nature they cannot
discern between morality and grace,—they take one for the other, pro
dea nubem.—2. In the dark the greatest beauty is hid,—let there be
rare flowers in the garden, and pictures in the room, yet in the dark
their beauty is vailed over,—so, though there be such transcendent
beauty in Christ as amazeth the angels, a man in the state of nature
sees none of this beauty. What is Christ to him, or heaven to him?
The vail is upon his heart.—3. A man in the dark is in danger every
step he goes: so a man in the state of nature is in danger, every step,
of falling into hell. Thus it is before Christ teacheth us; nay, the
darkness in which a sinner is, while in an unregenerate state, is
worse than natural darkness, for natural darkness affrights, Gen.
15:12., "An horror of great darkness fell upon Abraham," but the
spiritual darkness is not accompanied with horror,—men tremble not
at their condition,—nay, they like their condition well enough, John
3:19., "Men loved darkness." This is their sad condition, till Jesus
Christ comes as a prophet to teach them, and to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.
4. See the happy condition of the children of God, they have Christ to
be their prophet, Isa. 54:13., "All thy children shall be taught of the
Lord;" 1 Cor. 1:30., "God is made to us wisdom." One man cannot see
by another's eyes; but believers see with Christ's eyes,—"In his light
they see light;" Christ gives them the light of grace and light of glory.
Use 2d. Labour to have Christ for your prophet; he teacheth savingly,
he is an interpreter of a thousand, he can untie those knots which
puzzle very angels. Till Christ teach, we never learn any lesson: till
Christ is made to us wisdom, we shall never be wise to salvation.

QUEST. What shall we do to have Christ for our teacher?
Ans. See your need of Christ's teaching. You cannot see your way
without this morning-star. Some speak much of the light of reason
improved: Alas! the plumb-line of reason is too short to fathom the
deep things of God,—the light of reason will no more help a man to
believe, than the light of a candle will help him to understand. A man
can no more by the power of nature reach Christ, than an infant can
reach the top of the pyramids, or the ostrich fly up to the stars. See
your need of Christ's anointing and teaching, Rev. 3:18.
A. 2. Go to Christ to teach you, Ps. 25:5. "Lead me in thy truth, and
teach me." As one of the disciples said, "Lord teach us to pray," Luke
11:1.: so Lord, teach me to profit. Do thou light my lamp, O thou
great prophet of thy church! Give me a spirit of wisdom and
revelation, that I may see things in another manner than ever I saw
them before; teach me in the word to hear thy voice, and in the
sacrament to discern thy body. Ps. 13:3., "Lighten mine eyes," &c.
Cathedram habit in cœlo qui corda docet in terra. AUG. "He hath his
pulpit in heaven who converts souls." And that we may be
encouraged to go to our great prophet:
1. Jesus Christ is very willing to teach us. Why else did he enter into
the calling of the ministry but to teach the mysteries of heaven?
Matth. 4:23., "Jesus went about teaching and preaching the gospel of
the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness and all manner of
disease among the people." Why did he take the office prophetical
upon him?—Why was Christ so angry with them that kept away the
key of knowledge? Luke 11:52.—Why was Christ anointed with the
Spirit without measure?—but that he might anoint us with
knowledge. Knowledge is in Christ as milk in the breast for the child.
O then go to Christ for teaching! None in the gospel came to Christ

for sight but he restored their eye-sight; and sure Christ is more
willing to work a cure upon a blind soul, than ever he was to do so
upon a blind body.
2. There are none so dull and ignorant but Christ can teach them.
Every one is not fit to make a philosopher's scholar of; ex omni ligno
non fit Mercurius; but there is none so dull, but Christ can make a
good scholar of. Even such as are ignorant, and of low parts, Christ
teacheth them in such a manner, that they know more than the great
sages and wise men of the world. Hence that saying of St. Agustine,
surgunt indocti, et rapiunt cœlum,—the unlearned men rise up, and
take heaven; they know the truths of Christ more savingly than the
great admired Rabbies. The duller the scholar, the more is his skill
seen that teacheth. Hence it is, Christ delights in teaching the
ignorant, to get himself more glory, Isa. 35:5., "The eyes of the blind
shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped." Who
would go to teach a blind or a deaf man? Yet such dull scholars
Christ teacheth. Such as are blinded with ignorance, they shall see
the mysteries of the gospel, and the deaf ears shall be unstopped.
3. Wait upon the means of grace which Christ hath appointed.
Though Christ teacheth by his Spirit, yet he teacheth in the use of
ordinances. Wait at the gates of wisdom's door; ministers are
teachers under Christ, Eph. 4:11., "Pastors and teachers." We read of
pitchers and lamps within the pitchers, Judges 7:16. Ministers are
earthen vessels, but these pitchers have lamps within them to light
souls to heaven. Christ is said to speak to us from heaven now, Heb.
12:25. viz. by his ministers, as the king speaks by his ambassador.
Such as wean themselves from the breast of ordinances, seldom
thrive; either they grow light in their head, or lame in their feet. The
word preached is Christ's voice in the mouth of the minister, and

they that refuse to hear Christ speaking in the ministry, Christ will
refuse to hear them speaking on their death-bed.
4. If you would have the teachings of Christ, walk according to that
knowledge which you have already. Use your little knowledge well,
and Christ will teach you more, John 7:17, "If any man will do his
will, he shall know of my doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I
speak of myself." A master seeing his servant improve a little stock
well gives him more to trade with.
Use 3d. If you have been taught by Christ savingly, be thankful; it is
your honour to have God for your teacher, and that he should teach
you and not others, is matter of admiration and gratulation. O how
many knowing men are ignorant! They are not taught of God; they
have Christ's word to enlighten them, but not his Spirit to sanctify
them. But that you should have the inward as well as the outward
teaching,—that Christ should anoint you with the heavenly unction
of his Spirit,—that you can say as he, John 9:25., "One thing I know,
that whereas I was blind, I now see,"—O how thankful should you be
to Christ, who hath revealed his Father's bosom secrets unto you!
John 1:18., "No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten
Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him." If
Alexander thought himself so much obliged to Aristotle for the
philosophical instructions he learned from him; O how are we
obliged to Jesus Christ, this great Prophet, for opening to us the
eternal purposes of his love, and revealing to us the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven!

OF CHRIST'S PRIESTLY OFFICE

QUEST. XXV. HOW doth Christ execute the office of a priest?
ANS. In his once offering up of himself a sacrifice to satisfy divine
justice, and reconcile us to God, and in making continual
intercession for us.—Heb. 9:26., "Now once in the end of the world
hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself."
QUEST. What are the parts of Christ's priestly office?
Ans. Christ's priestly office hath two parts, his satisfaction and
intercession.
I. His satisfaction. And this consists of two branches: 1st. His active
obedience, Mat. 3:15., He fulfilled all righteousness. Christ did every
thing which the law required; his holy life was a perfect commentary
upon the law of God; and he obeyed the law for us.—2d. His passive
obedience. Our guilt being transferred and imputed to him, he did
undergo the penalty which was due to us; he appeared to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself. The paschal-lamb slain, was a type of
Christ who was offered up in sacrifice for us. Sin could not be done
away without blood, Heb. 9:22., "Without blood is no remission."
Christ was not only a lamb without spot, but a lamb slain.
QUEST. Why was it requisite there should be a priest?
Ans. There needed a priest to be an umpire, to mediate between a
guilty creature, and an holy God.
QUEST. How could Christ suffer, being God?
Ans. Christ suffered only in the human nature.
QUEST. But if only Christ's humanity suffered, how could this
suffering satisfy for sin?

Ans. The human nature being united to the divine, the human nature
did suffer, the divine did satisfy. Christ's Godhead, as it did support
the human nature that it did not faint, so it did give virtue to his
sufferings. The altar sanctifies the thing offered on it, Mat. 23:19.: so
the altar of Christ's divine nature sanctified the sacrifice of his death,
and made it of infinite value.
QUEST. Wherein doth the greatness of Christ's sufferings appear?
Ans. 1st. In the sufferings of his body. He suffered truly, not in
appearance only; the apostle calls it mors crucis,—the death of the
cross, Phil. 2:8. Tully, when he speaks of this kind of death, quid
decam in crucem tollere? Though he was a great orator he wanted
words to express it. The thoughts of this made Christ sweat great
drops of blood in the garden, Luke 22:44. It was an ignominious,
painful, cursed death. Christ suffered in all his senses: 1. In his eyes;
they beheld two sad objects, he saw his enemies insulting, and his
mother weeping.—2. In his ears; his ears were filled with the
revilings of the people, Mat. 27:42., "He saved others, himself he
cannot save."—3. In his smell; when their drivel fell upon his face.—
4. In his taste; when they gave him gall and vinegar to drink,
bitterness and sharpness.—5. In his feeling; his head suffered with
thorns, his hands and feet with the nails. Totum pro vulnere corpus;
now was this white lily dyed of a purple colour.—2d. In the sufferings
of his soul. He was pressed in the wine-press of his Father's wrath.
This caused that vociferation and outcry on the cross, "My God, My
God," cur deseruisti? Christ suffered a double eclipse upon the cross,
an eclipse of the sun, and an eclipse of the light of God's
countenance. How bitter was this agony! The evangelists use three
words to express it: "He began to be amazed," Mark 14:33.; "He
began to be faint;" "To be exceeding sorrowful," Matth. 26:37. Christ
felt the pains of hell in his soul, though not locally, yet equivalently.

QUEST. Why did Christ suffer?
Ans. Surely not for any desert of his own, Dan. 9:26., "The Messiah
shall be cut off, but not for himself;" it was for us, Isa. 53:6. Unus
peccat, alius plectitur; he suffered, that he might satisfy God's justice
for us. We, by our sins, had infinitely wronged God; and, could we
have shed rivers of tears, offered up millions of holocausts and
burnt-offerings, we could never have pacified an angry Deity;
therefore Christ must die, that God's justice may be satisfied.—It is
hotly debated among divines, whether God could not have forgiven
sin freely without a sacrifice. Not to dispute what God could have
done, yet when we consider God was resolved to have the law
satisfied, and to have man saved in a way of justice as well as mercy,
then, I say, it was necessary that Christ should lay down his life as a
sacrifice.
1. To fulfil the predictions of scripture, Luke 24:46., "Thus it behoved
Christ to suffer."
2. To bring us into favour with God. It is one thing for a traitor to be
pardoned, and another thing to be made a favourite. Christ's blood is
not only called a sacrifice, whereby God is appeased, but a
propitiation, whereby God becomes gracious and friendly to us.
Christ is our mercy-seat, from which God gives answers of peace to
us.
3. Christ died that he might make good his last will and testament
with his blood; there were many legacies which Christ bequeathed to
believers, which had been all null and void, had not he died, and by
his death confirmed the will, Heb. 9:16. A testament is in force after
men are dead; the mission of the Spirit, the promises, those legacies,
were not in force till Christ's death; but Christ by his blood hath
sealed them, and believers may lay claim to them.

4. He died that he might purchase for us glorious mansions,
therefore heaven is called not only a promised, but a 'purchased
possession,' Eph. 1:14. Christ died for our preferment; he suffered
that we might reign; he hung upon the cross that we might sit upon
the throne. Heaven was shut, &c. crux Christi, clavis Paradisi,—the
cross of Christ is the ladder by which we ascend to heaven. His
crucifixion is our coronation.
Use 1st. In the bloody sacrifice of Christ, see the horrid nature of sin;
sin, it is true, is odious as it banished Adam out of paradise, and
threw the angels into hell; but that which doth most of all make it
appear horrid, is this, that it made Christ veil his glory, and lose his
blood. We should look upon sin with indignation, and pursue it with
an holy malice, and shed the blood of those sins which shed Christ's
blood. The sight of Cæsar's bloody robe, incensed the Romans
against them that slew him. The sight of Christ's bleeding body
should incense us against sin; let us not parley with it, let not that be
our joy, which made Christ a man of sorrow.
Use 2d. Is Christ our priest sacrificed? See God's mercy and justice
displayed. I may say as the apostle, Rom. 11:22., "Behold the
goodness and severity of God." 1. The goodness of God in providing a
sacrifice: had not Christ suffered upon the cross, we must have lain
in hell for ever, satisfying God's justice.—2. The severity of God:
though it were his own Son, the Son of his love, and our sins were but
imputed to him, yet God did not spare him, Rom. 8:32., but his
wrath did flame against him. And if God were thus severe to his own
Son, how dreadful will he be one day to his enemies? Such as die in
wilful impenitency, must feel the same wrath as Christ did; and
because they cannot bear it at once, therefore they must be enduring
it for ever.

Use 3d. Is Christ our priest, who was sacrificed for us? Then see the
endeared affection of Christ to us sinners. "The cross," saith Austin,
"was a pulpit, in which Christ preached his love to the world." That
Christ should die, was more than if all the angels had been turned to
dust; and that Christ should die as a malefactor, having the weight of
all men's sins laid upon him, that he should die for his enemies,
Rom. 5:10. The balm-tree weeps out its precious balm, to heal those
that cut and mangle it: Christ shed his blood, to heal those that
crucified him. And that he should die freely: it is called 'the offering
of the body of Jesus,' Heb. 10:10. And though his sufferings were so
great that they made him sigh, and weep, and bleed; yet they could
not make him repent, Isa. 53:11., "He shall see of the travail of his
soul, and be satisfied." Christ had hard travail upon the cross, yet he
doth not repent of it, but thinks his sweat and blood well-bestowed,
because he sees redemption brought forth to the world. O infinite,
amazing love of Christ! A love that passeth knowledge, Eph. 3:19.,
that neither man nor angel can parallel! How should we be affected
with this love! If Saul was so affected with David's kindness in
sparing his life, how should we be affected with Christ's kindness in
parting with his life for us? At Christ's death and passion, the very
stones did cleave asunder, Mat. 27:51., "The rocks rent." Not to be
affected with Christ's love in dying, is to have hearts harder than
rocks.
Use 4th. Is Christ our sacrifice? then see the excellency of his
sacrifice. It is perfect, Heb. 10:14., "By one offering, he hath perfected
them that are sanctified." Therefore, how impious are the Papists, in
joining their merits and the prayers of saints with Christ's sacrifice?
They offer him up daily in the mass, as if Christ's sacrifice on the
cross were imperfect; this is a blasphemy against Christ's priestly
office.—2. Christ's sacrifice is meritorious; he not only died for our
example, but to merit salvation; the person who suffered being God

as well as man, did put virtue into his sufferings; and now our sins
are expiated, and God appeased. No sooner did the messengers say,
"Uriah is dead," but David's anger was pacified, 2 Sam. 11:21. No
sooner did Christ die, but God's anger was pacified.—3. This sacrifice
is beneficial. Out of the dead lion Samson had honey; it procures
justification of our persons, acceptance of our service,—access to God
with boldness,—entrance into the holy place of heaven, Heb. 10:19.
Per latus Christi patescit nobis in cœlum, Israel passed through the
Red sea to Canaan; so through the red sea of Christ's blood, we enter
into the heavenly Canaan.
Use 5th. Of exhortation. 1. Let us fiducially apply this blood of Christ;
all the virtue of a medicine is in the applying; though the medicine be
made of the blood of God, it will not heal, unless by faith applied. As
fire is to the chymist, so is faith to the Christian; the chymist can do
nothing without fire, so there is nothing done without faith. Faith
makes Christ's sacrifice ours, Phil. 3:8., "Christ Jesus my Lord." It is
not gold in the mine that enricheth, but gold in the hand; faith is the
hand that receives Christ's golden merits. It is not a cordial in the
glass refresheth the spirit, but a cordial drunk down. Per fidem
Christi sanguinem sugimus, CYPR. Faith opens the orifice of Christ's
wounds, and drinks the precious cordial of his blood. Without faith
Christ himself will not avail us.
2. Let us love a bleeding Saviour, and let us show our love to Christ,
by being ready to suffer for him. Many rejoice at Christ's suffering for
them, but dream not of their suffering for him; Joseph dreamed of
his preferment, but not of his imprisonment. Was Christ a sacrifice?
—Did he bear God's wrath for us?—We should bear man's wrath for
him. Christ's death was voluntary, Ps. 40:7., "Lo, I come to do thy
will, O God;" Luke 12:50., "I have a baptism to be baptized with, and
how am I straitened till it be accomplished!" Christ calls his

sufferings a baptism; he was to be (as it were) baptized in his own
blood; and how did he thirst for that time? 'How am I straitened?' O
then, let us be willing to suffer for Christ! Christ hath taken away the
venom and sting of the saints' sufferings: there is no wrath in their
cup. Our sufferings Christ can make sweet. As there was oil mixed in
the peace-offering, so God can mix the oil of gladness with our
sufferings. "The ringing of my chain is sweet music in my ears,"
LANDGRAVE OF HESSE. Life must be parted with shortly; what is it
to part with it a little sooner, as a sacrifice to Christ, as a seal of
sincerity, and a pledge of thankfulness?
Use 6th. Of consolation. This sacrifice of Christ's blood may infinitely
comfort us. This is the blood of atonement; Christ's cross is cardo
salutis, CALV. "The hinge and fountain of our comfort." 1. This blood
comforts in case of guilt! O, saith the soul, my sins trouble me! why,
Christ's blood was shed for the remission of sin, Mat. 26:5. Let us see
our sins laid on Christ, and then they are no more ours but his.—2. In
case of pollution. Christ's blood is an healing and cleansing blood:
(1.) It is healing, Isa. 53:5., "With his stripes we are healed." It is the
best weapon-salve, it heals at a distance: Though Christ be in heaven,
we may feel the virtue of his blood healing our bloody issue. (2.) And
it is cleansing: It is therefore compared to fountain-water, Zech. 13:1.
The word is a glass to shew us our spots, and Christ's blood is a
fountain to wash them away; it turns leprosy into purity, 1 John 1:7.,
"The blood of Jesus cleanseth us from all our sin." There is indeed
one spot so black, that Christ's blood doth not wash away, viz. the sin
against the Holy Ghost. Not but that there is virtue enough in
Christ's blood to wash it away; but he who hath sinned that sin will
not be washed, he contemns Christ's blood, and tramples it under
foot, Heb. 10:29. Thus we see what a strong cordial Christ's blood is;
it is the anchor-hold of our faith, the spring of our joy, the crown of
our desires, and the only support both in life and death. In all our

fears, let us comfort ourselves with the propitiatory sacrifice of
Christ's blood: Christ died both as a purchaser and as a conqueror: 1.
As a purchaser, in regard of God having by his blood obtained our
salvation. 2. And as a conqueror, in regard of Satan; the cross being
his triumphant chariot, wherein he hath led hell and death captive.
Use ult. Bless God for this precious sacrifice of Christ's death, Ps.
103:1., "Bless the Lord, O my soul!" And for what doth David bless
him? "Who redeemeth thy life from destruction!" Christ gave himself
a sin-offering for us; let us give ourselves a thank-offering to him. If a
man redeem another out of debt, will not he be grateful? How deeply
do we stand obliged to Christ, who hath redeemed us from hell and
damnation! Rev. 5:9., "And they sung a new song, saying, thou art
worthy to take the book, and open the seals; for thou wast slain, and
hast redeemed us to God by thy blood." Let our hearts and tongues
join in concert to bless God, and let us shew thankfulness to Christ
by fruitfulness; let us bring forth (as spice-trees) the fruits of
humility, zeal, good works. This is to live unto him who died for us, 2
Cor. 5:15. The wise men did not only worship Christ, but presented
him with gifts: gold, and frankincense, and myrrh, Mat. 2:11. Let us
present Christ with the fruits of righteousness which are unto the
glory and praise of God.

OF CHRIST'S INTERCESSION
ROM. 8:34. Who also maketh intercession for us.
II. When Aaron entered into the holy place, his bells gave a sound: so
Christ having entered into heaven, his intercession makes a melodius
sound in the ears of God. Christ, though he be exalted to glory, hath

not laid aside his bowels of compassion, but is still mindful of his
body mystical, as Joseph was mindful of his father and brethren,
when he was exalted to the court. "Who also maketh intercession for
us." To intercede is to make request in the behalf of another. Christ is
the great master of requests in heaven; Christus est Catholicus Ratris
Sacerdos, TERTUL.
QUEST. What are the qualifications of our intercessor?
Ans. 1. He is holy, Heb. 7:26., "For such an high priest became us,
who is holy, undefiled, separated from sinners." "Christ knew no
sin," 2 Cor. 5:21. He knew sin in its weight, not in the act. It was
requisite that he, who was to do away the sins of others, should
himself be without sin. Holiness is one of the precious stones which
shine on the breastplate of our high priest.
A. 2. He is faithful, Heb. 2:17., "It behoved him to be made like unto
his brethren, that he might be a faithful high priest." Moses was
faithful as a servant,—Christ as a son, Heb. 3:5. He doth not forget
any cause he hath to plead, nor doth he use any deceit in pleading.
An ordinary attorney may either leave out some word which might
make for the client, or put in a word against him, having received a
fee on both sides; but Christ is true to the cause he pleads; we may
leave our matters with him, we may trust our lives and souls in his
hand.
A. 3. He never dies. The priests under the law, while their office lived,
they themselves died, Heb. 7:23., "They were not suffered to
continue, by reason of death;" but "Christ ever lives to make
intercession," Heb. 7:25. He hath no succession in his priesthood.
QUEST. Who Christ intercedes for?

Ans. Not for all promiscuously, John 17:9., but for the elect. The
efficacy of Christ's prayer reacheth no further than the efficacy of his
blood; but his blood was shed only for the elect, therefore his prayers
only reach them. The high priest went into the sanctuary with the
names only of the twelve tribes upon his breast: so Christ goes into
heaven only with the names of the elect upon his breast. Christ
intercedes for the weakest believers, John 17:20., and for all the sins
of believers. In the law there were some sins the high priest was
neither to offer sacrifice for, nor yet to offer prayer for, Numb. 15:30.,
"The soul that doth ought presumptuously shall be cut off." The
priest might offer up prayer for sins of ignorance, but not of
presumption; but Christ's intercession extends to all the sins of the
elect. Of what a bloody colour was David's sin! Yet it did not exclude
Christ's intercession.
QUEST. What doth Christ in the work of intercession?
Ans. Three things.
1. He presents the merit of his blood to his Father, and, in the virtue
of that price paid, pleads for mercy. The high priest was herein a
lively type of Christ. Aaron was to do four things: 1. Kill the beasts.—
2. To enter with the blood into the holy of holies.—3. To sprinkle the
mercy-seat with the blood.—4. To kindle the incense, and with the
smoke of it cause a cloud arise over the mercy-seat; and so the
atonement was made, Lev. 16:11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Christ our high
priest did exactly answer to this type: he was offered up in sacrifice,
that answers to the priest's killing the bullock: and Christ is gone up
into heaven, that answers to the priest's going into the holy of holies,
—and he spreads his blood before his Father, that answers to the
priest's sprinkling the blood upon the mercy-seat,—and he prays to
his Father that for his blood's sake he would be propitious to sinners,

that answers to the cloud of incense going up,—and through his
intercession God is pacified, that answers to the priest's making
atonement.
2. Christ by his intercession answers all bills of indictment brought in
against the elect. Believers, do what they can, Sin, and then Satan
accuseth them to God, and conscience accuseth them to themselves:
now, Christ by his intercession, answers all these accusations, Rom.
8:33., "Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? it is
Christ that maketh intercession for us." When Esculus was accused
for some impiety, his brother stood up for him, and shewed the
magistrates how he had lost his hand in the service of the state, and
so obtained his pardon: thus, when Satan accuseth the saints, or
when the justice of God lays any thing to their charge, Christ shews
his own wounds, and by virtue of his bloody sufferings, he answers
all the demands and challenges of the law, and counterworks Satan's
accusations.
3. Christ by his intercession calls for acquittance, 'Lord, let the sinner
be absolved from guilt:' and in this sense Christ is called an advocate,
1 John 2:1. He requires that the sinner be set free in the court. An
advocate differs much from an orator; an orator useth rhetoric to
persuade and intreat the judge to shew mercy to another; but an
advocate tells the judge what is law. Thus Christ appears in heaven as
an advocate, he represents what is law; when God's justice opens the
debt-book, Christ opens the law-book: "Lord," saith he, "thou art a
just God, and wilt not be pacified without blood; Lo! here the blood is
shed, therefore in justice, give me a discharge of these distressed
creatures; it is equal, that the law being satisfied, the sinner should
be acquitted." And, upon Christ's plea, God sets his hand to the
sinner's pardon.

QUEST. In what manner Christ intercedes?
Ans. 2. Freely: he pleads our cause in heaven, and takes no fee. An
ordinary lawyer will have his fee, and sometimes a bribe too; but
Christ is not mercenary, how many causes doth he plead every day in
heaven and will take nothing? As Christ laid down his life freely,
John 10:15, 18., so he intercedes freely.
A. 3. Feelingly: he is as sensible of our condition as his own, Heb.
4:15., "We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmity." As a tender-hearted mother would plead
with a judge for a child ready to be condemned; O how would her
bowels work! how would her tears trickle down! what weeping
rhetoric would she use to the judge for mercy! Thus the Lord Jesus is
full of sympathy and tenderness, Heb. 2:17., that he might be a
merciful high priest; though he hath left his passion, yet not his
compassion. An ordinary lawyer is not affected with the cause he
pleads, nor doth he care which way it goes; it is profit makes him
plead, not affection; but Christ intercedes feelingly, and that which
makes him intercede with affection is, it is his own cause which he
pleads. He hath shed his blood to purchase life and salvation for the
elect; and if they should not be saved, he would lose his purchase.
A. 4. Efficaciously: it is a prevailing intercession. Christ never lost
any cause he pleaded; he was never non-suited. Christ's intercession,
must needs be effectual, if we consider,
1. The excellency of his person. If the prayer of a saint be so prevalent
with God, (Moses's prayer did bind God's hand, Exod. 32:10., "Let
me alone;" and Jacob, as a prince, prevailed with God, Gen. 32:28.;
and Elijah did by prayer open and shut heaven, James 5:17.) then
what is Christ's prayer? He is the Son of God, the Son in whom he is
well pleased, Mat. 3:17. What will not a father grant a son! John

11:42., "I knew that thou hearest me always." If God could forget that
Christ were a priest, yet he cannot forget that he is a son.
2. Christ prays for nothing but what his Father hath a mind to grant.
There is but one will between Christ and his Father; Christ prays
"Sanctify them through thy truth;" and, "This is the will of God, even
your sanctification," 1 Thess. 4:3. So then, if Christ prays for nothing
but what God the Father hath a mind to grant, then he is like to
speed.
3. Christ prays for nothing but what he hath power to give: what he
prays for as he is man, that he hath power to give as he is God, John
17:24., "Father, I will." Father, there he prays as a man; I will, there
he gives as God. This is a great comfort to a believer, when his prayer
is weak and he can hardly pray for himself, Christ's prayer in heaven
is mighty and powerful. Though God may refuse prayer as it comes
from us, yet not as it comes from Christ.
4. Christ's intercession is always ready at hand. The people of God
have sins of daily incursion; and, besides these, sometimes they lapse
into great sins, and God is provoked, and his justice is ready to break
forth upon them; but Christ's intercession is ready at hand, he daily
makes up the breaches between God and them, he presents the
merits of his blood to his Father to pacify him. When the wrath of
God began to break out upon Israel, Aaron presently stepped in with
his censer, and offered incense, and so the plague was stayed, Numb.
16:47., so, no sooner doth a child of God offend, and God begin to be
angry, but immediately Christ steps in and intercedes: "Father, it is
my child hath offended, though he hath forgotten his duty, thou hast
not lost thy bowels: O pity him, and let thy anger be turned away
from him!" Christ's intercession is ready at hand, and, upon the least

failings of the godly, he stands up and makes request for them in
heaven.
QUEST. What are the fruits of Christ's intercession?
Ans. 1st Fruit, Justification. In justification there are two things: 1.
Guilt is remitted. 2. Righteousness is imputed, Jer. 33:16., "The Lord
our righteousness." We are reputed not only righteous as the angels,
but as Christ, having his robes put upon us, 2 Cor. 5:21. But whence
is it that we are justified? It is from Christ's intercession, Rom. 8:33,
34., "Lord," saith Christ, "these are the persons I have died for; look
upon them as if they had not sinned, and repute them righteous."
2d Fruit. The unction of the Spirit, 1 John 2:20., "Ye have an unction
from the Holy One." This unction or anointing is nothing else but the
work of sanctification in the heart whereby the Spirit makes us
partake of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1:4. Such as speak of the
philosopher's stone, suppose it to have such a property, that when it
toucheth the metal it turns it into gold: such a property hath the
Spirit of God upon the soul; when it toucheth the soul, it puts it into
a divine nature, it makes it to be holy and to resemble God. The
sanctifying work of the Spirit is the fruit of Christ's intercession,
John 7:39., "The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was
not yet glorified." Christ being glorified and in heaven, now he prays
the Father, and the Father sends the Spirit, who pours out the holy
anointing upon the elect.
3d Fruit. The purification of our holy things. It is Christ's work in
heaven, not only to present his own prayers to his Father, but he
prays over our prayers again, Rev. 8:3., "Another angel came, having
a golden censer, and there was given to him much incense, that he
should offer it with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar."
This angel was Christ; he takes the golden censer of his merits, and

puts our prayers into this censer, and with the incense of his
intercession makes our prayers go up as a sweet perfume in heaven.
It is observable, Lev. 16:16., "Aaron shall make atonement for the
holy place." This was typical, to shew that our holy duties need to
have atonement made for them. Our best services, as they come from
us, are mixed with corruption, as wine that tastes of the cask, Isa.
64:6., "they are filthy rags;" but Christ purifies and sweetens these
services, mixing the sweet odours of his intercession with them; and
now God accepts and crowns them. What would become of our
duties without an high priest? Christ's intercession doth to our
prayers as the fan to the chaff, it winnows it from the corn; so Christ
winnows out the chaff which intermixeth with our prayers.
4th Fruit. Access with boldness unto the throne of grace, Heb. 4:16.
We have a great high priest that is passed into the heavens, let us go,
—come boldly to the throne of grace; we have a friend at court that
speaks a good word for us, and is following our cause in heaven,
therefore let this animate and encourage us in prayer. We think it too
much boldness; what, such sinners as we to come for pardon,—we
shall be denied! This is a sinful modesty: did we indeed come in our
own name in prayer, it were presumption, but Christ intercedes for
us in the force and efficacy of his blood. Now, to be afraid to come to
God in prayer, is a dishonour to Christ's intercession.
5th Fruit. The sending the Comforter, John 14:16., "I will pray the
Father, and he will give you another Comforter." The comfort of the
Spirit is distinct from the anointing; this comfort is very sweet,—
sweeter than the honey-drops from the comb,—it is the manna in the
golden pot, it is vinum in pectore,—a drop of this heavenly comfort is
enough to sweeten a sea of worldly sorrow,—it is called "the earnest
of the Spirit," 2 Cor. 1:22. An earnest assures one of the whole sum.
The Spirit gives us an earnest of heaven in our hand. Whence is this

comforting work of the Spirit? Thank Christ's intercession for it: 'I
will pray the Father, and he shall send the Comforter.'
6th Fruit. Perseverance in grace, John 17:11., "Keep through thy own
name those whom thou hast given me." It is not our prayer, or
watchfulness, or grace that keeps us, but it is God's care and
maintenancy; he holds us, that we do not fall away. And, whence is it
God preserves us? It is from Christ's intercession; "Father keep
them." That prayer of Christ for Peter, is the copy of his prayer now
in heaven, Luke 22:32., "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not." Peter's faith did fail in some degree when he denied Christ; but
Christ prayed that it might not totally fail. The saints persevere in
believing, because Christ perseveres in praying.
7th Fruit. Absolution at the day of judgment. Christ shall judge the
world, John 5:22., "God hath committed all judgment to the Son."
Now sure those that Christ hath so prayed for, he will absolve when
he sits upon the bench of judicature. Will Christ condemn those he
prays for? Believers are his spouse; will he condemn his spouse?
Use 1st. Branch 1. See here the constancy of Christ's love to the elect.
He did not only die for them, but intercedes for them in heaven;
when Christ hath done dying, he hath not done loving; he is now at
work in heaven for the saints; he carries their names on his breast,
and will never leave praying till that prayer be granted, John 17:24.,
"Father, I will, that those whom thou hast given me, be with me
where I am."
Branch 2. See whence it is that the prayers of the saints are so
powerful with God. Jacob, as an angel, prevailed with God; Moses'
prayer tied God's hands; Precibus suis tanquam vinquam vinculis
ligatum tenuit Deum; "Let me alone," Exod. 32:10. Whence is this? It
is Christ's prayer in heaven makes the saints' prayers so available.

Christ's divine nature is the altar on which he offers up our prayers,
and so they prevail; prayer, as it comes from the saints, is but weak
and languid; but when the arrow of a saint's prayer is put into the
bow of Christ's intercession, now it pierceth the throne of grace.
Branch 3. It shows where a Christian must chiefly fix his eye when he
comes to prayer, viz. on Christ's intercession. We are to look up to
the mercy-seat, but to hope for mercy through Christ's intercession.
We read, Lev. 6, that Aaron made the atonement as well by the
incense, as by the blood: we must look to the cloud of incense, viz.
the intercession of Christ. Christian, look up to thy advocate, one that
God can deny nothing to; a word from Christ's mouth is more than if
all the angels in heaven were interceding for thee. If a man had a suit
depending in the court of chancery, and had a skilful lawyer to plead,
this would much encourage him. Christ is now at the court appearing
for us, Heb. 9:24., and he hath great potency in heaven; this should
much encourage us to look up to him, and hope for audience in
prayer. We might indeed be afraid to present our petitions, if we had
not Christ to deliver them.
Branch 4. The sad condition of an unbeliever: he hath none in
heaven to speak a word for him, John 17:9., "I pray not for the
world;" as good be shut out of heaven as be shut out of Christ's
prayer. Christ pleads for the saints, as queen Esther did for the Jews,
when they should have been destroyed: "Let my people be given me
at my request," Esth. 7:3. When the devil shows the blackness of
their sins, Christ shows the redness of his wounds. But how sad is the
condition of that man Christ will not pray for, nay, that he will pray
against? As queen Esther petitioned against Haman, and then his
face was covered, Esth. 7:6., and he was led away to execution. It is
sad when the law shall be against the sinner, and conscience, and

judge, and no friend to speak a word for him; there is no way then,
but, jailor, take the prisoner.
Branch 5. If Christ makes intercession, then we have nothing to do
with other intercessors. The church of Rome distinguisheth between
mediators of redemption and intercession, and say, the angels do not
redeem us, but intercede for us, and pray to them; but Christ only
can intercede for us ex officio. God hath consecrated him an high
priest, Heb. 5:6., "Thou art a priest for ever." Christ intercedes vi
pretii,—in the virtue of his blood; he pleads his merits to his Father;
the angels have no merits to bring to God, therefore can be no
intercessors for us; whoever is our advocate must be our propitiation
to pacify God, 1 John 2:1., "We have an advocate with the Father, v.
2. And he is our propitiation." The angels cannot be our propitiation,
therefore not our advocates.
2d Use. Of trial. How shall we know that Christ intercedes for us?
They have little ground to think Christ prays for them, who never
pray for themselves: well, but how shall we know?
Ans. I. If Christ be praying for us, then his Spirit is praying in us, Gal.
4:6., "He hath sent forth his Spirit into your heart, crying, Abba,
Father;" and Rom. 8:26. the Spirit helps us with sighs and groans;
not only with gifts but groans. We need not climb up into the
firmament to see if the sun be there, we may see the beauty of it upon
the earth; so we need not go up into heaven to see if Christ be there
interceding for us, let us look into our hearts, if they are quickened
and inflamed in prayer, and we can cry, Abba, Father. By this
interceding of the Spirit within us, we may know Christ is interceding
above for us.
A. 2. If we are given to Christ, then he intercedes for us, John 17:9., "I
pray for them whom thou hast given me;" 'tis one thing for Christ to

be given to us, another for us to be given to Christ.
QUEST. How know you that?
Ans. If thou art a believer, then thou art one given to Christ, and he
prays for thee; faith is an act of recumbency, we do rest on Christ as
the stones in the building rest upon the corner-stone. Faith throws
itself into Christ's arms; it saith, "Christ is my priest,—his blood is
my sacrifice,—his divine nature is my altar, and here I rest." This
faith is seen by its effects; it is a refining work, and a resigning work.
It purifies the heart, there is the refining work; it makes a deed of gift
to Christ, it gives up its use, its love to him, 1 Cor. 6:19., there is the
resigning work of faith. These that believe are given to Christ, and
have a part in his prayer, John 17:20., "Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word."
3d Use. Of exhortation. Branch 1. It stirs us up to several duties: 1. If
Christ appears for us in heaven, then we must appear for him upon
earth; Christ is not ashamed to carry our names on his breast, and
shall we be ashamed of his truth? Doth he plead our cause, and shall
we not stand up in his cause? What a mighty argument is this to
stand up for the honour of Christ in times of apostacy? Christ is
interceding for us: doth he present our names in heaven, and shall
not we profess his name on earth?
Branch 2. If Christ lays out all his interest for us at the throne of
grace, we must lay out all our interest for him, Phil. 1:20., "That
Christ may be magnified." Trade your talents for Christ's glory;
there's no man but has some talent to trade,—one parts, another
estate. O trade for Christ's glory! Spend and be spent for him; let
your heart study for Christ, your hands work for Christ, your tongue
speak for him; if Christ be an advocate for us in heaven, we must be

factors for him on earth, every one in his sphere must act vigorously
for Christ.
Branch 3. Believe in this glorious intercession of Christ! That he now
intercedes for us, and that for his sake God will accept us: in the text,
"Who maketh intercession for us." If we believe not, we dishonour
Christ's intercession. If a poor sinner may not go to Christ as his high
priest, believing in his intercession, then are we Christians in a worse
condition under the gospel than the Jews were under the law. They,
when they had sinned, had their high priest to make atonement: and
shall not we have our high priest? Is not Christ our Aaron, who
presents his blood and incense before the mercy-seat? O look up by
faith to Christ's intercession! Christ did not only pray for his disciples
and apostles, but for the weakest believer.
Branch 4. Love your intercessor, 1 Cor. 16:22., "If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema." Kindness invites love;
had you a friend at court, who, when you were questioned for
delinquency or debt, should plead with the judge for you, and bring
you off your troubles, would you not love that friend? So it is here,
how oft doth Satan put in his bills against us in the court? Now
Christ is at the Judge's hand, he sits at his Father's right hand ever to
plead for us, and to make our peace with God. O how should our
hearts be fired with love to Christ! Love him with a sincere and
superlative love, above estate, relations: BERN. Plusquam tua, tuos.
And our fire of love should be as fire on the altar, never to go out,
Lev. 6:13.
4th Use. Of comfort to believers. Christ is at work for you in heaven,
he makes intercession for you. O! but I am afraid Christ does not
intercede for me.
QUEST. I am a sinner; who doth Christ intercede for?

Ans. Isa. 53:12., "He made intercession for the transgressors." Did
Christ open his sides for thee, and will he not open his mouth to
plead for thee?
QUEST. But I have offended my high priest by distrusting his blood,
abusing his love, grieving his Spirit; and will he ever pray for me?
Ans. Which of us may not say so? But, Christian, dost thou mourn for
unbelief? Be not discouraged, thou mayest have a part in Christ's
prayer, Numb. 16, "The congregation murmured against Aaron;" yet,
though they had sinned against their high priest, v. 48., "Aaron ran
in with his censer, and stood between the dead and the living." If so
much bowels in Aaron who was but a type of Christ, how much more
bowels are in Christ who will pray for them who have sinned against
their high priest? Did not he pray for them that crucified him,
"Father, forgive them."
QUEST. But I am unworthy; what am I, that Christ should intercede
for me?
Ans. The work of Christ's intercession is a work of free grace; Christ's
praying for us, is from his pitying of us; Christ looks not at our
worthiness, but our wants.
QUEST. But I am followed with sad temptations?
Ans. But though Satan tempts, Christ prays, and Satan shall be
vanquished; though thou mayest lose a single battle, yet not the
victory; Christ prays that thy faith fail not, therefore, Christian, say,
"Why art thou cast down, O my soul?" Christ intercedes; it is man
that sins,—it is God that prays; the Greek word for advocate signifies
comforter. This is a sovereign comfort, Christ makes intercession.

OF CHRIST'S KINGLY OFFICE
QUEST. XXVI. HOW doth Christ execute the office of a king?
ANS. In subduing us to himself, in ruling and defending us, and in
restraining and conquering all his and our enemies.
Now of Christ's regal office, Rev. 19:16., "And he hath on his vesture,
and on his thigh, a name written, 'King of kings, and Lord of
lords.' "—Jesus Christ is of mighty renown, he is a king; 1. He hath a
kingly title, 'High and Mighty,' Isa. 57:15.—2. He hath his insignia
regalia,—his ensigns of royalty; corona est insigne regiœ potestatis,—
his crown, Rev. 6:2.; his sword, Ps. 45:3., "Gird thy sword upon thy
thigh;" his sceptre, Heb. 1:8., "A sceptre of righteousness is the
sceptre of thy kingdom."—3. His escutcheon, or coat armour; he
gives the lion in his arms, Rev. 5:5., "The lion of the tribe of Judah."
And he is, the text saith, "King of kings." He hath a pre-eminence of
all all other kings; he is called, "the Prince of the kings of the earth,"
Rev. 1:5. He must needs be so, for "by him kings reign," Prov. 8:15.
They hold their crowns by immediate tenure from this great King.
Christ infinitely outvies all other princes; he hath the highest throne,
the largest do minions, and the longest possession, Heb 1:8., "Thy
throne, O God, is for ever and ever." Christ hath many heirs, but no
successors. Well may he he called "King of kings," for he hath an
unlimited power; the power of other kings is limited, but Christ's
power is unlimited, Ps. 135:6., "Whatsoever he pleased, that did he,
in heaven and earth, and in the sea." Christ's power is as large as his
will. The angels take the oath of allegiance to him, Heb. 1:6., "Let all
the angels of God worship him."

QUEST. How doth Christ come to be king?
Ans. Not by usurpation, but legally. Christ holds his crown by
immediate tenure from heaven. God the Father hath decreed him to
be king, Ps. 2:6, 7., "I have set my king upon my holy hill: I will
declare the decree." God hath anointed and sealed him to his regal
office, John 6:27., "Him hath God the Father sealed." God hath set
the crown upon his head.
QUEST. In what sense is Christ king?
Ans. Two ways: 1st. In reference to his people. And, 2d. In reference
to his enemies.
1st. In reference to his people: 1. To govern them. It was prophesied
of Christ before he was born, Mat. 2:6., "And thou, Bethelehem, art
not the least among the princes of Judah; for out of thee shall come a
governor that shall rule my people Israel." It is a vain thing for a king
to have a crown on his head, unless he have a sceptre in his hand to
rule.
QUEST. Where doth Christ rule?
Ans. His kingdom is spiritual. He rules in the hearts of men. He sets
up his throne where no other king doth, he rules the will and
affections, his power binds the conscience, he subdues men's lusts,
Mic. 7:19., "He will subdue our iniquities."
QUEST. What doth Christ rule by?
Ans. By law, and by love: 1. He rules by law. It is one of the jura
regalia, the flowers of the crown, to enact laws. Christ as king makes
laws, and by his laws he rules: the law of faith, "believe in the Lord
Jesus,"—the law of sanctity, 1 Pet. 1:15., "Be ye holy in all manner of

conversation." Many would admit Christ to be their advocate to
plead for them, but not their king to rule them.—2. He rules by love.
He is a king full of mercy and clemency; as he hath a sceptre in his
hand, so an olive branch of peace in his mouth. Though he be the
Lion of the tribe of Judah for majesty, yet the Lamb of God for
meekness. His regal rod hath honey at the end of it. He sheds abroad
his love into the hearts of his subjects; he rules them with promises
as well as precepts. This makes all his subjects become volunteers:
they are willing to pay their allegiance to him, Ps. 110:3., his people
are a willing people.
2d. Christ is a king to defend his people. As Christ hath a sceptre to
rule them, so a shield to defend them, Ps. 3:3., "Thou, O Lord, art a
shield for me." When Antiochus did rage furiously against the Jews,
he took away the vessels of the Lord's house, set up an idol in the
temple; then this great king, called Michael, did stand up for them to
defend them, Dan. 12:1. Christ preserves his church as a spark in the
ocean, as a flock of sheep among wolves. That the sea should be
higher than the earth and yet not drown it, is a wonder so that the
wicked should be so much higher than the church in power, and not
devour it, is because Christ hath this inscription on his vesture and
his thigh, KING OF KINGS. Ps. 124:2, 3., "If it had not been the Lord,
who was on our side, they had swallowed us up." They say, lions are
insomnes, they have little or no sleep; it is true of the Lion of the
tribe of Judah, he never slumbers nor sleeps, but watcheth over his
church to defend it: Isa. 27:2, 3., "Sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red
wine; I the Lord do keep it, lest any hurt it. I will keep it night and
day." If the enemies destroy the church, it must be at a time when it
is neither night nor day, for Christ keeps it day and night. Christ is
said to carry his church, as the eagle her young ones upon her wings,
Exod. 19:4. The arrow must first hit the eagle before it can hurt the
young ones, and shoot through her wings: the enemies must first

strike through Christ, before they can destroy his church. Let the
wind and storms be up, and the church almost covered with waves,
yet Christ is in the ship of the church, and so long there is no danger
of shipwreck. Nor will Christ only defend his church, as he is king,
but deliver it, 2 Tim. 4:17., "And I was delivered out of the mouth of
the lion," viz. Nero. 1 Chron. 11:14., "The Lord saved them by a great
deliverance." Sometimes Christ is said to command deliverance, Ps.
64:4.; sometimes to create deliverance, Isa. 45:18. Christ as a king,
commands deliverance, and as a God creates it. And deliverance
shall come in his time. Isa. 60:22., "I the Lord will hasten it in his
time."
QUEST. When is the time that this King will deliver his people?
Ans. When the hearts of his people are humblest, when their prayers
are ferventest, when their faith is strongest, when their forces are
weakest, when their enemies are highest, now is the usual time that
Christ puts forth his kingly power in their deliverance, Isa. 33:2, 8, 9.
3d. Christ is a king to reward his people. There's nothing lost by
serving this king: 1. He rewards his subjects in this life: (1.) He gives
them inward peace and joy; a bunch of grapes by the way: and
oftentimes riches and honour. "Godliness hath the promise of this
life," 1 Tim. 4:8. These are, as it were, the saints' vails. But besides
the great reward is to come, "An eternal weight of glory," 2 Cor. 4:17.
Christ makes all his subjects kings, Rev. 2:10., "I will give thee a
crown of life." This crown will be full of jewels, and it will 'never
fade,' 1 Pet. 5:4.—(2.) Christ is a king in reference of his enemies, in
subduing and conquering them; he pulls down their pride, befools
their policy, restrains their malice. That stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, which smote the image, Dan. 2:34., was an
emblem, saith Austin, of Christ's monarchical power, conquering and

triumphing over his enemies. Christ will make his enemies his
footstool, Ps. 110:1. He can destroy them with ease, 2 Chron. 14:11.,
"It is nothing with thee, to help." He can do it with weak means,
without means. He can make the enemies destroy themselves: he set
the Persians against the Grecians: and, 2 Chron. 20:23., the children
of Ammon helped to destroy one another. Thus Christ is king in
vanquishing the enemies of his church.—This is a great ground of
comfort to the church of God in the midst of all the combinations of
the enemy, "Christ is king;" and he can not only bound the enemies'
power, but break it. The church hath more with her than against her,
she hath Emmanuel on her side, even that great King to whom all
knees must bend. Christ is called "a man of war," Exod. 15:3., he
understands all the policy of chivalry he is described with seven eyes
and seven horns, Rev. 5:6. The seven eyes are to discern the
conspiracies of his enemies, and the seven horns are to push and vex
his enemies. Christ is described with a crown and a bow, Rev. 6:2.,
"He that sat on the white horse had a bow, and a crown was given
unto him, and he went forth conquering and to conquer." The crown
is an ensign of his kingly office, and the bow is to shoot his enemies
to death. Christ is described with a vesture dipt in blood, Rev. 19:13.
He hath a golden sceptre to rule his people, but an iron rod to break
his enemies: Rev. 17:12, 14., "The ten horns thou sawest are ten
kings; these shall make war with the Lamb, but the Lamb shall
overcome them;" for he is the King of kings. The enemies may set up
their standard, but Christ will set up his trophies at last, Rev. 14:18,
20., "And the angel gathered the vine of the earth, and cast it into the
great wine-press of the wrath of God, and the wine-press was
trodden, and blood came out of the wine-press." The enemies of
Christ shall be but as so many clusters of ripe grapes, to be cast into
the great wine-press of the wrath of God, and to be trodden by Christ
till their blood come out. Christ will at last come off victor, and all his
enemies shall be put under his feet; gaudeo quod Christus Dominus

est, alioqui desperassem,—"I am glad Christ reigns, else I should
have despaired," said Miconius in an epistle to Calvin.
Use 1st. Branch 1. See hence, it is no disparagement to serve Christ;
he is a king, and it is no dishonour to be employed in a king's service.
Some are apt to reproach the saints for their piety; they serve the
Lord Christ, he who hath this inscription upon his vesture, KING OF
KINGS. Theodosius thought it a greater honour to be a servant of
Christ, than the head of an empire, Servere est regnare. Christ's
servants are called 'vessels of honour,' 2 Tim. 2:21.; and 'a royal
nation,' 1 Pet. 2:9. Serving of Christ ennobles us with dignity: it is a
greater honour to serve Christ, than to have kings serve us.
Branch 2. If Christ he king, it informs us, that all matters of fact must
one day be brought before him. Christ hath jus vitæ et necis,—the
power of life and death in his hand, John 5:22., "The Father hath
committed all judgment to the Son." He who once hung upon the
cross, shall sit upon the bench of judicature; kings must come before
him to be judged; they who once sat upon the throne, must appear at
the bar. God hath committed all judgment to the Son, and Christ's is
the highest court of judicature; if this king once condemns men,
there is no appeal to any other court.
Branch 3. See whither we are to go, when we are foiled by corruption;
go to Christ, he is king; desire him by his kingly power to subdue thy
corruptions, to bind these kings with chains, Ps. 149:8. We are apt to
say of our sins, "These sons of Zeruiah will be too strong for us:" we
shall never overcome this pride and infidelity: ay, but go to Christ, he
is king; though our lusts are too strong for us, yet not for Christ to
conquer, he can by his Spirit break the power of sin. Joshua, when he
had conquered five kings, caused his servants to set their feet on the

necks of those kings; so Christ can and will set his feet on the necks
of our lusts.
Use 2d. Of caution. Is Christ King of kings? Let all great ones take
heed how they employ their power against Christ. Christ gives them
their power, and if this power shall be made use of for the
suppressing of his kingdom, and ordinances, their account will be
heavy. God hath laid the key of government upon Christ's shoulders,
Isa. 9:6., and to go to oppose Christ in his kingly office, it is as if the
thorns should set themselves in battalia against the fire, or a child
fight with an archangel. Christ's sword on his thigh is able to avenge
all his quarrels: it is not good to stir a lion; let no man provoke the
"Lion of the tribe of Judah, whose eyes are as a lamp of fire, and the
rocks are thrown down by him," Nah. 1:6. "He shall cut off the spirit
of princes," Ps. 76:12.
Use 3d. Branch 1. If Christ be a great king, submit to him. Say not, as
those Jews, "We have no king but Cæsar,"—no king but our lusts.
This is to choose the bramble to rule over you, and "out of the
bramble will come forth a fire," Judg. 9. Submit to Christ willingly.
All the devils in hell submit to Christ; but it is against their will, they
are his slaves, not his subjects. Submit cheerfully to Christ's person
and his laws. Many would have Christ their Saviour, but not their
Prince; such as will not have Christ to be their king to rule them,
shall never have his blood to save them. Obey all Christ's princely
commands; if he commands love, humility, good works, be as the
needle which points which way soever the loadstone draws.
Branch 2. Let such admire God's free grace, who were once under the
power and tyranny of Satan, and now Christ hath made them of
slaves to become the subjects of his kingdom. Christ did not need
subjects, he hath legions of angels ministering to him; but in his love,

he hath honoured you to make you his subjects. O how long was it
ere Christ could prevail with you to come under his banner! How
much opposition did he meet with, ere you would wear this Prince's
colours! But at last omnipotent grace overcame you. When Peter was
sleeping between two soldiers, an angel came and beat off his chains,
Acts 12:7., so, when thou wert sleeping in the devil's arms, that Christ
should, by his Spirit smite thy heart, and cause the chains of sin to
fall off, and make thee a subject of his kingdom. O admire free grace!
Thou who art a subject of Christ, art sure to reign with Christ for
ever.