PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 14
Representations of the Glory of Christ in the Old Testament

---

The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 8. Representations of the Glory of Christ in the Old Testament.

and its branches, John 15: 1-5. Hereby is there a continual communication from his all-fulness of grace unto the whole church and all
the members of it, unto all the ends and duties of spiritual life. They live, nevertheless not they, but Christ liveth in them; and the life
which they lead in the flesh is by the faith of the Son of God. And the other, – by virtue of the law and constitution of the Gospel, – is,
that hereon his righteousness and all the fruits of his meditation are imputed unto us; the glory of which mystery the apostle unfolds,
Rom. 3-5.
I might add hereunto the mutual inbeing that is between him and believers by love; for – the way of the communication of his love
unto them being by the shedding of it abroad in their hearts by the Holy Ghost, and their returns of love unto him being wrought in
them by an almighty efficiency of the same Spirit – there is that which is deeply mysterious and glorious in it. I might mention also
the continuation of his discharge of all his offices towards us, whereon all our receptions from him, or all the benefits of his mediation
whereof we are made partakers, do depend. But the few instances that have been given of the glory of Christ in this mysterious
communication of himself unto his church may suffice to give us such a view of it as to fill our hearts with holy admiration and
thanksgiving.

The Glory of Christ in the Recapitulation of all things in Him.
In the last place, the Lord Christ is peculiarly and eminently glorious in the recapitulation of all things in him, after they had been
scattered and disordered by sin. This the apostle proposeth as the most signal effect of divine wisdom, and the sovereign pleasure of
God.
“He has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good
pleasure, which he has purposed in himself: that, in the dispensation of the fulness of times, he might gather together in one all things
in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him,” Eph 1: 8-10.
F or the discovery of the mind of the Holy Ghost in these words, so far as I am at present concerned, – namely, as unto the
representation of the glory of Christ in them, – sundry brief observations must be premised; and in them it will be necessary that we
briefly declare the original of all these things in heaven and earth, their primitive order, the confusion that ensued thereon, with their
restitution in Christ, and his glory thereby.
1. God alone has all being in him. Hence he gives himself that name, “I AM,” Exod. 3: 14. He was eternally All; when all things else
that ever were, or now are, or shall be, were nothing. And when they are, they are no otherwise but as “they are of him, and through
him, and to him,” Rom. 11: 36. Moreover, his being and goodness are the same. The goodness of God is the meekness of the Divine
Being to be communicative of itself in its effects. Hence this is the first notion of the divine nature, – infinite being and goodness, in a
nature intelligent and self-subsistent. So the apostle declares it, “He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder,” Heb. 11: 6.
2. In this state of infinite, eternal being and goodness, antecedent unto any act of wisdom or power without himself to give existence
unto other things, God was, and is, eternally in himself all that he will be, all that he can be, unto eternity. For where there is infinite
being and infinite goodness, there is infinite blessedness and happiness, whereunto nothing can be added. God is always the same.
That is his name, “‘attah hu’” – Ps. 102: 27, “Thou art he,” – always the same. All things that are, make no addition unto God, no
change in his state. His blessedness, happiness, self-satisfaction, as well as all other his infinite perfections, were absolutely the same
before the creation of any thing, whilst there was nothing but himself, as they are since he has made all things: for the blessedness of
God consists in the ineffable mutual in being of the three holy persons in the same nature, with the immanent reciprocal acting of the
Father and the Son in the eternal love and complacency of the Spirit. Hereunto nothing can be added, herein no change can be made
by any external work or effect of power. Herein does God act in the perfect knowledge and perfect love of his own perfections, unto an
infinite acquiescence therein, – which is the divine blessedness. This gives us the true notion of the divine nature antecedent unto the
manifestation of it made by any outward effects: – infinite being and goodness, eternally blessed in the knowledge and enjoyment of
itself by inconceivable, ineffable, internal acting, answering the manner of its subsistence, which is in three distinct persons.
3 . This being and goodness of God, by his own will and pleasure acting themselves in infinite wisdom and power, produced the
creation of all things. Herein he communicated a finite, limited dependent being and goodness unto other things without himself. For
all being and goodness being, as was said, in him alone, it was necessary that the first outward work and effect of the divine nature
must be the communication of being and goodness unto other things. Wherefore, as when he had given unto every thing its being out
of nothing, by the word of his power, saying, Let them be, and they were; so it is said, that he looked on all that he had made, “and,
behold, they were exceeding good,” Gen. 1: 31. Being and goodness must be the first outward effects of the divine nature, which, being
wrought by infinite power and wisdom, do represent unto us the glory of God in the creation of all things. Infinite being in selfsubsistence, which is necessary in the first cause and spring of all things, – infinite goodness to communicate the effect of this being
unto that which was not, – and infinite wisdom and power in that communication, – are gloriously manifested therein.
4 . In this state, all things that were made, depended immediately on God himself, without the interposition of any other head of
influence or rule. They had the continuance of their being and its preservation from the immediate acting of these properties of the
divine nature whereby they were made; and their dependence on God was by virtue of that law, which was implanted on the
principles and powers of their several natures by God himself.
5. Thus “In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth”. He provided himself of two distinct, rational families, that should
depend on him according to a law of moral obedience, and thereby give glory to him; with two distinct habitations for them, cognate
unto their nature and use, – heaven above, and the earth beneath. The earth he appointed for the habitation of man; which was every
way suited unto the constitution of his nature, the preservation of his being, and the end of his creation in giving glory to God. Heaven

he prepared for the habitation of the angels; which was suited unto the constitution of their nature, the preservation of their being,
and the end of their creation, in giving glory to God. Wherefore, as man had power and dominion over all things here below, and was
to use them all unto the glory of God, – by which means God received glory from them also, though in themselves brute and
inanimate; so the angels had the like dominion over the celestial and ethereal bodies, wherewith God has fitted the place of their
habitation, that through the contemplation and use of them God might have a revenue of glory and praise from them also. To
suppose any other race of intellectual creatures, besides angels in heaven and men on earth, is not only without all countenance from
any divine testimony, but it disturbs and disorders the whole representation of the glory of God made unto us in the Scripture, and the
whole design of his wisdom and grace, as declared therein. Intellectual creatures not comprehended in that government of God and
mystery of his wisdom in Christ which the Scripture reveals, are a chimera framed in the imaginations of some men, scarce duly
sensible of what it is to be wise unto sobriety.
6. This order of things was beautiful and comely. Hence were they all said to be “exceeding good.” For each of these families had their
own immediate, distinct dependence on God. He was the immediate head of them. There was no other common head interposed
between God and them. They were not a head unto one another. There were no communications unto them, but what were
immediate from God himself. And their union among themselves was in this alone, that all their obedience did meet and centre in
God. So God made the heavens and the earth, and two distinct families in them, for himself.
7. This beautiful order in itself, this union between the two families of God, was disturbed, broken, dissolved by the entrance of sin; for
hereby part of the family above, and the whole family below, fell off from their dependence on God; and ceasing to centre in him as
their head, they fell into variance and enmity among themselves. For the centre of this union and order being removed and lost,
nothing but enmity and confusion remained among them. Hereon, to show that its goodness was lost, God cursed the earth and all
that was in it; for it was put in subjection unto man, who was now fallen from him. Howbeit he cursed not the heavens, which were
in subjection unto the angels, because some of them only left their habitation; and the habitation of the residue was not to be cursed
for their sakes. But mankind was wholly gone off from God.
8. The angels that sinned God utterly rejected for ever, as an example of his severity; the whole race of mankind he would not utterly
cast off, but determined to recover and save a remnant, according to the election of grace; which, how he did it in a way of
condecency unto all his divine perfections, I have elsewhere declared.
9 . Howbeit, he would not restore them into their former estate, so as to have again two distinct families, each in an immediate
dependence on himself, though he left them in different and distinct habitations, Eph 3: 15; but he would gather them both into one,
and that under a new head, in whom the one part should be preserved from sinning, and the other delivered from sin committed.
10. This, then, is that which the apostle declares in these words, “To gather together in one all things which are in heaven, and which
are on earth, even in him.” And so he again expresseth it, Col. 1: 20, “To reconcile all things unto himself in him, whether they be
things in earth, or things in heaven.” All things were fallen into disorder and confusion by sin; they were fallen off from God into
variance among themselves. God would not restore them into their first order, in an immediate dependence on his divine perfections.
He would no longer keep them in two distinct families; but he would, in his infinite wisdom and goodness, gather them up into one
common head, on whom they should have their immediate dependence, and be reconciled again among themselves.
11. This new head, wherein God has gathered up all things in heaven and earth into one, one body, one family, on whom is all their
dependence, in whom they all now consist, is Jesus Christ the Son of God incarnate. See 1 Cor. 11: 3; Eph 1: 22, 23. This glory was
reserved for him; none other could be meet for it or worthy of it. See Col. 1: 17-19.
12. To answer all the ends of this new Head of God’s recollected family, all power in heaven and earth, all fulness of grace and glory, is
committed unto him. There is no communication from God, no act of rule towards this family, no supply of virtue, power, grace, or
goodness unto angels or men, but what is immediately from this new head whereinto they are gathered. In him they all consist, on
him do they depend, unto him are they subject; in their relation unto him doth their peace, union, and agreement among themselves
consist. This is the recapitulation of all things intended by the apostle.
13. It is true that he acts distinctly and variously towards the two parts of the re-collected family of angels and men, according as their
different states and conditions do require. For, – 1. We had need of a reparation by redemption and grace, which the angels had not. 2.
Angels were capable of immediate confirmation in glory, which we are not, until we come to heaven. Therefore, – 1. He assumed our
nature that it might be repaired, which he did not thy] the nature of the angels 2. He gives us union unto himself by his Spirit, which
exalts us into a dignity and honour meet for fellowship with them in the same family.
This is a brief account of the mysterious work of divine wisdom in the recapitulation of all things in Jesus Christ; and herein is he
transcendently glorious, or his glory herein is far above our comprehension; yet some things may be observed, to direct us in the view
and contemplation of it. As, – 1. He alone was a meet and capable subject of it. He alone could bear the weight of this glory. No mere
creature in heaven or earth was meet to be thus made the head of the whole new creation of God. In none of them could all things
consist. None of them was meet to be thus in the place of God, to have all things depend upon him, and be put in subjection unto him;
so as that there should be no communication between God and the creation but by and through him alone. Wherefore, when the Holy
Ghost assigns this glory unto him, he so describes him as that we may discern his singular meekness for it; as, that he is “the
brightness of the Father’s glory, and the express image of his person, upholding all things by the word of his power,” Heb. 1: 3; – that
he is “the image of the invisible God, the first born of every creature, by whom all things were created that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers; all things were created by him, and
for him; and he is before all things, and by him all things consist,” Col. 1: 15-17. Such a one alone, and no other, was meet to bear and
uphold this glory. And the glory of his person is such, as that it is the blessedness of all creatures to centre in this glory of his office.
2. This is that glory which God designed unto his only Son incarnate, and it gives us a little view into the glory of that mystery, the
wonderful eternal design of God to glorify himself in the incarnation of Christ. God would have his eternal, his only-begotten Son to
be incarnate, to take our nature on him, – to be made man. What is his design in this incomprehensible work of his wisdom, love, and
power? Indeed, in the first place, it was for the redemption of the church, by the sacrifice of himself, and other acts of his mediation.
But there is that which is more general and comprehensive, and wherein all the concerns of the glory of God do centre. And this was,

that he might “gather all things into one” in him; – that the whole creation, especially that which was to be eternally blessed, should
have a new head given unto it, for its sustentation, preservation, order, honour, and safety. All springs are in him, and all streams are
unto him, and in and by him unto God. Who can express the divine beauty, order, and harmony of all things that are in this, their
recapitulation in Christ? The union and communion between angels and men, – the order of the whole family in heaven and earth, –
the communication of life, grace, power, mercy, and consolation to the church, – the rule and disposal of all things unto the glory of
God, – do all depend hereon. This glory God designed unto his Son incarnate; and it was the greatest, the highest that could be
communicated unto him. For, as the apostle observes, all things are put in subjection unto him, he only excepted who does so make
them subject; that is, God the Father, 1 Cor. 15: 27.
There is no contemplation of the glory of Christ that ought more to affect the hearts of them that do believe with delight and joy, than
this, of the recapitulation of all things in him. One view by faith of him in the place of God, as the supreme head of the whole
creation. Moving, acting, guiding, and disposing of it, will bring in spiritual refreshment unto a believing refreshment unto a believing
soul.
And it will do so the more, in that it gives a glorious representation of his divine nature also. For that any mere creature should thus be
a head of life, motion, and power, as also of sovereign rule and disposal, of the whole new creation, with all things reduced into order
thereby, is not only an impious, but a foolish imagination.
Did we live more in the contemplation of this glory of Christ, and of the wisdom of God in this recapitulation of all things in him,
there is not anything of our duty which it would not mind us of, nor anything of privilege which it would not give us a sense of, as
might early be demonstrated.
3. In particular, the Lord Christ is glorious herein, in that the whole breach made on the glory of God in the creation, by the entrance
of sin, is hereby repaired and made up. The beauty and order of the whole creation consisted in its dependence on God, by the
obedience of the rational part of it, angels and men. Thereby were the being, the goodness, the wisdom, and power of God made
manifest. But the beauty of this order was defaced, and the manifestation of the divine perfections unto the glory of God eclipsed, by
the entrance of sin. But all is restored, repaired, and made up, in this recapitulation of all things in one new head, – Christ Jesus; yea,
the whole curious frame of the divine creation is rendered more beautiful than it was before. Hence the whole of it groaneth for the
interest of each part in this restoration of all things. Whatever there is of order, of beauty, of glory, in heaven above, or in earth
beneath, it all ariseth from this new relation of the creation unto the Son of God. Whatever is not gathered into one, even in him, in its
place, and according to its measure, is under darkness, disorder, and the curse. Hence the Jews have a saying, that “in the days of the
messiah all things shall be healed, but the serpent;” that is, the devil, and wicked men, which are as his seed.
4. He is glorious herein, in that he is appointed as the only meals of exerting and expressing all the treasures of the infinite wisdom of
God towards his creatures. The wisdom of God is absolutely, always, and in all things infinite. God does not, God cannot, act with
more wisdom in one thing than in another; as in the creation of man, than in that of any inanimate creatures. In the first creation,
infinite wisdom was the inseparable companion of infinite power: “Hove marvellous are thy works, O Lord! in wisdom hast thou
made them all”. But when the effects of this divine wisdom, in their principal beauty and glory, were defaced, greater treasures of
wisdom were required unto their reparation. And in this recollection of all things in Christ, did God lay them forth unto the utmost of
whatever he will do in dealing with his creatures. So the apostle expresseth it, Eph 3: 10, “To the intent that now, unto the
principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God.” By the recapitulation of all
things into this one head, the manifold, various, unsearchable wisdom of God was made known unto the angels themselves. They
knew not before of the design and work of God after the entrance of sin. These could not comprehend the wisdom that might repair
that loss. They knew not that divine wisdom had another way to take herein; at least they knew not what way that should be. But
hereby the manifold wisdom of God, his infinite wisdom in the treasures of it, able by various ways to attain the ends of his glory, was
made known unto them. Herein namely, in the re-collection of all things in Christ – divine wisdom has made known and represented
itself in all its stores and treasures unto angels and men. “In him are hid,” and by him are displayed, “all the treasures of wisdom,” Col.
2: 3. Herein is he glorious, and will be so to eternity.
6. He is glorious herein, in that hereby firmness and security is communicated unto the whole new creation. The first creation in its
order was a curious and glorious fabric. But every thing depending immediately on God, by virtue of the principles of its own nature
and the law of its obedience, all was brought unto a loss by the sin of angels and men. But now every thing that belongs unto this new
creation, even every believer in the world, as well as the angels in heaven, being gathered together in this one head, the whole and all,
and every part and member of it, seen every particular believer, are secured from ruin, such as befell all things before. In this new
Head they have an indissoluble consistency.
But manum de tabula. I shall insist on no more instances of this nature, which plentifully offer themselves in the Scripture unto us.
For who can declare this glory of Christ? who can speak of these things as he ought? I am so far from designing to set forth the whole
of it, that I am deeply sensible how little a portion I can comprehend of the least part of it. Nor can I attain unto any satisfaction in
these Meditations, but what issues in an humble admiration.

Differences between our Beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in this World
and by Sight in Heaven – The First of them Explained.
“We walk” here “by faith, and not by sight,” 2 Cor. 5: 7; that is, in the life of God, in our walking before him, in the whole of our
obedience therein, we are under the conduct and influence of faith, and not of sight. Those are the two spiritual powers of our sou1s; –
by the one whereof we are made partakers of grace, holiness, and obedience in this life; and by the other, of eternal blessedness and
glory.
Both these – namely, faith and sight, the one in this life, the other in that which is to come – have the same immediate object. For
they are the abilities of the soul to go forth unto, and to embrace their object. Now, this object of them both is the glory of Christ, as
has been declared, as also what that glory is, and wherein it does consist; wherefore my present design is to inquire into the difference

that is between our beholding of the glory of Christ in this world by faith, and the vision which we shall have of the same glory
hereafter.
The latter of these is peculiarly intended in that prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ for his disciples, John 17: 24, “Father, I will that they
also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me.” But I shall not
distinctly insist upon it, my design being another way, respecting principally the work of God in this life, and the privileges which we
enjoy thereby. Y et I shall now take a short prospect of that also; not absolutely, but in the differences that are between faith and sight,
or the view which we have of the glory of Christ in this world by faith, and that which they enjoy by vision who are above; – the
object of them both being adequately the same.
But herein, also, I shall have respect only unto some of those things which concern our practice, or the present immediate exercise of
faith. For I have elsewhere handled at large the state of the church above, or that of present glory, giving an account of the
administration of the office of Christ in heaven, his presence among the glorified souls, and the adoration of God under his conduct. I
have also declared the advantage which they have by being with him, and the prospect they have of his glory. Therefore these things
must here be only touched on.
These differences may be referred unto two heads: – 1. Those which arise from the different natures and acting of those means and
instruments whereby we apprehend this glory of Christ, – namely, faith and vision; and, 2. Those that arise from the different effects
produced by them. Instances in each kind shall be given.
1. The view which we have of the glory of Christ by faith in this world is obscure, dark, inevident, reflexive. So the apostle declares, 1
Cor. 13: 12, “Now we see through a glass darkly,” “di’ esoptrou en aivigmati”; – “through” or by “a glass, in a riddle,” a parable, a dark
saying. There is a double figurative limitation put upon our view of the glory of Christ, taken from the two ways of our perception of
what we apprehend, – namely, the sight of things, and the hearing of words.
The first is, that we have this view not directly, but reflexively and by way of a representation, as in a glass. For I take the grass here,
not to be optical or a prospective, which helps the sight, but a speculum, or a glass which reflects an image of what we do behold. It is
a sight like that which we have of a man in a glass, when we see not his person or substance, but an image or representation of them
only, which is imperfect.
The shadow or image of this glory of Christ is drawn in the gospel, and therein we behold it as the likeness of a man represented unto
us in a glass; and although it be obscure and imperfect in comparison of his own real, substantial glory, which is the object of vision in
heaven, yet is it the only image and representation of himself which he has left, and given unto us in this world. That woeful, cursed
invention of framing images of him out of stocks and stones, however adorned, or representations of him by the art of painting, are so
far from presenting unto the minds of men any thing of his real glory, that nothing can be more effectual to divert their thoughts and
apprehensions from it. But by this figurative expression of seeing in a glass, the apostle declares the comparative imperfection of our
present view of the glory of Christ.
But the allusion may be taken from an optic glass or tube also, whereby the sight of the eye is helped in beholding things at a great
distance. By the aid of such glasses, men will discover stars or heavenly lights, which, by reason of their distance from us, the eye of
itself is no way able to discern. And those which we do see are more fully represented, though remote enough from being so perfectly.
Such a glass is the gospel, without which we can make no discovery of Christ at all; but in the use of it we are far enough from
beholding him in the just dimensions of his glory.
And he adds another intimation of this imperfection, in an allusion unto the way whereby things are proposed and conveyed unto the
minds and apprehensions of men. Now this is by words. And these are either plain, proper, and direct, or dark, figurative, and
parabolical. And this latter way makes the conception of things to be difficult and imperfect; and by reason of the imperfection of our
view of the glory of Christ by faith in this world, the apostle says it is in “ainigmati”, in “a riddle.” These “ainigmata” the Psalmist calls
“chidot”, “dark sayings,” Ps. 78: 2.
But here it must be observed, that the description and representation of the Lord Christ and his glory in the gospel is not absolutely or
in itself either dark or obscure; yea, it is perspicuous, plain, and direct. Christ is therein evidently set forth crucified, exalted, glorified.
But the apostle does not here discourse concerning the way or means of the revelation of it unto us, but of the means or instrument
whereby we comprehend that revelation. This is our faith, which, as it is in us, being weak and imperfect, we comprehend the
representation that is made unto us of the glory of Christ as men do the sense of a dark saying, a riddle, a parable; that is, imperfectly,
and with difficulty.
On the account hereof we may say at present, how little a portion is it that we know of him! as Job speaks of God, chap. 26: 14. How
imperfect are our conceptions of him! How weak are our minds in their management! There is no part of his glory that we can fully
comprehend. And what we do comprehend, – there is a comprehension in faith, Eph 3: 18, – we cannot abide in the steady
contemplation of. For ever blessed be that sovereign grace, whence it is that He who “commanded light to shine out of darkness has
shined into our hearts, to give us the light of the knowledge of his own glory in the face of Jesus Christ,” and therein of the glory of
Christ himself; – that he has so revealed him unto us, as that we may love him, admire him, and obey him: but constantly, steadily,
and clearly to behold his glory in this life we are not able; “for we walk by faith, and not by sight.”
Hence our sight of him here is as it were by glances, – liable to be clouded by many interpositions. “Behold, he standeth behind the
wall, he looketh forth at the windows, showing” (“metzitz”, flourishing) “himself through the lattice,” Cant. 2: 9. There is a great
interposition between him and us, as a wall; and the means of the discovery of himself unto us, as through a window and lattice,
include a great instability and imperfection in our view and apprehension of him. There is a wall between him and us, which yet he
standeth behind. Our present mortal state is this wall, which must be demolished before we can see him as he is. In the meantime he
looketh through the windows of the ordinances of the Gospel. He gives us sometimes, when he is pleased to stand in those windows, a
view of himself; but it is imperfect, as is our sight of a man through a window. The appearances of him at these windows are full of
refreshment unto the souls of them that do believe. But our view of them is imperfect, transient, and does not abide; – we are for the
most part quickly left to bemoan what we have lost. And then our best is but to cry, “the hart panteth after the water-brooks, so

panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before thee?” When
wilt thou again give me to see thee, though but as through the windows alas! what distress do we ofttimes sit down in, after these
views of Christ and his glory! But he proceeds farther yet; and flourishes himself through the lattices. This displaying of the glory of
Christ, called the flourishing of himself, is by the promises of the Gospel, as they are explained in the ministry of the Word. In them
are represented unto us the desirable beauties and glories of Christ. How precious, how amiable is he, as represented in them! How are
the souls of believers ravished with the views of them! Y et is this discovery of him also but as through a lattice. We see him but by
parts, – unsteadily and unevenly.
Such, I say, is the sight of the glory of Christ which we have in this world by faith. It is dark, – it is but in part. It is but weak,
transient, imperfect, partial. It is but little that we can at any time discover of it; it is but a little while that we can abide in the
contemplation of what we do discover. “Rara hora, breves mora.” Sometimes it is unto us as the sun when it is under a cloud, – we
cannot perceive it. When he hideth his face, who then can behold him? As Job speaks, so may we, “Behold, I go forward, but he is not
there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: he hideth himself on
the right hand, that I cannot see him,” chap. 23: 8, 9. Which way soever we turn ourselves, and what duties soever we apply ourselves
unto, we can obtain no distinct view of his glory. Y et, on the other hand, it is sometimes as the sun when it shines in its brightness,
and we cannot bear the rays of it. In infinite condescension he says unto his church, “Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have
overcome me,” Cant. 6: 6, – as if he could not bear that overcoming affectionate love, which looks through the eyes of the church in
its acting of faith on him. Ah! how much more do we find our souls overcome with his love, when at any time he is pleased to make
any clear discoveries of his glory unto us! Let us now, on the other hand, take a little consideration of that vision which we shall have
of the same glory in heaven, that we may compare them together.
Vision, or the sight which we shall have of the glory of Christ in heaven, is immediate, direct, intuitive; and therefore steady, even, and
constant and it is so on a double account: – 1. Of the object which shall be proposed unto us; 2. Of the visive power or faculty
wherewith we shall be endued: from the imperfection of both which in this world ariseth the imperfection of our view of the glory of
Christ by faith, as has been declared.
1. The object of it will be real and substantial. Christ himself, in his own person, with all his glory, shall be continually with us, before
us, proposed unto us. We shall no longer have an image, a representation of him, such as is the delineation of his glory in the Gospel.
We “shall see him,” saith the apostle, “face to face,” 1 Cor. 13: 12; which he opposeth unto our seeing him darkly as in a glass, which is
the utmost that faith can attain to. “We shall see him as he is”, 1 John 3: 2; – not as now, in an imperfect description of him. As a
man sees his neighbour when they stand and converse together face to face, so shall we see the Lord Christ in his glory; and not as
Moses, who had only a transient sight of some parts of the glory of God, when he caused it to pass by him.
There will be use herein of our bodily eyes, as shall be declared. For, as Job says, in our flesh shall we see our Redeemer, and our eyes
shall behold him, chap. 19: 25-27. That corporeal sense shall not be restored unto us, and that glorified above what we can conceive,
but for this great use of the eternal beholding of Christ and his glory. Unto whom is it not a matter of rejoicing, that with the same
eyes wherewith they see the tokens and signs of him in the sacrament of the supper, they shall behold himself immediately in his own
person? But principally, as we shall see immediately, this vision is intellectual. It is not, therefore, the mere human nature of Christ
that is the object of it, but his divine person, as that nature subsisteth therein. What is that perfection which we shall have (for that
which is perfect must come and do away that which is in part) in the comprehension of the hypostatical union, I understand not; but
this I know, that in the immediate beholding of the person of Christ, we shall see a glory in it a thousand times above what here we
can conceive. The excellencies of infinite wisdom, love, and power therein, will be continually before us. And all the glories of the
person of Christ which we have before weakly and faintly inquired into, will be in our sight for evermore.
Hence the ground and cause of our blessedness is, that “we shall ever be with the Lord,” 1 Thess. 4: 17, – as himself prays, “that we
may be with him where he is, to behold his glory.” Here we have some dark views of it, – we cannot perfectly behold it, until we are
with him where he is. Thereon our sight of him will be direct, intuitive, and constant.
There is a glory, there will be so, subjectively in us in the beholding of this glory of Christ, which is at present incomprehensible. For it
does not yet appear what we ourselves shall be, 1 John 3: 2. Who can declare what a glory it will be in us to behold this glory of
Christ? And how excellent, then, is that glory of Christ itself! This immediate sight of Christ is that which all the saints of God in this
life do breathe and pant after. Hence are they willing to be dissolved, or “desire to depart, that they may be with Christ,” which is best
for them, Phil. 1: 23. They choose “to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord,” 2 Cor. 5: 8; or that they may enjoy the
inexpressibly longed-for sight of Christ in his glory. Those who do not so long for it, whose souls and minds are not frequently visited
with earnest desires after it, unto whom the thoughts of it are not their relief in trouble, and their chiefest joy, are carnal, blind, and
cannot see afar off. He that is truly spiritual entertains and refresheth himself with thoughts hereof continually.
2. It will be so from that visive power or faculty of beholding the glory of Christ which we shall then receive. Without this we cannot
see him as he is. When he was transfigured in the mount, and had on his human nature some reflections of his divine glory, his
disciples that were with him were rather amazed than refreshed by it, Matt. 17: 6. They saw his glory, but spake thereon “they knew
not what,” Luke 9: 30-33. And the reason hereof was, because no man in this life can have a visive power, either spiritual or corporeal,
directly and immediately to behold the real glory of Christ.
Should the Lord Jesus appear now to any of us in his majesty and glory, it would not be unto our edification nor consolation. For we
are not meet nor able, by the power of any light or grace that we have received, or can receive, to bear the immediate appearance and
representation of them. His beloved apostle John had leaned on his bosom probably many a time in his life, in the intimate
familiarities of love; but when he afterward appeared unto him in his glory, “he fell at his feet as dead,” Rev. 1: 17. And when he
appeared unto Paul, all the account he could give thereof we, “that he saw a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun;”
whereon he, and all that were with him, “fell to the ground,” Acts 26: 13, 14.
And this was one reason why, in the days of his ministry here on earth, his glory was veiled with the infirmities of the flesh, and all
sorts of sufferings, as we have before related. The church in this life is no way meet, by the grace which it can be made partaker of, to
converse with him in the immediate manifestations of his glory.