PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 3 of 10
Chapters 11 through 15

These chapters continue the wisdom of Ben Sira, covering lessons on humility and deceptive appearances, the need for caution when choosing associates, the nature of true generosity, the blessings that attend those who fear God, and the great gift of free will given to every man.

CHAPTER 11

Verse 1. Wisdom lifteth up the head of him that is of low degree, and maketh him to sit among great men.

Verse 2. Commend not a man for his beauty, neither abhor a man for his outward appearance.

Verse 3. The bee is little among such as fly, but her fruit is the chief of sweet things.

Verse 4. Boast not of thy clothing and raiment, and exalt not thyself in the day of honor; for the works of the Lord are wonderful, and His works among men are hidden.

Verse 5. Many kings have sat down upon the ground, and one that was never thought of hath worn the crown.

Verse 6. Many mighty men have been greatly disgraced, and the honorable delivered into other men's hands.

Verse 7. Blame not before thou hast examined the truth; understand first, and then rebuke.

Verse 8. Answer not before thou hast heard the cause; neither interrupt men in the midst of their talk.

Verse 9. Strive not in a matter that concerneth thee not, and sit not in judgment with sinners.

Verse 10. My son, meddle not with many matters; for if thou meddle much, thou shalt not be innocent; and if thou follow after, thou shalt not obtain, neither shalt thou escape by fleeing.

Verse 11. There is one that laboreth, and taketh pains, and maketh haste, and is so much the more behind.

Verse 12. Again, there is another that is slow and hath need of help, wanting ability, and full of poverty; yet the eye of the Lord looked upon him for good, and set him up from his low estate.

Verse 13. And lifted up his head from misery, so that many that saw it marveled at him.

Verse 14. Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the Lord.

Verse 15. Wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of the law are of the Lord; love and the way of good works are from Him.

Verse 16. Error and darkness had their beginning together with sinners, and evil shall wax old with them that glory therein.

Verse 17. The gift of the Lord remaineth with the godly, and His favor bringeth prosperity forever.

Verse 18. There is that waxeth rich by his wariness and pinching, and this is the portion of his reward.

Verse 19. Whereas he saith, I have found rest, and now will eat continually of my goods; and yet he knoweth not what time shall come upon him, and that he must leave those things to others and die.

Verse 20. Be steadfast in thy covenant, and be conversant therein, and wax old in thy work.

Verse 21. Marvel not at the works of sinners, but trust in the Lord and abide in thy labor; for it is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord on the sudden to make a poor man rich.

Verse 22. The blessing of the Lord is in the reward of the godly, and in an hour that cometh swiftly He maketh His blessing to flourish.

Verse 23. Say not, What profit is there of my service? And what good things shall I have hereafter?

Verse 24. Again, say not, I have enough, and possess many things, and what evil can come to me hereafter?

Verse 25. In the day of prosperity there is a forgetfulness of affliction, and in the day of affliction there is no more remembrance of prosperity.

Verse 26. For it is an easy thing unto the Lord in the day of death to reward a man according to his ways.

Verse 27. The affliction of an hour maketh a man forget pleasure, and in his end his deeds shall be discovered.

Verse 28. Judge none blessed before his death, for a man shall be known in his children.

Verse 29. Bring not every man into thine house, for the deceitful man hath many trains.

Verse 30. Like as a partridge taken and kept in a cage, so is the heart of the proud; and like as a spy, watcheth he for thy fall.

Verse 31. For he lieth in wait, and turneth good into evil, and in things worthy of praise will lay blame upon thee.

Verse 32. Of a spark of fire a heap of coals is kindled, and a sinful man layeth wait for blood.

Verse 33. Take heed of a mischievous man, for he worketh wickedness; lest he bring upon thee a perpetual blot.

Verse 34. Receive a stranger into thine house, and he will disturb thee and turn thee out of thine own.

CHAPTER 12

Verse 1. When thou wilt do good, know to whom thou doest it, so shalt thou be thanked for thy benefits.

Verse 2. Do good to the godly man, and thou shalt find a recompense; and if not from him, yet from the Most High.

Verse 3. There can no good come to him that is always occupied in evil, nor to him that giveth no alms.

Verse 4. Give to the godly man, and help not a sinner.

Verse 5. Do well unto him that is lowly, but give not to the ungodly. Hold back thy bread, and give it not unto him, lest he overmaster thee thereby; for else thou shalt receive twice as much evil for all the good thou shalt have done unto him.

Verse 6. For the Most High hateth sinners, and will repay vengeance unto the ungodly, and keepeth them against the mighty day of their punishment.

Verse 7. Give unto the good, and help not the sinner.

Verse 8. A friend cannot be known in prosperity, and an enemy cannot be hidden in adversity.

Verse 9. In the prosperity of a man, enemies will be grieved; but in his adversity, even a friend will depart.

Verse 10. Never trust thine enemy, for like as iron rusteth, so is his wickedness.

Verse 11. Though he humble himself and go crouching, yet take good heed and beware of him, and thou shalt be unto him as if thou hadst wiped a looking glass, and thou shalt know that his rust hath not been altogether wiped away.

Verse 12. Set him not by thee, lest when he hath overthrown thee, he stand up in thy place; neither let him sit at thy right hand, lest he seek to take thy seat, and thou at the last remember my words and be pricked therewith.

Verse 13. Who will pity a charmer that is bitten with a serpent, or any such as come nigh wild beasts?

Verse 14. So one that goeth to a sinner, and is defiled with him in his sins, who will pity?

Verse 15. For a while he will abide with thee, but if thou begin to fall, he will not tarry.

Verse 16. An enemy speaketh sweetly with his lips, but in his heart he imagineth how to throw thee into a pit. He will weep with his eyes, but if he find opportunity, he will not be satisfied with blood.

Verse 17. If adversity come upon thee, thou shalt find him there first; and though he pretend to help thee, yet shall he undermine thee.

Verse 18. He will shake his head and clap his hands, and whisper much, and change his countenance.

CHAPTER 13

Verse 1. He that toucheth pitch shall be defiled therewith, and he that hath fellowship with a proud man shall be like unto him.

Verse 2. Burden not thyself above thy power while thou livest, and have no fellowship with one that is mightier and richer than thyself; for how agree the kettle and the earthen pot together? For if the one be smitten against the other, it shall be broken.

Verse 3. The rich man hath done wrong, and yet he threateneth withal; the poor is wronged, and he must entreat also.

Verse 4. If thou be for his profit, he will use thee; but if thou have nothing, he will forsake thee.

Verse 5. If thou have anything, he will live with thee; yea, he will make thee bare, and will not be sorry for it.

Verse 6. If he have need of thee, he will deceive thee, and smile upon thee, and put thee in hope; he will speak thee fair, and say, What wantest thou?

Verse 7. And he will shame thee by his meats, until he have drawn thee dry twice or thrice, and at the last he will mock thee. Afterward, when he seeth thee, he will forsake thee, and shake his head at thee.

Verse 8. Beware that thou be not deceived, and brought down in thy jollity.

Verse 9. If thou be invited of a mighty man, withdraw thyself, and so much the more will he invite thee.

Verse 10. Press thou not upon him, lest thou be put back; stand not far off, lest thou be forgotten.

Verse 11. Affect not to be made equal unto him in talk, and believe not his many words; for with much communication will he tempt thee, and smiling upon thee will get out thy secrets.

Verse 12. But cruelly he will lay up thy words, and will not spare to do thee hurt, and to put thee in prison.

Verse 13. Observe and take good heed, for thou walkest in peril of thy overthrowing. When thou hearest these things, awake in thy sleep.

Verse 14. Love the Lord all thy life, and call upon Him for thy salvation.

Verse 15. Every beast loveth his like, and every man loveth his neighbor.

Verse 16. All flesh consorteth according to kind, and a man will cleave to his like.

Verse 17. What fellowship hath the wolf with the lamb? So the sinner with the godly.

Verse 18. What agreement is there between the hyena and a dog? And what peace between the rich and the poor?

Verse 19. As the wild ass is the lion's prey in the wilderness, so the rich eat up the poor.

Verse 20. As the proud hate humility, so doth the rich abhor the poor.

Verse 21. A rich man beginning to fall is held up of his friends; but a poor man being down is thrust also away by his friends.

Verse 22. When a rich man is fallen, he hath many helpers; he speaketh things not to be spoken, and yet men justify him. The poor man slipped, and yet they rebuked him too; he spake wisely, and could have no place.

Verse 23. When a rich man speaketh, every man holdeth his tongue, and look, what he saith, they extol it to the clouds. But if the poor man speak, they say, What fellow is this? And if he stumble, they will help to overthrow him.

Verse 24. Riches are good unto him that hath no sin, and poverty is evil in the mouth of the ungodly.

Verse 25. The heart of a man changeth his countenance, whether it be for good or evil; and a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance.

Verse 26. A cheerful countenance is a token of a heart that is in prosperity, and the finding out of parables is a wearisome labor of the mind.

CHAPTER 14

Verse 1. Blessed is the man that hath not slipped with his mouth, and is not pricked with the multitude of sins.

Verse 2. Blessed is he whose conscience hath not condemned him, and who is not fallen from his hope in the Lord.

Verse 3. Riches are not comely for a niggard, and what should an envious man do with money?

Verse 4. He that gathereth by defrauding his own soul gathereth for others, that shall spend his goods riotously.

Verse 5. He that is evil to himself, to whom will he be good? He shall not take pleasure in his goods.

Verse 6. There is none worse than he that envieth himself, and this is a recompense of his wickedness.

Verse 7. And if he doeth good, he doeth it unwillingly, and at the last he will declare his wickedness.

Verse 8. The envious man hath a wicked eye; he turneth away his face, and despiseth men.

Verse 9. A covetous man's eye is not satisfied with his portion, and the iniquity of the wicked drieth up his soul.

Verse 10. A wicked eye envieth his bread, and he is a niggard at his table.

Verse 11. My son, according to thy ability do good to thyself, and give the Lord His due offering.

Verse 12. Remember that death will not be long in coming, and that the covenant of the grave is not shown unto thee.

Verse 13. Do good unto thy friend before thou die, and according to thy ability stretch out thy hand and give to him.

Verse 14. Defraud not thyself of the good day, and let not the part of a good desire overpass thee.

Verse 15. Shalt thou not leave thy travails unto another, and thy labors to be divided by lot?

Verse 16. Give, and take, and sanctify thy soul; for there is no seeking of dainties in the grave.

Verse 17. All flesh waxeth old as a garment, for the covenant from the beginning is, Thou shalt die the death.

Verse 18. As of the green leaves on a thick tree, some fall and some grow; so is the generation of flesh and blood, one cometh to an end and another is born.

Verse 19. Every work rotteth and consumeth away, and the worker thereof shall go withal.

Verse 20. Blessed is the man that doth meditate good things in wisdom, and that reasoneth of holy things by his understanding.

Verse 21. He that considereth her ways in his heart shall also have understanding in her secrets.

Verse 22. Go after her as one that traceth, and lie in wait in her ways.

Verse 23. He that prieth in at her windows shall also hearken at her doors.

Verse 24. He that doth lodge near her house shall also fasten a pin in her walls.

Verse 25. He shall pitch his tent nigh unto her, and shall lodge in a lodging where good things are.

Verse 26. He shall set his children under her shelter, and shall lodge under her branches.

Verse 27. By her he shall be covered from heat, and in her glory shall he dwell.

CHAPTER 15

Verse 1. He that feareth the Lord will do good, and he that hath the knowledge of the law shall obtain her.

Verse 2. And as a mother shall she meet him, and receive him as a wife married of a virgin.

Verse 3. With the bread of understanding shall she feed him, and give him the water of wisdom to drink.

Verse 4. He shall be stayed upon her, and shall not be moved; and shall rely upon her, and shall not be confounded.

Verse 5. She shall exalt him above his neighbors, and in the midst of the congregation shall she open his mouth.

Verse 6. He shall find joy and a crown of gladness, and she shall cause him to inherit an everlasting name.

Verse 7. But foolish men shall not attain unto her, and sinners shall not see her.

Verse 8. For she is far from pride, and men that are liars cannot remember her.

Verse 9. Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, for it was not sent him of the Lord.

Verse 10. For praise shall be uttered in wisdom, and the Lord will prosper it.

Verse 11. Say not thou, It is through the Lord that I fell away; for thou oughtest not to do the things that He hateth.

Verse 12. Say not thou, He hath caused me to err; for He hath no need of the sinful man.

Verse 13. The Lord hateth all abomination, and they that fear God love it not.

Verse 14. He Himself made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel.

Verse 15. If thou wilt, to keep the commandments, and to perform acceptable faithfulness.

Verse 16. He hath set fire and water before thee; stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou wilt.

Verse 17. Before man is life and death, and whether him liketh shall be given him.

Verse 18. For the wisdom of the Lord is great, and He is mighty in power, and beholdeth all things.

Verse 19. And His eyes are upon them that fear Him, and He knoweth every work of man.

Verse 20. He hath commanded no man to do wickedly, neither hath He given any man license to sin.

This concludes Part 3 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 16 through Chapter 20, covering God's justice and punishment, His mercy toward frail humanity, and the governance of the tongue.
