PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 10
Warnings and Encouragements


Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 9. Warnings and Encouragements.

cloudings, nor declinings of it. O how should this fill thy soul with
desires of being unclothed!
2. As for the enjoyment of saints, here indeed we have fellowship
with them of the lower form; but that fellowship is so dissweetened
by remaining corruptions, that there is no satisfaction in it; as it is
the greatest plague that can befal an hypocrite to live in a pure
church, so it is the greatest vexation to the spirit of a saint, to live in a
corrupt and disordered church; but when death hath admitted you
into that glorious assembly of the spirits of just men made perfect,
you shall have the desire of your hearts; here you cannot fully close
with another; yea, you cannot fully close with your own souls. O what
discords, jarrings, censurings are here? What perfect, blessed
harmony there! In heaven each saint loves another as himself, they
are altogether lovely. O my soul, haste thee away from the lion's
dens, from the mountains of Bether, from divided saints, to those
mountains of myrrh, and hills of frankincense: thou art now going
unto thine own people, as the apostle's phrase imports, Cor. 5:8.
Arg. 6. If this will not do, Consider what heavy burdens death will
ease thy shoulders of.
In this tabernacle we groan, being burdened, (1.) With bodily
distempers; how true do we find that of Theophrastus. The soul pays
a dear rent for the tenement it now lives in? But glorified bodies are
clogged with no indispositions; death is the best physician; it will
cure thee of all diseases at once. (2.) With the indwelling of sin; this
makes us groan from the very bowels, Rom. 7:24. "But he that is
dead, is free from sin," Rom. 6:7. Hath justification destroyed its
damning power, and sanctification its reigning power? So
glorification destroys its very being and existence. (3.) We groan
under temptations here, but as soon as we are out of the body, we are
out of the reach of temptation: when once thou art got into heaven,
thou mayest say, Now Satan, I am there where thou canst not come;
for as the damned in hell are malo obformati, so fixed in sin and
misery, that their condition cannot be altered; so glorified saints are

bono confirmati, so fixed in holiness and glory, that they cannot be
shaken. (4.) Here we groan under various troubles, and afflictions,
but then the days of our mourning are ended. God shall wipe away all
tears from our eyes. O then let us haste away, that we may be at rest!
Argument 7. If still thou linger, like Lot in Sodom, then, lastly,
examine all the pleas and pretences for a longer time on earth. Why
art thou unwilling to die?
Objections
Objection 1. O I have many relations in the world, I know not what
will become of them when I am gone.
Solution. If thou art troubled about their bodies, and outward
condition, why should not that word satisfy thee, Jer. 49:11. "Leave
thy fatherless children to me, I will keep them alive, and let thy
widows trust in me." Luther, in his last will and testament, hath this
expression, 'Lord, thou hast given me wife and children, I have
nothing to leave them, but I commit them unto thee. O Father of the
fatherless, and judge of widows, Nutri, serva, doce; nourish, keep,
and teach them.' Or, art thou troubled for their souls? Thou canst not
convert them, if thou shouldst live, and God can make thy prayers
and counsels to live, and take place upon them when thou art dead.
Objection 2. I would fain live to do God more service in the world.
Solution. Well, but if he have no more service for thee to do here,
why shouldst thou not say with David, "If he have no delight to use
me any farther, here am I, let him do what seemeth him good." In
this world thou hast no more to do, but he is calling thee to an higher
service and employment in heaven; and what thou wouldst do for
him here, he can do that by other hands.
Objection 3. I am not yet fully ready, I am not as a bride, completely
adorned for the bridegroom.

Solution. Thy justification is complete already, though thy
sanctification be not so; and the way to make it so, is to die; for till
then it will have its defects, and wants.
Objection 4. O but I want assurance; if I had that, I could die
presently.
Solution. Yea, there it sticks, indeed; but then consider, that an
hearty willingness to leave all the world to be freed from sin, and be
with God, is the next way to that desired assurance; no carnal person
was ever willing to die upon this ground.
And thus I have finished those cases which so nearly concern the
people of God, in the several conditions of their life, and taught them
how to keep their hearts in all. I shall next apply the whole.

I. Use, of Information
A Special Warning to Hypocrites and
Formal Professors
YOU have heard, that the keeping of the heart is the great work of a
Christian, in which the very soul and life of religion consists, and
without which all other duties are of no value with God: hence, then,
I shall infer, to the consternation of hypocrites, and formal
professors.
1. That the pains and labours which many persons have taken in
religion, are but lost labour and pains, to no purpose, such as will
never turn to account.
Many great services have been performed, many glorious works are
wrought by men, which yet are utterly rejected by God, and shall
never stand upon record, in order to an eternal acceptation, because
they took no heed to keep their hearts with God in those duties: this

is that fatal rock, upon which thousands of vain professors have split
themselves eternally: they are curious about the externals of religion,
but regardless of their hearts. O how many hours have some
professors spent in hearing, praying, reading, conferring! and yet, as
to the main end of religion, as good they had sat still, and done
nothing; for all this signifies nothing, the great work, I mean heart
work, being all the while neglected. Tell me, thou vain professor,
when didst thou shed a tear for the deadness, hardness, unbelief, or
earthliness of thy heart? Thinkest thou such an easy religion can save
thee? If so, we may invert Christ's words, and say, "Wide is the gate,
and broad is the way, that leadeth to life, and many there be that go
in thereat." Hear me, thou self-deluding hypocrite, thou that hast put
off God with heartless duties, thou that hast acted in religion, as if
thou hadst been blessing an idol, that couldst not search and
discover thy heart; thou that hast offered to God but the skin of the
sacrifice, not the marrow, fat and inwards of it: how wilt thou abide
the coming of the Lord? How wilt thou hold up thy head before him,
when he shall say, O thou dissembling, false-hearted man! how
couldst thou profess religion? With what face couldst thou so often
tell me that thou lovedst me, when thou knew all the while, in thine
own conscience, that thine heart was not with me? O tremble to
think what a fearful judgment it is to be given over to a heedless, and
careless heart; and then to have religious duties, instead of a rattle,
to quiet and still the conscience!
2. Hence also infer for the humiliation, even of upright hearts, That
unless the people of God spend more time and pains about their
hearts, than generally and ordinarily they do, they are never like to
do God much service, or be owners of much comfort in this world.
I may say of that Christian that is remiss and careless in keeping his
heart, as Jacob said of Reuben, "Thou shalt not excel." It grieves me
to see how many Christians there are that go up and down dejected,
and complaining, that live at a poor low rate, both of service and
comfort; and how can they expect it should be otherwise, as long as

they live at such a careless rate? O how little of their time is spent in
the closet in searching, humbling, and quickening their hearts?
You say your hearts are dead, and do you wonder they are so, as long
as you keep them not with the fountain of life? If your bodies had
been dieted as your souls have been, they would have been dead too;
never expect better hearts till you take more pains with them: Qui
fugit molam, fugit farinam; he that will not have the sweat, must not
expect the sweet of religion.
O Christians! I fear your zeal and strength have run in the wrong
channel; I fear most of us may take up the Church's complaint, Cant.
1:6. "They have made me the keeper of the vineyards, but mine own
vineyard have I not kept." Two things have eaten up the time and
strength of the professors of this generation, and sadly diverted them
from heart-work: (1.) Fruitless controversies started by Satan, I
doubt not, to this very purpose, to take us off from practical
godliness, to make us puzzle our heads when we should be searching
our hearts. O how little have we minded that of the apostle, Heb.
13:9. "It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace, and
not with meats;" i.e. with disputes and controversies about meats,
"which have not profited them that have been occupied therein."
O how much better is it to see men live exactly, than to hear them
dispute subtlely! These unfruitful questions, how have they rent the
churches, wasted time and spirits, and called Christians off from
their main business, from looking to their own vineyard? What think
ye, sirs? Had it not been better if the questions agitated among the
people of God of late days had been such as these? How shall a man
discern the special, from the common operations of the Spirit? How
may a soul observe its first declinings from God? How may a
backsliding Christian recover his first love? How may the heart be
preserved from unseasonable thoughts in duty? How may a bosomsin be discovered, and mortified, &c. would not this have tended
more to the credit of religion and comfort of your souls? O it is time
to repent and be ashamed of this folly! When I read what Suarez, a

Papist, said, who wrote many tomes of disputations, that he prized
the time he set apart for the searching and examining of his heart, in
reference to God, above all the time that ever he spent in other
studies: I am ashamed to find the professors of this age yet insensible
of their folly. Shall the conscience of a Suarez feel a relenting pang
for strength and time so ill employed, and shall not yours? This is it
your ministers long since warned you of; your spiritual nurses were
afraid of the rickets, when they saw our heads only to grow, and our
hearts to whither. O when will God beat our swords into plowshares! I mean, our disputes and contentions into practical
godliness. (2.) Another cause of neglecting our hearts hath been
earthly incumbrances; the heads and hearts of many have been filled
with such a croud and noise of worldly business, that they have sadly
and sensibly declined and withered in their zeal, love, and delight in
God; in their heavenly, serious, and profitable way of conversing with
men.
O how hath this wilderness entangled us! our discourses and
conferences, nay, our very prayers and duties have a tang of it: we
have had so much work without doors, that we have been able to do
but little within. It was the sad complaint of an holy one*, 'O (saith
he) it is sad to think how many precious opportunities I have lost;
how many sweet motions and admonitions of the Spirit I have passed
over unfruitfully, and made the Lord to speak in vain: in the secret
illapses of his Spirit, the Lord hath called upon me, but my worldly
thoughts did still lodge within me, and there was no place within my
heart for such calls of God." Surely there is a way of enjoying God,
even in our worldly employments; God would never have put us
upon them to our loss; "Enoch walked with God, and begat sons and
daughters," Gen. 5:19. He walked with God, but did not retire and
separate himself from the things of this life: and the angels that are
employed by Christ in the things of this world, (for the spirit of the
living creatures is in the wheels) they are finite creatures, and cannot
be in a twofold ubi at one time; yet they lose nothing of the beatifical
vision all the time of their administration: for Mat. 18:10. "Their
angels (even whilst they are employed for them) behold the face of

their Father which is in heaven." We need not lose our visions by our
employments, if the fault were not our own. Alas! that ever
Christians, who stand at the door of eternity, and have more work
upon their hands than this poor moment of interposing time is
sufficient for, should yet be filling both their heads and hearts with
trifles.
3. Hence I infer for the awakening of all, That if the keeping of the
heart be the great work of a Christian, then there are but few real
Christians in the world.
Indeed if every one that hath learned the dialect of Christianity, and
can talk like a saint: if every one that hath gifts and parts, and by the
common assisting presence of the Spirit can preach, pray, or
discourse like a Christian; in a word, if such as associate themselves
with the people of God, and delight in ordinances, may pass for
Christians, the number then is great.
But, alas! to what a small number will they shrink, if you judge them
by this rule! how few are there that make conscience of keeping their
hearts, watching their thoughts, judging their ends, &c. O there be
but few closet men among professors! It is far easier for men to be
reconciled to any duties in religion than to these: The profane part of
the world will not so much as touch with the outside of religious
duties, much less with this; and for the hypocrite, though he be polite
and curious about those externals, yet you can never persuade him to
this inward work, this difficult work, to which there is no inducement
by human applause; this work, that would quickly discover what the
hypocrite cares not to know; so that by a general consent, this heartwork is left to the hands of a few secret ones, and I tremble to think
in how few hands it is.

II. Use, for Exhortation

A Special Encouragement to the People of
God
If the keeping of the heart be so important a business; if such choice
advantages accrue to you thereby; if so many dear and precious
interests be wrapt up in it, then let me call upon the people of God
every where to fall close to this work.
O study your hearts, watch your hearts, keep your hearts! away with
fruitless controversies, and all idle questions; away with empty
names and vain shews; away with unprofitable discourse and bold
censures of others; turn in upon yourselves; get into your closets,
and now resolve to dwell there. You have been strangers to this work
too long; you have kept others vineyards too long; you have trifled
about the borders of religion too long; this world hath detained you
from your great work too long; will you now resolve to look better to
your hearts? Will you haste and come out of the crowds of business,
and clamours of the world, and retire yourselves more than you have
done? O that this day you would resolve upon it!
Reader, methinks I should prevail with thee: All that I beg for is but
this, that thou wouldst step aside a little oftener to talk with God, and
thine own heart; that thou wouldst not suffer every trifle to divert
thee; that thou wouldst keep a more true and faithful account of thy
thoughts and affections; that thou wouldst but seriously demand of
this thy own heart, at least every evening, O my heart, where hast
thou been to-day? Whither hast thou made a road today? If all that
hath been said by way of inducement be not enough, I have yet more
motives to offer you. And the first is this:

Ten Motives Exhorting to a Hearty
Engagement in Keeping the Heart

1 Motive. The studying, observing, and diligent keeping of your own
hearts, will marvellously help your understanding in the deep
mysteries of religion.
An honest well-experienced heart, is a singular help to a weak head;
such a heart will serve you instead of a commentary upon a great
part of the scriptures: By this means yon shall far better understand
the things of God, than the learned rabbies and profound doctors (if
graceless and unexperienced) ever did; you shall not only have a
more clear, but a more sweet perception and gust of them: A man
may discourse orthodoxly and profoundly of the nature and effects of
faith, the troubles and comforts of conscience, the sweetness of
communion with God, that never felt the efficacy and sweet
impressions of these things upon his own spirit: but O how dark and
dry are these notions, compared with his upon whose heart they have
been acted? When such a man reads David's Psalms, or Paul's
epistles, there he finds his own objections made and answered. O,
saith he, these holy men speak my very heart: Their doubts were
mine, their troubles mine, and their experiences mine. I remember
Chrysostom, speaking to his people of Antioch about some choice
experiences, used this expression: Sciunt initiati quid dico: Those
that are initiated, know what I say: Experience is the best
schoolmaster. O then, study your hearts, keep your hearts!
2 Motive. The study and observation of your own hearts will antidote
you against the dangerous and infecting errors of the times and
places you live in.
For what think you is the reason that so many professors in England
have departed from the faith, giving heed to fables; that so many
thousands have been led away by the error of the wicked; that Jesuits
and Quakers, who have sown corrupt doctrine, have had such
plentiful harvests among us, but because they have met with a
company of empty notional professors, that never knew what belongs
to practical godliness, and the study of their own hearts.

If professors did but give diligence to study, search and watch their
own hearts, they would have that ιδιον σεριγμον, that stedfastness of
their own, that Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 3:17 and this would ballast and
settle them, Heb. 13:9. Suppose a subtle Papist should talk to such of
the dignity and merit of good works; could he ever work the
persuasion of it into that heart that is conscious to itself of so much
darkness, deadness, distraction and unbelief, attending its best
duties? It is a good rule, Non est disputandum de gustu: There is no
disputing against taste. What a man hath felt and tasted, one cannot
beat him off from that by argument.
3 Motive. Your care and diligence in keeping your hearts will prove
one of the best evidences of your sincerity.
I know no external act of religion that differences the sound from the
unsound professor: It is wonderful to consider how far hypocrites go
in all external duties; how plausibly they can order the outward man,
hiding all their indecencies from the observation of the world.
But then, they take no heed to their hearts; they are not in secret
what they appear to be in public: And before this trial no hypocrite
can stand. It is confessed they may in a fit, under a pang upon a
death-bed, cry out of the wickedness of their hearts; but alas! there is
no heed to be taken to these extorted complaints. In our law, no
credit is to be given to the testimony of one upon the rack, because it
may be supposed that the extremity of the torture may make him say
any thing to be eased. But if self-jealousy, care, and watchfulness, be
the daily workings and frames of thy heart, it strongly argues the
sincerity of it: For what but the sense of a divine eye; what but the
real hatred of sin as sin, could put thee upon those secret duties,
which lie out of the observation of all creatures?
If then it be a desirable thing in thine eyes to have a fair testimony of
thine integrity, and to know of a truth, that thou fearest God; then
study thine heart, watch thy heart, keep thy heart.

4 Motive. How fruitful, sweet, and comfortable would all ordinances
and duties be to us, if our hearts were better Kept?
O what precious communion might you have with God every time
you approach him, if your hearts were but in frame! You might then
say with David, Psal. 104:35. "My meditation of him shall be sweet."
That which loses all our comforts in ordinances and more secret
duties, is the indisposedness of the heart: A Christian whose heart is
in a good frame, gets the start of all others that come with him in that
duty: They strive hard to get up their hearts to God, now trying this
argument upon them, and then that, to quicken and affect them, and
sometimes go away as bad as they came: Sometimes the duty is
almost ended before their hearts begin to stir or feel any warmth,
quickening, or power from it: But all this while the prepared heart is
at its work; this is he that ordinarily gets the first sight of Christ in a
sermon, the first seal from Christ in a sacrament, the first kiss from
Christ in secret prayer. I tell you, and tell you but what I have felt,
that prayers and sermons would appear to you other manner of
things than they do, did you but bring better ordered hearts unto
them; you would not go away dejected and drooping. O this hath
been a lost duty to me! if you had not lost your hearts, it had not
been so. If then the comfort of ordinances be sweet, look to your
hearts, keep your hearts.
5 Motive. Acquaintance with your own hearts would be a fountain of
matter to you in prayer.
A man that is diligent in heart-work, and knows the state of his own
soul, will have a fountain-fulness of matter to supply him richly in all
his addresses to God; his tongue shall not faulter and make pause for
want of matter; Psal. 45:1. "My heart is inditing a good matter:" Or,
as Montanus renders the original, my heart is boiling up good
matter, like a living spring, that is still bubbling up fresh water; and
then my tongue is as the pen of a ready writer: Others must pump
their memories, rack their inventions, and are often at a loss, when
they have done all: but if thou have kept, and faithfully studied thine

own heart, it will be with thee (as Job speaks in another case) like
bottles full of new wine that want vent, which are ready to burst: As
holy matter flows plentifully, so more feelingly and sweetly from
such a heart. When a heart-experienced Christian is mourning before
God over some special heart-corruption, wrestling with God for the
supply of some special inward want, he speaks not as other men do
that have learned to pray by rote; their confessions and petitions are
squeezed out; his drop freely, like pure honey from the comb: It is a
happiness then to be with or near such a Christian. I remember
Bernard, having given rules to prepare the heart for prayer,
concludes them thus, Et cum talis fueris, momento mei; and (saith
he) When thy heart is in this frame, then remember me.
6 Motive. By this the decayed power of religion will be recovered
again among professors, which is the most desirable state in this
world.
O that I might live to see that day, when professors shall not walk in
a vain shew, when they shall please themselves no more with a name
to live, being spiritually dead! When they shall be no more (as many
of them now are) a company of frothy, vain, and unserious persons,
but the majestic beams of holiness shining from their heavenly and
serious conversation, shall awe the world, and command reverence
from all that are about them; when they shall warm the hearts of
those that come nigh them, so that men shall say, God is in these
men of a truth.
Well, such a time may again be expected, according to that promise,
Isa. 60:21. "The people shall be all righteous." But till we pursue
closer to this great work of keeping our hearts, I am out of hopes to
see those blessed days; I cannot expect better times till God gives
better hearts. Doth it not grieve you to see what a scorn religion is
made in the world? what objects of contempt and scorn the
professors of it are made in the world?

Professors, would you recover your credit? Would you again obtain
an honourable testimony in the consciences of your very enemies?
Then keep your hearts, watch your hearts: it is the looseness,
frothiness, and earthliness of your hearts that have made your lives
so; and these have brought you under the contempt of the world; you
first lost your sights of God, and communion with him, then your
heavenly and serious deportment among men, and by that your
interest in their consciences: O then, for the credit of religion, for the
honour of your profession keep your hearts!
7 Motive. By diligence in keeping your hearts, we should prevent,
and remove the fatal scandals and stumbling-blocks out of the way of
the world.
"Woe to the world (saith Christ) because of offences!" Matth. 18:7.
Doth not shame cover your faces? Do not your hearts bleed within
you, to hear of the scandalous miscarriages of many loose
professors? Could you not, like Shem and Japhet, go backward with a
garment to cover the shame of many professors? How is that worthy
name blasphemed! Jam. 2:7. 2 Sam. 12:13, 14. the hearts of the
righteous saddened, Psal. 25:3. Ezek. 36:20. by this the world is
fearfully prejudiced against Christ and religion, the bonds of death
made fast upon their souls; those that have a general love and liking
to the ways of God, startled and quite driven back, and thus soulblood is shed: woe to the world!
Yea, how are the consciences of fallen professors plunged, and even
overwhelmed in the deeps of trouble? God inwardly
excommunicating their souls from all comfortable fellowship with
himself, and the joys of his salvation: infinite are the mischiefs that
come by the scandalous lives of professors.
And what is the true cause and reason of all this, but the neglecting
of their hearts? Were our hearts better kept, all this would be
prevented. Had David kept his heart, he had not broken his bones: a
negligent and careless heart must of necessity produce a disorderly

and scandalous life. I thank God for the freedom and faithfulness of
a* reverend brother, in shewing professors their manifold
miscarriages; and from my heart do wish, that when their wounds
have been thoroughly searched by that probe, God would be pleased
to heal them by this plaister. O professors! if ever you will keep
religion sweet; if ever you hope to recover the credit of it in the
world, keep your hearts; either keep your hearts, or lose your credit;
keep your hearts, or lose your comforts; keep your hearts lest ye shed
soul-blood. What words can express the deep concernments, the
wonderful consequences of this work! Every thing puts a necessity, a
solemnity, a beauty upon it.
8 Motive. An heart well kept will fit you for any condition God casts
you into, or any service he hath to use you in.
He that hath learnt how to keep his heart lowly, is fit for prosperity:
and he that knows how to use and apply it to scripture-promises and
supports, is fit to pass through any adversity: He that can deny the
pride and selfishness of his heart is fit to be employed in any service
for God. Such a man was Paul, he did not only spend his time in
preaching to others, in keeping others vineyards, but he looked to
himself, kept his own vineyard; 1 Cor. 9:27. "Lest when I have
preached to others, I myself should be a cast-away." And what an
eminent instrument was he for God? He could turn his hand to any
work; he could dexterously manage both an adverse and prosperous
condition: "I know how to abound, and how to suffer want. Let the
people deify him, it moves him not, unless to indignation. Let them
stone him, he can bear it; If a man purge himself from these (saith
he, 2 Tim. 2:21) he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and
meet for the master's house, and prepared unto every good work."
First the heart must be purged, and then it is prepared for any
service of God. When the heart of Isaiah was purified, which was the
thing signified by the touching of his lips with a coal from the altar,
Isa. 6:7 then he was fit for God's work: "Here am I, send me," ver. 8.
A man that hath not learned to keep his heart, put him upon any
