PURITAN GOLD -- Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices by Thomas Brooks: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 12
Satan's Devices Regarding Grace and Assurance

---

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. By Thomas Brooks.

Chapter 7. Satan's Devices Regarding Grace and Assurance.

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
with a king. Ah! when men have poor, low, light, slight thoughts of God, in their
drawing near to God, they tempt the devil to bestir himself, and to cast in a multitude of
vain thoughts to disturb and distract the soul in its waiting on God. There is nothing that
will contribute so much to the keeping out of vain thoughts, as to look upon God as an
omniscient God, an omnipresent God, an omnipotent God, a God full of all glorious
perfections, a God whose majesty, purity, and glory will not allow him to behold the
least iniquity. The reason why the blessed saints and glorious angels in heaven have not
so much as one vain thought is, because they are greatly affected with the greatness,
holiness, majesty, purity, and glory of God.
When Pompey could not keep his soldiers in the camp by persuasion he cast himself
down along in the narrow passage which led out of it, and bade them go if they would—
but they must first trample upon their general; and the thoughts of this overcame them.
You are wise, and know how to apply it to the point in hand.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, To be faithful in
religious services, notwithstanding all those wandering thoughts the soul is troubled
with. This will be a sweet help against them: for the soul to be resolute in waiting on
God, whether it be troubled with vain thoughts or not; to say, 'Well I will pray still, and
hear still, and meditate still, and keep fellowship with the saints still.' Many precious
souls can say from experience, that when their souls have been steadfast in their
waiting on God, that Satan has left them, and has not been so busy in vexing their souls
with vain thoughts. When Satan perceives that all those trifling vain thoughts that he
casts into the soul do but vex the soul into greater diligence, carefulness, watchfulness,
and steadfastness in holy and heavenly services, and that the soul loses nothing of his
zeal, piety, and devotion—but doubles his care, diligence, and earnestness, he often
ceases to interpose his trifles and vain thoughts, as he ceased to tempt Christ, when
Christ was steadfast in resisting his temptations.
It is a rule in the civil law that nothing seems to be done, if there remains anything to
be done. If once you say, 'it is enough', you are undone.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider this, That
those vain and trifling thoughts that are cast into our souls, when we are waiting upon
God in this or that religious service, if they be not cherished and indulged—but
abhorred, resisted, and disclaimed; they are not sins upon our souls, though they may
be troubles to our minds; they shall not be put upon our accounts, nor keep mercies
and blessings from being enjoyed by us. When a soul in uprightness can look God in the
face, and say, Lord, when I approach near unto you, there are a world of vain thoughts
crowd in upon me, which disturb my soul, and weaken my faith, and lessen my comfort
and spiritual strength. Oh, these are my clog, my burden, my torment, my hell! Oh, do
justice upon these, free me from these, that I may serve you with more freeness,
singleness, spiritualness, and sweetness of spirit. These thoughts may vex that soul—
but they shall not harm that soul. nor keep a blessing from that soul. If vain thoughts
resisted and lamented could stop the current of mercy, and render a soul unhappy,
there would be none on earth that should ever taste of mercy, or be everlastingly
happy.
It is not Satan casting in of vain thoughts that can keep mercy from the soul, or undo
the soul—but the lodging and cherishing of vain thoughts: 'O Jerusalem, how long shall
83

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
vain thoughts lodge within you?' (Jer.4:14) Vain thoughts pass through the best hearts;
they are lodged and cherished only in the worst hearts.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That watching against sinful thoughts, resisting of sinful thoughts, lamenting and
weeping over sinful thoughts, carries with it the sweetest and strongest evidence of the
truth and power of grace, and of the sincerity of your hearts, and is the readiest and the
surest way to be rid of them (Psalm 139:23). Many low and carnal considerations may
cause men to watch their words, their lives, their actions; as hope of gain, or to please
friends, or to get a name in the world, and many other such like considerations. Oh! but
to watch our thoughts, to weep and lament over them—this must needs be from some
noble, spiritual, and internal principle—such as love to God, a holy fear of God, a holy
care and delight to please the Lord. Thoughts are the first-born, the blossoms of the
soul, the beginning of our strength—whether for good or evil; and they are the greatest
evidences for or against a man, that can be.
The schools do well observe, that outward sins are of greater infamy—but inward heart
sins are of greater guilt, as we see in the devil's. There is nothing that so speaks out a
man to be thoroughly and kindly wrought upon, as his having his thoughts to be
'brought into obedience,' as the apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 10:4, 5. Grace is grown up to a
very great height in that soul where it prevails, to the subduing of those vain thoughts
that walk up and down in the soul. (Psalm 139:23; Is. 59:7; 66:18; Matt. 9:4; 12:25.)
Well! though you cannot be rid of them, yet make resistance and opposition against the
first risings of them. When sinful thoughts arise, then think thus, The Lord takes notice
of these thoughts; 'he knows them afar off,' as the Psalmist speaks (Psalm 138:6). He
knew Herod's bloody thoughts, and Judas's betraying thoughts, and the Pharisees' cruel
and blasphemous thoughts afar off. (Matt. 15:15-18).
Oh! think thus: All these sinful thoughts, they defile and pollute the soul, they deface
and spoil much of the inward beauty and glory of the soul. If I commit this or that sin,
to which my thoughts incline me, then either I must repent or not repent; if I repent, it
will cost me more grief, sorrow, shame, heart-breaking, and soul-bleeding, before my
conscience will be quieted, divine justice pacified, my comfort and joy restored, my
evidences cleared, and my pardon in the court of conscience sealed—than the imagined
profit or seeming sensual pleasure can be worth. 'What fruit had you in those things
whereof you are now ashamed' (Rom. 6:21).
Tears, instead of gems, were the ornaments of David's bed when he had sinned; and so
they must be yours, or else you must lie down in the bed of sorrow forever.
If I never repent, oh! then my sinful thoughts will be scorpions that will eternally vex
me, the rods that will eternally lash me, the thorns that will everlastingly pierce me, the
dagger that will be eternally a-stabbing me, the worm that will be forever a-gnawing
me! Oh! therefore, watch against them, be constant in resisting them, and in lamenting
and weeping over them, and then they shall not hurt you, though they may for a time
trouble you. And remember this—he who does this, does more than the most glistering
and blustering hypocrite in the world does.
Inward bleeding kills many a man; so will sinful thoughts, if not repented of.
84

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, To labor more and more to
be filled with the fullness of God, and to be enriched with all spiritual and heavenly
things. What is the reason that the angels in heaven have not so much as an idle
thought? It is because they are filled with the fullness of God (Eph. 3:19). Take it for an
experienced truth, the more the soul is filled with the fullness of God and enriched with
spiritual and heavenly things—the less room there is in that soul for vain thoughts. The
fuller the vessel is of wine—the less room there is for water. Oh, then, lay up much of
God, of Christ, of precious promises, and choice experiences in your hearts—and then
you will be less troubled with vain thoughts. 'A good man, out of the good treasure of
his heart, brings forth good things' (Matt. 12:35).
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, To keep up holy and
spiritual affections; for such as your affections are, such will be your thoughts. 'Oh how
I love your law! it is my meditation all the day' (Psalm 119:97). What we love most, we
most muse upon. 'When I awake, I am still with you' (Psalm 139:18). That which we
much like—we shall much mind. Those who are frequent in their love to God and his
law, will be frequent in thinking of God and his law—a child will not forget his mother.
Remedy (7). The seventh remedy against this device of Satan is, To avoid multiplicity of
worldly business. Oh, let not the world take up your hearts and thoughts. Souls which
are torn in pieces with the cares of the world will be always vexed and tormented with
vain thoughts in all their approaches to God. Vain thoughts will be still crowding in upon
him that lives in a crowd of business. The stars which have least circuit are nearest the
pole; and men that are least perplexed with business are commonly nearest to God.
2 Tim. 2:4, 'No one serving as a soldier gets involved in civilian affairs--he wants to
please his commanding officer.' This is a comparison which Paul borrows from the
custom of the Roman empire, wherein soldiers were forbidden to take up private
businesses.
DEVICE 8: By working them to rest in their performances; to rest in prayer, and to rest
in hearing, reading, and the communion of saints.
And when Satan has drawn the soul to rest upon the service done, then he will help the
soul to reason thus: Why, you had better never pray, as to pray and rest in prayer; you
had better never hear, as to hear and rest in hearing; you had better never be in the
communion of saints, as to rest in the communion of saints. And by this device he stops
many souls in their heavenly race, and takes off poor souls from those services that
should be their joy and crown (Is. 58:1-2, Zech. 7:4-6, Matt. 6:2, Rom. 1:7).
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell much upon the
imperfections and weaknesses which attend your choicest services. Oh the spots, the
blots, the blemishes that are to be seen on the face of our best duties! When you have
done all you can, you have need to close up all with this, 'Oh enter not into judgment
with your servant, O Lord' (Psalm 143:2), for the weaknesses that cleave to my best
services. We may all say with the church, 'All our righteousnesses are as a menstruous
cloth' (Is. 64:6). If God should be strict to mark what is done amiss in our best actions,

85

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
we are undone! Oh the water that is mingled with our wine; the dross that cleaves unto
our gold! Pride and high confidence is most apt to creep in upon 'duties well done'.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider The
impotence and inability of any of your best services, divinely to comfort, refresh, and
bear your souls up from fainting, and sinking in the days of trouble, when darkness is
round about you, when God shall say to you, as he did once to the Israelites, 'Go and
cry unto the gods that you have chosen; let them save you in the time of your
tribulation' (Judges 10:14). So, when God shall say in the day of your troubles, Go to
your prayers, to your hearing, and to your fasting, and see if they can help you, if they
can support you, if they can deliver you.
If God in that day does but withhold the influence of his grace, your former services will
be but poor cordials to comfort you; and then you must and will cry out, Oh, 'none but
Christ, none but Christ!' Oh my prayers are not Christ, my hearing is not Christ, my
fasting is not Christ. Oh! one smile of Christ, one glimpse of Christ, one good word from
Christ, one nod of love from Christ in the day of trouble and darkness—will more revive
and refresh the soul than all your former services, in which your souls rested, as if they
were the bosom of Christ, which should be the only center of our souls. Christ is the
crown of crowns, the glory of glories, and the heaven of heavens.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That good things rested upon will as certainly undo us, and everlastingly destroy us—as
the foulest enormities which can be committed by us. Those souls that after they have
done all, do not look up so high as Christ—and rest, and center alone in Christ, laying
down their services at the footstool of Christ—must lie down in sorrow; their bread is
prepared for them in hell. 'But watch out, you who live in your own light and warm
yourselves by your own fires. This is the reward you will receive from me: You will soon
lie down in great torment' (Is. 50:11). Is it good to dwell with everlasting burnings, with
a devouring fire? Why then, rest in your duties still? See that you center only in the
bosom of Christ.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, To dwell much upon the
necessity and excellency of that resting-place which God has provided for you. Above all
other resting-places—he himself is your resting-place; his free mercy and love is your
resting-place; the pure, glorious, matchless, and spotless righteousness of Christ is your
resting-place. Ah! it is sad to think, that most men have forgotten their resting-place, as
the Lord complains: 'My people have been as lost sheep, their shepherds have caused
them to go astray, and have turned them away to the mountains: they are gone from
mountain to hill, and forgotten their resting-place' (Jer. 50:6). So poor souls who do not
see the excellency of that resting-place that God has appointed for their souls to lie
down in—they wander from mountain to hill, from one duty to another, and here they
will rest and there they will rest. But those who see the excellency of that resting-place
that God has provided for them, they will say, 'Farewell prayer, farewell hearing,
farewell fasting. I will rest no more in you—but now I will rest only in the bosom of
Christ, the love of Christ, the righteousness of Christ!'

86

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

CHAPTER 4: SATAN'S DEVICES TO KEEP SAINTS IN A SAD,
DOUBTING, QUESTIONING & UNCOMFORTABLE CONDITION
[8 devices and their remedies]
Though Satan can never rob a believer of his crown, yet such is his malice and envy,
that he will leave no stone unturned, no means unattempted, to rob them of their
comfort and peace—to make their life a burden and a hell unto them, to cause them to
spend their days in sorrow and mourning, in sighing and complaining, in doubting and
questioning. 'Surely,' he says, 'we have no interest in Christ; our graces are not true,
our hopes are the hopes of hypocrites; our confidence is our presumption, our
enjoyments are our delusions.'
Blessed John Bradford (the martyr) in one of his epistles, says thus, 'O Lord, sometime
methinks I feel it so with me—as if there were no difference between my heart and the
wicked. I have a blind mind as they, a stout, stubborn, rebellious hard heart as they,'
and so he goes on.
I shall show you this in some particulars:
DEVICE 1: The first device that Satan has to keep souls in a sad, doubting, and
questioning condition, and so making their life a hell, is, By causing them to be still
poring and musing upon sin, to mind their sins more than their Savior; yes, so to mind
their sins as to forget, yes, to neglect their Savior; that, as the Psalmist speaks, 'The
Lord is not in all their thoughts' (Psalm 10:4). Their eyes are so fixed upon their
disease, that they cannot see the remedy, though it be near; and they do so muse upon
their debts, that they have neither mind nor heart to think of their Surety. A Christian
should wear Christ in his bosom as a flower of delight, for he is a whole paradise of
delight. He who minds not Christ more than his sin, can never be thankful and fruitful as
he should.
Remedy (1). The first remedy is for weak believers to consider, That though Jesus
Christ has not freed them from the presence of sin, yet he has freed them from the
damnatory power of sin. It is most true that sin and grace were never born together,
neither shall sin and grace die together; yet while a believer breathes in this world, they
must live together, they must keep house together. Christ in this life will not free any
believer from the presence of any one sin, though he does free every believer from the
damning power of every sin. 'There is no condemnation to those who are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh—but after the Spirit' (Rom. 8:1). The law cannot
condemn a believer, for Christ has fulfilled it for him; divine justice cannot condemn
him, for that Christ has satisfied; his sins cannot condemn him, for they in the blood of
Christ are pardoned; and his own conscience, upon righteous grounds, cannot condemn
him, because Christ, that is greater than his conscience, has acquitted him.
My sins hurt me not, if they like me not. Sin is like that wild fig-tree, or ivy in the wall;
cut off stump, body, bough, and branches, yet some strings or other will sprout out
again, until the wall be plucked down.

87

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That
though Jesus Christ has not freed you from the molesting and vexing power of sin, yet
he has freed you from the reign and dominion of sin. You say that sin does so molest
and vex you, that you can not think of God, nor go to God, nor speak with God.* Oh!
but remember it is one thing for sin to molest and vex you, and another thing for sin to
reign and have dominion over you. 'For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you
are not under the law—but under grace' (Rom. 6:14). Sin may rebel—but it shall never
reign in a saint. It fares with sin in the regenerate as with those beasts that Daniel
speaks of, 'that had their dominion taken away, yet their lives were prolonged for a
season' (Dan. 7:12). The primitive Christians chose rather to be thrown to lions without,
than left to lusts within.
Now sin reigns in the soul, when the soul willingly and readily obeys it, and submits to
its commands, as subjects do actively obey and embrace the commands of their prince.
The commands of a king are readily embraced and obeyed by his subjects—but the
commands of a tyrant are embraced and obeyed unwillingly. All the service that is done
to a tyrant, is out of violence, and not out of loving obedience. A free and willing
subjection to the commands of sin speaks out the soul to be under the reign and
dominion of sin; but from this plague, this hell, Christ frees all believers. It is a sign that
sin has not gained your consent—but committed a rape upon your souls, when you cry
out to God. If the ravished virgin under the law cried out—she was guiltless (Deut.
22:27); so when sin plays the tyrant over the soul, and the soul cries out, it is guiltless;
those sins shall not be charged upon the soul.
Sin cannot say of a believer as the centurion said of his servants, 'I bid one, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to another, Do this, and he does it'
(Matt. 8:9). No! the heart of a saint rises against the commands of sin; and when sin
would carry his soul to the devil, he hates his sin, and cries out for justice. Lord! says
the believing soul, sin plays the tyrant, the devil in me; it would have me to do that
which wars against your holiness as well as against my happiness; against your honor
and glory, as my comfort and peace; therefore do me justice, O righteous judge of
heaven and earth, and let this tyrant sin die for it! "What a wretched man I am! Who
will rescue me from this body of death?"
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, Constantly to keep one
eye upon the promises of remission of sin, as well as the other eye upon the inward
operations of sin. This is the most certain truth, that God graciously pardons those sins
to his people—that he will not in this life fully subdue in his people. Paul prays thrice
(that is, often), to be delivered from the thorn in the flesh. All he can get is 'My grace is
sufficient for you' (2 Cor. 12:9); I will graciously pardon that to you—which I will not
conquer in you, says God. 'And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
have sinned against me, and whereby they have transgressed against me. I, even I, am
he who blots out your transgressions for mine own sake, and will not remember your
sins (Jer. 33:8, Is. 43:25).
Ah! you lamenting souls, who spend your days in sighing and groaning under the sense
and burden of your sins, why do you deal so unkindly with God, and so injuriously with
your own souls, as not to cast an eye upon those precious promises of remission of sin
which may bear up and refresh your spirits in the darkest night, and under the heaviest
burden of sin?
88

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Is. 44:2; Micah 7:18, 19; Col. 2:13, 14. The promises of God are a precious book;
every leaf drops myrrh and mercy. Though the weak Christian cannot open, read, and
apply them, Christ can and will apply them to their souls. 'I, I am he, blotting out your
transgressions' today and tomorrow (the Hebrew denotes a continued act of God).
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, To look upon all your
sins as charged upon the account of Christ, as debts which the Lord Jesus has fully
satisfied; and indeed, were there but one farthing of that debt unpaid that Christ was
engaged to satisfy, it would not have stood with the unspotted justice of God to have let
him come into heaven and sit down at his own right hand. But all our debts, by his
death, being discharged, we are freed, and he is exalted to sit down at the right hand of
his Father, which is the top of his glory, and the greatest pledge of our felicity: 'For he
has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him,' said the apostle (2 Cor. 5:21). Christ was the greatest of
sinners by imputation and reputation.
All our sins were made to meet upon Christ, as that evangelical prophet has it: 'He was
despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows, and familiar with suffering. Like one
from whom men hide their faces he was despised, and we esteemed him not. Surely he
took up our infirmities and carried our sorrows, yet we considered him stricken by God,
smitten by him, and afflicted. But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed
for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his
wounds we are healed. We all, like sheep, have gone astray, each of us has turned to
his own way; and the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. (Isaiah 53:3-6).
In law, we know that all the debts of the wife are charged upon the husband. Says the
wife to one and to another, If I owe you anything, go to my husband. So may a believer
say to the law, and to the justice of God, If I owe you anything, go to my Christ, who
has undertaken for me. I must not sit down discouraged, under the apprehension of
those debts, which Christ, to the utmost farthing, has fully satisfied. Would it not argue
much weakness, I had almost said much madness, for a debtor to sit down discouraged
upon his looking over those debts that his surety has readily, freely, and fully satisfied?
The sense of his great love should engage a man forever to love and honor his surety,
and to bless that hand that has paid the debt, and cancelled the books. But to sit down
discouraged when the debt is satisfied, is a sin which bespeaks repentance.
Christ has the greatest worth and wealth in him. As the worth and value of many pieces
of silver is in one piece of gold, so all the excellencies scattered abroad in the creatures
are united in Christ. All the whole volume of perfections which are spread through
heaven and earth are epitomized in him.
Christ has cleared all reckoning between God and us. You remember the scapegoat.
Upon his head all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions in all
their sins, were confessed and put, and the goat did bear upon him all their iniquities
(Lev. 16:21). Why! the Lord Jesus is that blessed scapegoat, upon whom all our sins
were laid, and who alone has carried 'our sins away into the land of forgetfulness, where
they shall never be remembered more.'

89

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Christ is the channel of grace from God. A believer, under the guilt of his sin, may look
the Lord in the face, and sweetly plead thus with him: It is true, Lord, I owed you
much—but your Son was my ransom, my redemption. His blood was the price; he was
my surety and undertook to answer for my sins; I know you must be satisfied, and
Christ has satisfied you to the utmost farthing: not for himself, for what sins had he of
his own? but for me; they were my debts that he satisfied for; be pleased to look over
the book, and you shall find that it is crossed by your own hand upon this very account,
that Christ has suffered and satisfied for them.
The bloods of Abel, for so the Hebrew has it, as if the blood of one Abel had so many
tongues as drops, cried for vengeance against sin; but the blood of Christ cries louder
for the pardon of sin!
Remedy (5). The fifth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, Of
the reasons why the Lord is pleased to have his people exercised, troubled, and vexed
with the operations of sinful corruption; and they are these: partly to keep them humble
and low in their own eyes; and partly to put them upon the use of all divine helps,
whereby sin may be subdued and mortified; and partly, that they may live upon Christ
for the perfecting the work of sanctification; and partly, to wean them from things
below, and to make them heart-sick of their absence from Christ, and to maintain in
them affections of compassion towards others who are subject to the same infirmities
with them; and that they may distinguish between a state of grace and a state of glory,
and that heaven may be more sweet to them when finally arrived there.
Now does the Lord upon these weighty reasons allow his people to be exercised and
molested with the operations of sinful corruptions? Oh then, let no believer speak, write,
or conclude bitter things against his own soul and comforts, because sin so troubles and
vexes his righteous soul. But he should lay his hand upon his mouth and be silent,
because the Lord will have it so, upon such weighty grounds as the soul is not able to
withstand.
Remedy (6). The sixth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That believers must repent for their being discouraged by their sins. Their being
discouraged by their sins will cost them many a prayer, many a tear, and many a
groan; and that because their discouragements under sin flow from ignorance and
unbelief. It springs from their ignorance of the richness, freeness, fullness, and
everlastingness of God's love; and from their ignorance of the power, glory, sufficiency,
and efficacy of the death and sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ; and from their
ignorance of the worth, glory, fullness, largeness, and completeness of the
righteousness of Jesus Christ; and from their ignorance of that real, close, spiritual,
glorious, and inseparable union which exists between Christ and their precious souls.
Ah! did precious souls know and believe the truth of these things as they should, they
would not sit down dejected and overwhelmed under the sense and operation of sin.
God never gave a believer a new heart that it should always lie a-bleeding, and that it
should always be rent and torn in pieces with discouragements.
DEVICE 2: By working them to make false definitions of their graces.

90

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Satan knows, that as false definitions of sin wrong the soul one way, so false definitions
of grace wrong the soul another way.
Oh how does Satan labor with might and main to work men to make false definitions of
FAITH! Some he works to define faith too high, as that it is a full assurance of the love
of God to a man's soul in particular, or a full persuasion of the pardon and remission of
a man's own sins in particular. Says Satan, What do you talk of faith? Faith is an
assurance of the love of God, and of the pardon of sin; and this you have not; you know
you are far off from this; therefore you have no faith. And by drawing men to make
such a false definition of faith, he keeps them in a sad, doubting, and questioning
condition, and makes them spend their days in sorrow and sighing, so that tears are
their drink, and sorrow is their food, and sighing is their work all the day long.
The philosophers say there are eight degrees of. Now, if a man should define heat only
by the highest degree, then all other degrees will be ruled out from being heat. So if
men shall define faith only by the highest degrees, by assurance of the love of God, and
of the pardon of his sins in particular, what will become of lesser degrees of faith?
If a man should define a man to be a living man, only by the highest and strongest
demonstrations of life, as laughing, leaping, running, working, and walking; would not
many thousands who groan under internal and external weaknesses, and who cannot
laugh, nor leap, nor run, nor work, nor walk—be found dead men by such a definition,
that yet we know to be alive? It is so here, and you know how to apply it.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
there may be true faith, yes, great measures of faith, where there is no assurance. The
Canaanite woman in the Gospel had strong faith, yet no assurance that we read of.
'These things have I written unto you,' says John, 'who believe on the name of the Son
of God, that you may know that you have eternal life' (1 John 5:13). In these words you
see that they did believe, and had eternal life, in respect of the purpose and promise of
God, and in respect of the seeds and beginnings of it in their souls, and in respect of
Christ their head, who sits in heaven as a public person, representing all his chosen
ones, 'Who has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus' (Eph. 2:6); and yet they did not know that they had eternal life.
It is one thing to have a right to heaven, and another thing to know it; it is one thing to
be beloved, and another thing for a man to know that he is beloved. It is one thing for
God to write a man's name in the book of life, and another thing for God to tell a man
that his name is written in the book of life; and to say to him (Luke 10:20), 'Rejoice,
because your name is written in heaven.' So Paul: 'In whom you also trusted, after you
heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation: in whom also, after you believed,
you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise' (Eph. 1:13). So Micah: 'Rejoice not
against me, O my enemy: for when I shall fall, I shall rise; when I shall sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned' (Micah 7:8, 9). This soul had no assurance, for he sits in darkness, and was
under the sad countenance of God; and yet had strong faith, as appears in those words,
'When I fall, I shall rise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.' He
will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness. So also those in Is.
50:10 had faith, though they had no assurance. And let this suffice for the first answer.

91

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That God in the Scripture defines faith otherwise. God defines faith to be a receiving of
Christ—'As many as received him, to them he gave this privilege, to be the sons of God'
(John 1:12). 'To as many as believed on his name'—to be a cleaving of the soul unto
God, though no joy—but afflictions, attend the soul (Act. 11:23). Yes, the Lord defines
faith to be a coming to God in Christ, and often to a resting and staying, rolling of the
soul upon Christ. It is safest and sweetest to define as God defines, both vices and
graces. This is the only way to settle the soul, and to secure it against the wiles of men
and devils, who labor, by false definitions of grace, to keep precious souls in a doubting,
staggering, and languishing condition, and so make their lives a burden, a hell, unto
them. Matt. 11:23; John 6:37; Heb. 7:25, 26.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider this,
That there may be true faith where there is much doubtings. Witness those frequent
sayings of Christ to his disciples, 'Why are you afraid, O you of little faith?' (Matt. 6:30,
14:31, 16:8; Luke 12:28). People may be truly believing who nevertheless are
sometimes doubting. In the same people that the fore-mentioned scriptures speak of,
you may see their faith commended and their doubts condemned, which does
necessarily suppose a presence of both.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That assurance is an effect of faith; therefore it cannot be faith. The cause cannot be
the effect, nor the root the fruit. As the effect flows from the cause, the fruit from the
root, the stream from the fountain, so does assurance flow from faith. This truth I shall
make good thus: The assurance of our salvation and pardon of sin does primarily arise
from the witness of the Spirit of God that we are the children of God (Eph. 1:13); and
the Spirit never witnesses this until we are believers: 'For we are sons by faith in Christ
Jesus' (Gal. 4:6). Therefore assurance is not faith—but follows it, as the effect follows
the cause.
Again, no man can be assured and persuaded of his salvation until he be united to
Christ, until he be ingrafted into Christ; and a man cannot be ingrafted into Christ until
he has faith. He must first be ingrafted into Christ by faith before he can have assurance
of his salvation; which does clearly evidence, that assurance is not faith—but an effect
and fruit of faith.
Again, faith cannot be lost—but assurance may; therefore assurance is not faith.
Though assurance is a precious flower in the garden of a saint, and is more infinitely
sweet and delightful to the soul than all outward comforts and contentments; yet it is
but a flower which is subject to fade, and to lose its freshness and beauty, as saints by
sad experience find. Psalm 51:12, 30:6, 7; Cant. 5:6; Is. 8:17.
Again, a man must first have faith before he can have assurance, therefore assurance is
not faith. And that a man must first have faith before he can have assurance, is clear by
this, a man must first be saved before he can be assured of his salvation; for he cannot
be assured of that which is not. And a man must first have a saving faith before he can
be saved by faith, for he cannot be saved by that which he has not; therefore a man
must first have faith before he can have assurance, and so it soundly follows that
assurance is not faith.

92

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
There are many thousand precious souls, of whom this world is not worthy, that have
the faith of reliance, and yet lack assurance and the effects of it; as high joy, glorious
peace, and vehement longings after the coming of Christ.
DEVICE 3: By working the soul to make false inferences from the cross actings of
Providence.
Says Satan—Do you not see how Providence crosses your prayers, and crosses your
desires, your tears, your hopes, your endeavors? Surely if his love were towards you, if
his soul did delight and take pleasure in you—he would not deal thus with you. (Psalm
77:7, et seq.; 31:1; 73:2, 23).
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
many things may be cross to our desires, which are not cross to our spiritual and
eternal good. Abraham, Jacob, David, Job, Moses, Jeremiah, Jonah, and Paul, met with
many things that were contrary to their desires and endeavors, that were not contrary
to their good; as all know that have wisely compared their desires and endeavors and
God's actings together. Medicine and surgery often works contrary to the patients'
desires, when it does not work contrary to their good.
I remember a story of a godly man, who had a great desire to go to France, and as he
was going to board the ship, he broke his leg; and it pleased Providence so to order it,
that the ship that he should have gone in, was sunk, and not a man saved; and so by
breaking a bone his life was saved. Though Providence did work cross to his desire, yet
it did not work cross to his good.
Some heretics, not being able to repudiate the preaching and writing of Augustine,
sought his destruction, waiting to trap him on the way he was to go. But by God's
providence Augustine, missing his way, escaped the danger.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That the hand of God may be against a man, when the love and heart of God is much
set upon a man. No man can conclude how the heart of God stands—by his hand in
providential dealings. The hand of God was against Ephraim, and yet his love, his heart,
was dearly set upon Ephraim: "I have surely heard Ephraim's moaning: 'You disciplined
me like an unruly calf, and I have been disciplined. Restore me, and I will return,
because you are the Lord my God. After I strayed, I repented; after I came to
understand, I beat my breast. I was ashamed and humiliated because I bore the
disgrace of my youth.' Is not Ephraim my dear son, the child in whom I delight? Though
I often speak against him, I still remember him. Therefore my heart yearns for him; I
have great compassion for him," declares the Lord." Jeremiah 31:18-20 ' (Jer. 31:1820).*
God's providential hand may be with people, when his heart is set against them. God's
providential hand was for a time with Saul, Haman, Asshur, and Jehu—and yet his heart
was set against them. 'No man knows love or hatred by all that is before him' (Eccles.
9:1, 2).
God can look sourly, and chide bitterly, and strike heavily—even where and when he
loves dearly. The hand of God was very much against Job—and yet his love, his heart,
93

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
was very much set upon Job, as you may see by comparing chaps. 1 and 2, with 41 and
42. The hand of God was sore against David and Jonah—when his heart was much set
upon them. He who shall conclude that the heart of God is against those who his hand is
against, will condemn the generation of the just, whom God unjustly would not have
condemned.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan, is, to consider, That all the
cross providences which befall the saints are for some noble good that God intends to
confer upon them. Providence wrought cross to David's desire in taking away the child
sinfully begotten—but yet not cross to more noble good; for was it not far better for
David to have such a legitimate heir as Solomon was, than that a illegitimate child
should wear the crown, and sway the scepter?
Joseph, you know, was sold into a far country by the envy and malice of his brethren,
and afterwards imprisoned because he would not be a prisoner to his mistress's lusts;
yet all these providences did wonderfully conduce to his advancement, and the
preservation of his father's family, which was then the visible church of Christ. It was so
handled by a noble hand of providence, that what they sought to injure, they did
promote. Joseph was therefore sold by his brethren that he might not be worshiped,
and yet he was therefore worshiped because he was sold. Cf. Genesis 37:7, etc.
David was designed to a kingdom—but oh! the straits, troubles, and deaths that he runs
through before he feels the weight of his crown! And all this was but in order to the
sweetening of his crown, and to the settling of it more firmly and gloriously upon his
head.
God did so contrive it that Jonah's offence, and those cross actings of his which
attended it, should advantage that end which they seemed most directly to oppose.
Jonah he flies to Tarshish, then cast into the sea, then saved by a miracle. Then the
mariners, as it is very probable, who cast Jonah into the sea, declared to the Ninevites
what had happened; therefore he must be a man sent of God, and that his threatenings
must be believed and hearkened to, and therefore they must repent and humble
themselves, that the wrath threatened might not be executed.
The motions of divine providence are so dark, so deep, so changeable, that the wisest
and noblest believers cannot tell what conclusions to make.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That all the strange, dark, deep, and changeable providences that believers meet with,
shall further them in their way to heaven—in their journey to happiness. Divine wisdom
and love will so order all things here below, that they shall work for the real, spiritual,
and eternal good—of those who love him. All the rugged providences that David met
with did contribute to the bringing of him to the throne; and all the rugged providences
that Daniel and the 'three children' met with did contribute to their great advancement.
So all the rugged providences that believers meet with, they shall all contribute to the
lifting up of their souls above all things, below God. As the waters lifted up Noah's ark
nearer heaven—and as all the stones that were about Stephen's ears did but knock him
the closer to Christ, the corner-stone—so all the strange rugged providences that we
meet with, they shall raise us nearer heaven, and knock us nearer to Christ, that
precious corner-stone.
94

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

DEVICE 4: By suggesting to them that their graces are not true—but counterfeit.
Says Satan—All is not gold which glitters, all is not free grace which you count grace,
which you call grace. That which you call faith is but imagination; and that which you
call zeal is but a natural heat and passion; and that light you have, it is but common, it
is short, to what many have attained to—who are now in hell. Satan does not labor
more mightily to persuade hypocrites that their graces are true when they are
counterfeit; than he does to persuade precious souls that their graces are counterfeit,
when indeed they are true, and such as will abide the touchstone of Christ.
Yet it must be granted that many a fair flower may grow out of a stinking root—and
many sweet dispositions and fair actions may be where there is only the corrupt root of
nature.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider, That
grace is taken two ways.
[1.] It is taken for the gracious good-will and favor of God, whereby he is pleased of his
own free love to accept of some in Christ for his own. This, some call the first grace,
because it is the fountain of all other graces, and the spring from whence they flow, and
it is therefore called grace, because it makes a man gracious with God—but this is only
in God.
[2.] Grace is taken for the gifts of grace, and they are of two sorts, common or special.
Some are common to believers and hypocrites, as a gift of knowledge, a gift of prayer,
etc. Some are special graces, and they are proper and peculiar to the saints, as faith,
humility, meekness, love, patience, etc. (Gal. 5:22, 23).
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, wisely to consider, The
differences between renewing grace and restraining grace, between sanctifying and
temporary grace; and this I will show you in these ten particulars.
[1.] True grace makes all glorious within and without. 'The King's daughter is all
glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold' (Psalm 45:13). True grace makes the
understanding glorious, the affections glorious. It casts a general glory upon all the
noble parts of the soul: 'The King's daughter is all glorious within.' And as it makes the
inside glorious, so it makes the outside glorious: 'Her clothing is of wrought gold.' It
makes men look gloriously, and speak gloriously, and walk and act gloriously, so that
vain souls shall be forced to say that these are those who have seen Jesus. God brings
not a pair of scales to weigh our graces—but a touchstone to try our graces. Purity,
preciousness, and holiness is stamped upon all saving graces. Acts 15:9; 2 Peter 4:1;
Jude 20.
As grace is a fire to burn up and consume the dross and filth of the soul, so it is an
ornament to beautify and adorn the soul. True grace makes all new, the inside new and
the outside new: 'If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature' (2 Cor. 5:17), but
temporary grace does not this. (The Greek signifies 'a new creation': new man, new
covenant, new paradise, new Lord, new law, new hearts, and new creatures go
together.)
95