PURITAN GOLD -- The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 14
The Country of Beulah


{361} IGNOR. Do you think that I am such a fool as to think God can
see no further than I? or, that I would come to God in the best of
my performances?

CHR. Why, how dost thou think in this matter?

IGNOR. Why, to be short, I think I must believe in Christ for
justification.

CHR. How! think thou must believe in Christ, when thou seest
not thy need of him! Thou neither seest thy original nor actual
infirmities; but hast such an opinion of thyself, and of what
thou dost, as plainly renders thee to be one that did never see a
necessity of Christ's personal righteousness to justify thee before
God. How, then, dost thou say, I believe in Christ?

{362} IGNOR. I believe well enough for all that.

CHR. How dost thou believe?

IGNOR. I believe that Christ died for sinners, and that I shall be
justified before God from the curse, through his gracious acceptance
of my obedience to his law. Or thus, Christ makes my duties, that
are religious, acceptable to his Father, by virtue of his merits;
and so shall I be justified.

{363} CHR. Let me give an answer to this confession of thy faith:--

1. Thou believest with a fantastical faith; for this faith is
nowhere described in the Word.

2. Thou believest with a false faith; because it taketh justification
from the personal righteousness of Christ, and applies it to thy
own.

3. This faith maketh not Christ a justifier of thy person, but
of thy actions; and of thy person for thy actions' sake, which is
false.

4. Therefore, this faith is deceitful, even such as will leave
thee under wrath, in the day of God Almighty; for true justifying
faith puts the soul, as sensible of its condition by the law, upon
flying for refuge unto Christ's righteousness, which righteousness
of his is not an act of grace, by which he maketh for justification,
thy obedience accepted with God; but his personal obedience to the
law, in doing and suffering for us what that required at our hands;
this righteousness, I say, true faith accepteth; under the skirt
of which, the soul being shrouded, and by it presented as spotless
before God, it is accepted, and acquit from condemnation.

{364} IGNOR. What! would you have us trust to what Christ, in his
own person, has done without us? This conceit would loosen the
reins of our lust, and tolerate us to live as we list; for what
matter how we live, if we may be justified by Christ's personal
righteousness from all, when we believe it?

CHR. Ignorance is thy name, and as thy name is, so art thou; even
this thy answer demonstrateth what I say. Ignorant thou art of
what justifying righteousness is, and as ignorant how to secure thy
soul, through the faith of it, from the heavy wrath of God. Yea,
thou also art ignorant of the true effects of saving faith in this
righteousness of Christ, which is, to bow and win over the heart
to God in Christ, to love his name, his word, ways, and people,
and not as thou ignorantly imaginest.

HOPE. Ask him if ever he had Christ revealed to him from heaven.

{365} IGNOR. What! you are a man for revelations! I believe that
what both you, and all the rest of you, say about that matter, is
but the fruit of distracted brains.

HOPE. Why, man! Christ is so hid in God from the natural apprehensions
of the flesh, that he cannot by any man be savingly known, unless
God the Father reveals him to them.

{366} IGNOR. That is your faith, but not mine; yet mine, I doubt
not, is as good as yours, though I have not in my head so many
whimsies as you.

CHR. Give me leave to put in a word. You ought not so slightly
to speak of this matter; for this I will boldly affirm, even as my
good companion hath done, that no man can know Jesus Christ but by
the revelation of the Father; [Matt. 11:27] yea, and faith too,
by which the soul layeth hold upon Christ, if it be right, must be
wrought by the exceeding greatness of his mighty power; the working
of which faith, I perceive, poor Ignorance, thou art ignorant of.
[1 Cor. 12:3, Eph. 1:18,19] Be awakened, then, see thine own
wretchedness, and fly to the Lord Jesus; and by his righteousness,
which is the righteousness of God, for he himself is God, thou
shalt be delivered from condemnation.

{367} IGNOR. You go so fast, I cannot keep pace with you. Do you
go on before; I must stay a while behind.

Then they said--

 Well, Ignorance, wilt thou yet foolish be,
 To slight good counsel, ten times given thee?
 And if thou yet refuse it, thou shalt know,
 Ere long, the evil of thy doing so.
 Remember, man, in time, stoop, do not fear;
 Good counsel taken well, saves: therefore hear.
 But if thou yet shalt slight it, thou wilt be
 The loser, (Ignorance), I'll warrant thee.


Then Christian addressed thus himself to his fellow:--

CHR. Well, come, my good Hopeful, I perceive that thou and I must
walk by ourselves again.

{368} So I saw in my dream that they went on apace before,
and Ignorance he came hobbling after. Then said Christian to his
companion, It pities me much for this poor man, it will certainly
go ill with him at last.

HOPE. Alas! there are abundance in our town in his condition,
whole families, yea, whole streets, and that of pilgrims too; and
if there be so many in our parts, how many, think you, must there
be in the place where he was born?

CHR. Indeed the Word saith, "He hath blinded their eyes, lest they
should see", &c. But now we are by ourselves, what do you think
of such men? Have they at no time, think you, convictions of sin,
and so consequently fears that their state is dangerous?

HOPE. Nay, do you answer that question yourself, for you are the
elder man.

CHR. Then I say, sometimes (as I think) they may; but they being
naturally ignorant, understand not that such convictions tend to
their good; and therefore they do desperately seek to stifle them,
and presumptuously continue to flatter themselves in the way of
their own hearts.

{369} HOPE. I do believe, as you say, that fear tends much to men's
good, and to make them right, at their beginning to go on pilgrimage.

CHR. Without all doubt it doth, if it be right; for so says the
Word, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." [Prov.
1:7, 9:10, Job 28:28, Ps. 111:10]

{370} HOPE. How will you describe right fear?

CHR. True or right fear is discovered by three things:--

1. By its rise; it is caused by saving convictions for sin.

2. It driveth the soul to lay fast hold of Christ for salvation.

3. It begetteth and continueth in the soul a great reverence of
God, his Word, and ways, keeping it tender, and making it afraid
to turn from them, to the right hand or to the left, to anything
that may dishonour God, break its peace, grieve the Spirit, or
cause the enemy to speak reproachfully.

HOPE. Well said; I believe you have said the truth. Are we now
almost got past the Enchanted Ground?

CHR. Why, art thou weary of this discourse?

HOPE. No, verily, but that I would know where we are.

{371} CHR. We have not now above two miles further to go thereon.
But let us return to our matter. Now the ignorant know not that
such convictions as tend to put them in fear are for their good,
and therefore they seek to stifle them.

HOPE. How do they seek to stifle them?

{372} CHR. 1. They think that those fears are wrought by the
devil, (though indeed they are wrought of God); and, thinking so,
they resist them as things that directly tend to their overthrow.

2. They also think that these fears tend to the spoiling of their
faith, when, alas, for them, poor men that they are, they have none
at all! and therefore they harden their hearts against them.

3. They presume they ought not to fear; and, therefore, in despite
of them, wax presumptuously confident.

4. They see that those fears tend to take away from them their
pitiful old self-holiness, and therefore they resist them with all
their might.

{373} HOPE. I know something of this myself; for, before I knew
myself, it was so with me.

CHR. Well, we will leave, at this time, our neighbour Ignorance by
himself, and fall upon another profitable question.

HOPE. With all my heart, but you shall still begin.

CHR. Well then, did you not know, about ten years ago, one Temporary
in your parts, who was a forward man in religion then?

HOPE. Know him! yes, he dwelt in Graceless, a town about two miles
off of Honesty, and he dwelt next door to one Turnback.

{374} CHR. Right, he dwelt under the same roof with him. Well,
that man was much awakened once; I believe that then he had some
sight of his sins, and of the wages that were due thereto.

HOPE. I am of your mind, for, my house not being above three miles
from him, he would ofttimes come to me, and that with many tears.
Truly I pitied the man, and was not altogether without hope of him;
but one may see, it is not every one that cries, Lord, Lord.

CHR. He told me once that he was resolved to go on pilgrimage, as
we do now; but all of a sudden he grew acquainted with one Save-self,
and then he became a stranger to me.

{375} HOPE. Now, since we are talking about him, let us a little
inquire into the reason of the sudden backsliding of him and such
others.

CHR. It may be very profitable, but do you begin.

HOPE. Well, then, there are in my judgment four reasons for it:--

{376} 1. Though the consciences of such men are awakened, yet their
minds are not changed; therefore, when the power of guilt weareth
away, that which provoked them to be religious ceaseth, wherefore
they naturally turn to their own course again, even as we see the
dog that is sick of what he has eaten, so long as his sickness
prevails he vomits and casts up all; not that he doth this of a
free mind (if we may say a dog has a mind), but because it troubleth
his stomach; but now, when his sickness is over, and so his stomach
eased, his desire being not at all alienate from his vomit, he turns
him about and licks up all, and so it is true which is written,
"The dog is turned to his own vomit again." [2 Pet. 2:22] Thus
I say, being hot for heaven, by virtue only of the sense and fear
of the torments of hell, as their sense of hell and the fears of
damnation chills and cools, so their desires for heaven and salvation
cool also. So then it comes to pass, that when their guilt and
fear is gone, their desires for heaven and happiness die, and they
return to their course again.

{377} 2. Another reason is, they have slavish fears that do
overmaster them; I speak now of the fears that they have of men,
for "the fear of man bringeth a snare". [Prov. 29:25] So then,
though they seem to be hot for heaven, so long as the flames of
hell are about their ears, yet when that terror is a little over,
they betake themselves to second thoughts; namely, that it is good
to be wise, and not to run (for they know not what) the hazard of
losing all, or, at least, of bringing themselves into unavoidable
and unnecessary troubles, and so they fall in with the world again.

{378} 3. The shame that attends religion lies also as a block in
their way; they are proud and haughty; and religion in their eye
is low and contemptible, therefore, when they have lost their sense
of hell and wrath to come, they return again to their former course.

{379} 4. Guilt, and to meditate terror, are grievous to them.
They like not to see their misery before they come into it; though
perhaps the sight of it first, if they loved that sight, might make
them fly whither the righteous fly and are safe. But because they
do, as I hinted before, even shun the thoughts of guilt and terror,
therefore, when once they are rid of their awakenings about the
terrors and wrath of God, they harden their hearts gladly, and
choose such ways as will harden them more and more.

{380} CHR. You are pretty near the business, for the bottom of all
is for want of a change in their mind and will. And therefore they
are but like the felon that standeth before the judge, he quakes
and trembles, and seems to repent most heartily, but the bottom
of all is the fear of the halter; not that he hath any detestation
of the offence, as is evident, because, let but this man have his
liberty, and he will be a thief, and so a rogue still, whereas, if
his mind was changed, he would be otherwise.
