PURITAN GOLD -- Institutes of the Christian Religion by John Calvin: Full Audiobook, Book I Chapter 3 of 18
The Human Mind Naturally Endued With The Knowledge Of God. We lay it down as a position not to be controverted, that the human mind,

---

Chapter III. The Human Mind Naturally Endued With The Knowledge Of God.


We lay it down as a position not to be controverted, that the human mind,
even by natural instinct, possesses some sense of a Deity. For that no man
might shelter himself under the pretext of ignorance, God hath given to
all some apprehension of his existence,(66) the memory of which he
frequently and insensibly renews; so that, as men universally know that
there is a God, and that he is their Maker, they must be condemned by
their own testimony, for not having worshipped him and consecrated their
lives to his service. If we seek for ignorance of a Deity, it is nowhere
more likely to be found, than among tribes the most stupid and furthest
from civilization. But, as the celebrated Cicero observes, there is no
nation so barbarous, no race so savage, as not to be firmly persuaded of
the being of a God.(67) Even those who in other respects appear to differ
but little from brutes, always retain some sense of religion; so fully are
the minds of men possessed with this common principle, which is closely
interwoven with their original composition. Now, since there has never
been a country or family, from the beginning of the world, totally
destitute of religion, it is a tacit confession, that some sense of the
Divinity is inscribed on every heart. Of this opinion, idolatry itself
furnishes ample proof. For we know how reluctantly man would degrade
himself to exalt other creatures above him. His preference of worshipping
a piece of wood or stone, to being thought to have no god, evinces the
impression of a Deity on the human mind to be very strong, the
obliteration of which is more difficult than a total change of the natural
disposition; and this is certainly changed, whenever man leaves his
natural pride, and voluntarily descends to such meannesses under the
notion of worshipping God.

II. It is most absurd, then, to pretend, as is asserted by some, that
religion was the contrivance of a few subtle and designing men, a
political machine to confine the simple multitude to their duty, while
those who inculcated the worship of God on others, were themselves far
from believing that any god existed. I confess, indeed, that artful men
have introduced many inventions into religion, to fill the vulgar with
reverence, and strike them with terror, in order to obtain the greater
command over their minds. But this they never could have accomplished, if
the minds of men had not previously been possessed of a firm persuasion of
the existence of God, from which the propensity to religion proceeds. And
that they who cunningly imposed on the illiterate, under the pretext of
religion, were themselves wholly destitute of any knowledge of God, is
quite incredible. For though there were some in ancient times, and many
arise in the present age, who deny the existence of God, yet, in spite of
their reluctance, they are continually receiving proofs of what they
desire to disbelieve. We read of no one guilty of more audacious or
unbridled contempt of the Deity than Caligula; yet no man ever trembled
with greater distress at any instance of Divine wrath, so that he was
constrained to dread the Divinity whom he professed to despise. This you
may always see exemplified in persons of similar character. For the most
audacious contemners of God are most alarmed, even at the noise of a
falling leaf. Whence arises this, but from the vengeance of the Divine
Majesty, smiting their consciences the more powerfully in proportion to
their efforts to fly from it? They try every refuge to hide themselves
from the Lord’s presence, and to efface it from their minds; but their
attempts to elude it are all in vain. Though it may seem to disappear for
a moment, it presently returns with increased violence; so that, if they
have any remission of the anguish of conscience, it resembles the sleep of
persons intoxicated, or subject to frenzy, who enjoy no placid rest while
sleeping, being continually harassed with horrible and tremendous dreams.
The impious themselves, therefore, exemplify the observation, that the
idea of a God is never lost in the human mind.

III. It will always be evident to persons of correct judgment, that the
idea of a Deity impressed on the mind of man is indelible. That all have
by nature an innate persuasion of the Divine existence, a persuasion
inseparable from their very constitution, we have abundant evidence in the
contumacy of the wicked, whose furious struggles to extricate themselves
from the fear of God are unavailing. Though Diagoras, and others like him,
turn to ridicule what all ages have believed of religion;(68) though
Dionysius scoff at the judgment of Heaven,—it is but a forced laughter,
for the worm of a guilty conscience torments them within, worse than if
they were seared with hot irons. I agree not with Cicero, that errors in
process of time become obsolete, and that religion is increased and
ameliorated daily. For the world, as will shortly be observed, uses its
utmost endeavours to banish all knowledge of God, and tries every method
of corrupting his worship. I only maintain, that while the stupid
insensibility which the wicked wish to acquire, to promote their contempt
of God, preys upon their minds, yet the sense of a Deity, which they
ardently desire to extinguish, is still strong, and frequently discovers
itself. Whence we infer, that this is a doctrine, not first to be learned
in the schools, but which every man from his birth is self‐taught, and
which, though many strain every nerve to banish it from them, yet nature
itself permits none to forget. Now, if the end for which all men are born
and live, be to know God,—and unless the knowledge of God have reached
this point, it is uncertain and vain,—it is evident, that all who direct
not every thought and action of life to this end, are degenerated from the
law of their creation. Of this the heathen philosophers themselves were
not ignorant. This was Plato’s meaning, when he taught that the chief good
of the soul consists in similitude to God, when the soul, having a clear
knowledge of him, is wholly transformed into his likeness.(69) The
reasoning also of Gryllus, in Plutarch, is very accurate, when he affirms,
that men entirely destitute of religion, not only do not excel the brutes,
but are in many respects far more wretched, being obnoxious to evil under
so many forms, and always dragging on a tumultuous and restless life. The
worship of God is therefore the only thing which renders men superior to
brutes, and makes them aspire to immortality.