PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 9 of 10
The Epistle of Enoch — Chapters 91 through 100

---

We now enter the Epistle of Enoch, the final major division of this ancient book. In these chapters, the aged patriarch addresses his children and all future generations with warnings, woes, and the great Apocalypse of Weeks — a sweeping vision of ten ages of human history.

CHAPTER 91

Verse 1. And now, my son Methuselah, call to me all thy brothers and gather together to me all the sons of thy mother; for the word calls me, and the spirit is poured out upon me, that I may show you everything that shall befall you for ever.

Verse 2. And thereupon Methuselah went and summoned to him all his brothers and assembled his relatives.

Verse 3. And he spake unto all the children of righteousness and said: Hear, ye sons of Enoch, all the words of your father, and hearken aright to the voice of my mouth; for I exhort you and say unto you, beloved: Love uprightness and walk therein.

Verse 4. And draw not nigh to uprightness with a double heart, and associate not with those of a double heart, but walk in righteousness, my sons. And it shall guide you on good paths, and righteousness shall be your companion.

Verse 5. For I know that violence must increase on the earth, and a great chastisement be executed on the earth, and all unrighteousness come to an end; yea, it shall be cut off from its roots, and its whole structure be destroyed.

Verse 6. And unrighteousness shall again be consummated on the earth, and all the deeds of unrighteousness and of violence and transgression shall prevail in a twofold degree.

Verse 7. And when sin and unrighteousness and blasphemy and violence in all kinds of deeds increase, and apostasy and transgression and uncleanness increase, a great chastisement shall come from heaven upon all these, and the holy Lord will come forth with wrath and chastisement to execute judgment on earth.

Verse 8. In those days violence shall be cut off from its roots, and the roots of unrighteousness together with deceit, and they shall be destroyed from under heaven.

Verse 9. And all the idols of the heathen shall be abandoned, and the temples burned with fire, and they shall remove them from the whole earth, and they shall be cast into the judgment of fire, and shall perish in wrath and in the grievous judgment for ever.

Verse 10. And the righteous shall arise from their sleep, and wisdom shall arise and be given unto them.

Verse 11. And after that the roots of unrighteousness shall be cut off, and the sinners shall be destroyed by the sword, and the blasphemers shall be cut off everywhere.

Verse 12. And now I tell you, my sons, and show you the paths of righteousness and the paths of violence. Yea, I will show them to you again that ye may know what will come to pass.

Verse 13. And now, hearken unto me, my sons, and walk in the paths of righteousness, and walk not in the paths of violence; for all who walk in the paths of unrighteousness shall perish for ever.

CHAPTER 92

Verse 1. The book written by Enoch — Enoch indeed wrote this complete doctrine of wisdom, which is praised of all men and a judge of all the earth — for all my children who shall dwell on the earth, and for the future generations who shall observe uprightness and peace.

Verse 2. Let not your spirit be troubled on account of the times; for the Holy and Great One hath appointed days for all things.

Verse 3. And the righteous one shall arise from sleep, shall arise and walk in the paths of righteousness, and all his path and conversation shall be in eternal goodness and grace.

Verse 4. He will be gracious to the righteous and give him eternal uprightness, and He will give him power so that he shall be endowed with goodness and righteousness. And he shall walk in eternal light.

Verse 5. And sin shall perish in darkness for ever, and shall no more be seen from that day for evermore.

CHAPTER 93

Verse 1. And after that Enoch both gave and began to recount from the books. And Enoch said: Concerning the children of righteousness and concerning the elect of the world, and concerning the plant of uprightness, I will speak these things, yea, I Enoch will declare them unto you, my sons, according to that which appeared to me in the heavenly vision, and which I have known through the word of the holy angels, and have learnt from the heavenly tablets.

Verse 2. And Enoch began to recount from the books and said: I was born the seventh in the first week, while judgment and righteousness still endured.

Verse 3. And after me there shall arise in the second week great wickedness, and deceit shall have sprung up; and in it there shall be the first end. And in it a man shall be saved; and after it is ended unrighteousness shall grow up, and a law shall be made for the sinners.

Verse 4. And after that in the third week at its close a man shall be elected as the plant of righteous judgment, and his posterity shall become the plant of righteousness for evermore.

Verse 5. And after that in the fourth week, at its close, visions of the holy and righteous shall be seen, and a law for all generations and an enclosure shall be made for them.

Verse 6. And after that in the fifth week, at its close, the house of glory and dominion shall be built for ever.

Verse 7. And after that in the sixth week all who live in it shall be blinded, and the hearts of all of them shall godlessly forsake wisdom. And in it a man shall ascend; and at its close the house of dominion shall be burnt with fire, and the whole race of the chosen root shall be dispersed.

Verse 8. And after that in the seventh week shall an apostate generation arise, and many shall be its deeds, and all its deeds shall be apostate.

Verse 9. And at the close of the seventh week shall the elect righteous of the eternal plant of righteousness be selected, to receive sevenfold instruction concerning all His creation.

Verse 10. And after that there shall be another, the eighth week, that of righteousness, and a sword shall be given to it that a righteous judgment may be executed on the oppressors, and sinners shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous.

Verse 11. And at its close they shall acquire houses through their righteousness, and a house shall be built for the Great King in glory for evermore.

Verse 12. And after that, in the ninth week, the righteous judgment shall be revealed to the whole world, and all the works of the godless shall vanish from all the earth, and the world shall be written down for destruction.

Verse 13. And after this, in the tenth week in the seventh part, there shall be the great eternal judgment, in which He will execute vengeance amongst the angels.

Verse 14. And the first heaven shall depart and pass away, and a new heaven shall appear, and all the powers of the heavens shall give sevenfold light.

CHAPTER 94

Verse 1. And now I say unto you, my sons, love righteousness and walk therein; for the paths of righteousness are worthy of acceptation, but the paths of unrighteousness shall suddenly be destroyed and vanish.

Verse 2. And to certain men of a generation shall the paths of violence and of death be revealed, and they shall hold themselves afar from them, and shall not follow them.

Verse 3. And now I say unto you the righteous: Walk not in the paths of wickedness, nor in the paths of death, and draw not nigh to them, lest ye be destroyed.

Verse 4. But seek and choose for yourselves righteousness and an elect life, and walk in the paths of peace, and ye shall live and prosper.

Verse 5. And hold fast my words in the thoughts of your hearts, and suffer them not to be effaced from your hearts; for I know that sinners will tempt men to evilly-entreat wisdom, so that no place may be found for her, and no manner of temptation may minish.

Verse 6. Woe to those who build unrighteousness and oppression and lay deceit as a foundation; for they shall be suddenly overthrown, and they shall have no peace.

Verse 7. Woe to those who build their houses with sin; for from all their foundations shall they be overthrown, and by the sword shall they fall. And those who acquire gold and silver in judgment suddenly shall perish.

Verse 8. Woe to you, ye rich, for ye have trusted in your riches, and from your riches shall ye depart, because ye have not remembered the Most High in the days of your riches.

Verse 9. Ye have committed blasphemy and unrighteousness, and have become ready for the day of slaughter, and the day of darkness and the day of the great judgment.

CHAPTER 95

Verse 1. Thus I speak and declare unto you: He who hath created you will overthrow you, and for your fall there shall be no compassion, and your Creator will rejoice at your destruction.

Verse 2. And your righteous ones in those days shall be a reproach to the sinners and the godless.

Verse 3. Oh that mine eyes were a cloud of waters that I might weep over you, and pour down my tears as a cloud of waters, that so I might rest from my trouble of heart!

Verse 4. Who has permitted you to practice reproaches and wickedness? And so judgment shall overtake you, sinners.

Verse 5. Fear not the sinners, ye righteous; for again will the Lord deliver them into your hands, that ye may execute judgment upon them according to your desires.

Verse 6. Woe to you who fulminate anathemas which cannot be reversed: healing shall therefore be far from you because of your sins.

Verse 7. Woe to you who requite your neighbour with evil; for ye shall be requited according to your works.

CHAPTER 96

Verse 1. Be hopeful, ye righteous; for suddenly shall the sinners perish before you, and ye shall have lordship over them according to your desires.

Verse 2. And in the day of the tribulation of the sinners, your children shall mount and rise as eagles, and higher than the vultures will be your nest, and ye shall ascend and enter the crevices of the earth, and the clefts of the rock for ever as coneys before the unrighteous, and the sirens shall sigh because of you — and weep.

Verse 3. Wherefore fear not, ye that have suffered; for healing shall be your portion, and a bright light shall enlighten you, and the voice of rest ye shall hear from heaven.

Verse 4. Woe unto you, ye sinners, for your riches make you appear like the righteous, but your hearts convict you of being sinners, and this fact shall be a testimony against you for a memorial of your evil deeds.

Verse 5. Woe to you who devour the finest of the wheat, and drink wine in large bowls, and tread under foot the lowly with your might.

Verse 6. Woe to you who drink water from every fountain, for suddenly shall ye be consumed and wither away, because ye have forsaken the fountain of life.

Verse 7. Woe to you who work unrighteousness and deceit and blasphemy; it shall be a memorial against you for evil.

Verse 8. Woe to you, ye mighty, who with might oppress the righteous; for the day of your destruction is coming. In those days many and good days shall come to the righteous — in the day of your judgment.

CHAPTER 97

Verse 1. Believe, ye righteous, that the sinners will become a shame and perish in the day of unrighteousness.

Verse 2. Be it known unto you, ye sinners, that the Most High is mindful of your destruction, and the angels of heaven rejoice over your destruction.

Verse 3. What will ye do, ye sinners, and whither will ye flee on that day of judgment, when ye hear the voice of the prayer of the righteous?

Verse 4. Yea, ye shall fare like unto them, against whom this word shall be a testimony: Ye have been companions of sinners.

Verse 5. And in those days the prayer of the righteous shall reach unto the Lord, and for you the days of your judgment shall come.

Verse 6. And all the words of your unrighteousness shall be read out before the Great Holy One, and your faces shall be covered with shame, and He will reject every work which is grounded on unrighteousness.

Verse 7. Woe to you, ye sinners, who live on the mid ocean and on the dry land, whose remembrance is evil against you.

Verse 8. Woe to you who acquire silver and gold in unrighteousness and say: We have become rich with riches and have possessions; and have acquired everything we have desired.

Verse 9. And now let us do what we purposed, for we have gathered silver and filled our treasuries, and many are the husbandmen of our houses.

Verse 10. And like water your lies shall flow away; for your riches shall not abide but speedily ascend from you, for ye have acquired it all in unrighteousness, and ye shall be given over to a great curse.

CHAPTER 98

Verse 1. And now I swear unto you, to the wise and to the foolish, for ye shall have manifold experiences on the earth.

Verse 2. For ye men shall put on more adornments than a woman, and coloured garments more than a virgin; in royalty and in grandeur and in power, and in silver and in gold and in purple, and in splendour and in food they shall be poured out as water.

Verse 3. Therefore they shall be wanting in doctrine and wisdom, and they shall perish thereby together with their possessions, and with all their glory and their splendour; and in shame and in slaughter and in great destitution, their spirits shall be cast into the furnace of fire.

Verse 4. I have sworn unto you, ye sinners, as a mountain has not become a slave, and a hill does not become the handmaid of a woman, even so sin has not been sent upon the earth, but man of himself has created it, and under a great curse shall they fall who commit it.

Verse 5. And barrenness has not been given to the woman, but on account of the deeds of her own hands she dieth without children.

Verse 6. I have sworn unto you, ye sinners, by the Holy Great One, that all your evil deeds are revealed in the heavens, and that none of your deeds of oppression are covered and hidden.

Verse 7. And do not think in your spirit nor say in your heart that ye do not know and that ye do not see that every sin is every day recorded in heaven in the presence of the Most High.

Verse 8. From henceforth ye know that all your oppression wherewith ye oppress is written down every day till the day of your judgment.

Verse 9. Woe to you, ye fools, for through your folly shall ye perish; and ye transgress against the wise, and so good hap shall not be your portion.

Verse 10. And now, know ye that ye are prepared for the day of destruction; wherefore do not hope to live, ye sinners, but ye shall depart and die; for ye know no ransom; for ye are prepared for the day of the great judgment, for the day of tribulation and great shame for your spirits.

Verse 11. Woe to you, ye obstinate of heart, who work wickedness and eat blood: whence have ye good things to eat and to drink and to be filled? From all the good things which the Lord the Most High has placed in abundance on the earth; therefore ye shall have no peace.

Verse 12. Woe to you who love the deeds of unrighteousness: wherefore do ye hope for good hap unto yourselves? Know that ye shall be delivered into the hands of the righteous, and they shall cut off your necks and slay you, and have no mercy upon you.

Verse 13. Woe to you who rejoice in the tribulation of the righteous; for no grave shall be dug for you.

Verse 14. Woe to you who set at nought the words of the righteous; for ye shall have no hope of life.

Verse 15. Woe to you who write down lying and godless words; for they write down their lies that men may hear them and act godlessly towards their neighbour.

Verse 16. Therefore they shall have no peace but die a sudden death.

CHAPTER 99

Verse 1. Woe to you who work godlessness, and glory in lying and extol them: ye shall perish, and no happy life shall be yours.

Verse 2. Woe to them who pervert the words of uprightness, and transgress the eternal law, and transform themselves into what they were not — into sinners: they shall be trodden under foot upon the earth.

Verse 3. In those days make ready, ye righteous, to raise your prayers as a memorial, and place them as a testimony before the angels, that they may place the sin of the sinners for a memorial before the Most High.

Verse 4. In those days the nations shall be stirred up, and the families of the nations shall arise on the day of destruction.

Verse 5. And in those days the destitute shall go forth and carry off their children, and they shall abandon them, so that their children shall perish through them; yea, they shall abandon their children that are still sucklings, and not return to them, and shall have no pity on their beloved ones.

Verse 6. And again I swear to you, ye sinners, that sin is prepared for a day of unceasing bloodshed.

Verse 7. And they who worship stones, and grave images of gold and silver and wood and stone and clay, and those who worship impure spirits and demons, and all kinds of idols not according to knowledge, shall get no manner of help from them.

Verse 8. And they shall become godless by reason of the folly of their hearts, and their eyes shall be blinded through the fear of their hearts and through visions in their dreams.

Verse 9. Through these they shall become godless and fearful; for they shall have wrought all their work in a lie, and shall have worshipped a stone: therefore in an instant shall they perish.

Verse 10. But in those days, blessed are all they who accept the words of wisdom, and understand them, and observe the paths of the Most High, and walk in the path of His righteousness, and become not godless with the godless; for they shall be saved.

Verse 11. Woe to you who spread evil to your neighbours; for you shall be slain in Sheol.

Verse 12. Woe to you who make deceitful and false measures, and to them who cause bitterness on the earth; for they shall thereby be utterly consumed.

Verse 13. Woe to you who build your houses through the grievous toil of others, and all their building materials are the bricks and stones of sin; I tell you ye shall have no peace.

Verse 14. Woe to them who reject the measure and eternal heritage of their fathers and whose souls follow after idols; for they shall have no rest.

Verse 15. Woe to them who work unrighteousness and help oppression, and slay their neighbours until the day of the great judgment.

Verse 16. For He shall cast down your glory, and bring affliction on your hearts, and shall arouse His fierce indignation, and destroy you all with the sword; and all the holy and righteous shall remember your sins.

CHAPTER 100

Verse 1. And in those days in one place the fathers together with their sons shall be smitten, and brothers one with another shall fall in death till the streams flow with their blood.

Verse 2. For a man shall not withhold his hand from slaying his sons and his sons' sons, and the sinner shall not withhold his hand from his honoured brother; from dawn till sunset they shall slay one another.

Verse 3. And the horse shall walk up to the breast in the blood of sinners, and the chariot shall be submerged to its height.

Verse 4. In those days the angels shall descend into the secret places and gather together into one place all those who brought down sin, and the Most High will arise on that day of judgment to execute great judgment amongst sinners.

Verse 5. And over all the righteous and holy He will appoint guardians from amongst the holy angels to guard them as the apple of an eye, until He has made an end of all wickedness and all sin; and though the righteous sleep a long sleep, they have nought to fear.

Verse 6. And then shall the children of the earth see the wise in security, and shall understand all the words of this book, and recognize that their riches shall not be able to save them in the overthrow of their sins.

Verse 7. Woe to you, sinners, on the day of strong anguish, ye who afflict the righteous and burn them with fire: ye shall be requited according to your works.

Verse 8. Woe to you, ye obstinate of heart, who watch in order to devise wickedness: therefore shall fear come upon you, and there shall be none to help you.

Verse 9. Woe to you, ye sinners, on account of the words of your mouth, and on account of the deeds of your hands which your godlessness has wrought: in blazing flames fiercer than fire shall ye burn.

Verse 10. And now, know ye that from the angels He will inquire as to your deeds in heaven — from the sun and from the moon and from the stars — in reference to your sins because upon the earth ye execute judgment on the righteous.

Verse 11. And He will summon to testify against you every cloud and mist and dew and rain; for they shall all be withheld because of you from descending upon you, and they shall be mindful of your sins.

Verse 12. And now give presents to the rain that it be not withheld from descending upon you, nor yet the dew, when it has received gold and silver from you that it may descend. When the hoar-frost and snow with their chilliness, and all the snow-storms with all their plagues fall upon you, in those days ye shall not be able to stand before them.

Verse 13. Observe the heaven, ye children of heaven, and every work of the Most High, and fear ye Him and work no evil in His presence. If He closes the windows of heaven, and withholds the rain and the dew from descending on the earth on your account, what will ye do then?

This concludes Part Nine of our reading of the Book of Enoch. In our next and final episode, we shall complete the book with Chapters One Hundred and One through One Hundred and Eight.