PURITAN GOLD -- Religious Affections by Jonathan Edwards: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 11
Part II: No Certain Signs V-VII

---

V. It is no sign that religious affections are truly holy and spiritual, or that they are not, that
they come with texts of Scripture, remarkably brought to the mind.
It is no sign that affections are not gracious, that they are occasioned by Scriptures so
coming to mind; provided it be the Scripture itself, or the truth which the Scripture so brought
contains and teaches, that is the foundation of the affection, and not merely, or mainly, the sudden
and unusual manner of its coming to the mind.
But on the other hand, neither is it any sign that affections are gracious, that they arise on
occasion of Scriptures brought suddenly and wonderfully to the mind; whether those affections be
fear or hope, joy or sorrow, or any other. Some seem to look upon this as a good evidence that
their affections are saving, especially if the affections excited are hope or joy, or any other which
are pleasing and delightful. They will mention it as an evidence that all is right, that their experience
came with the word, and will say, "There were such and such sweet promises brought to my mind:
they came suddenly, as if they were spoken to me: I had no hand in bringing such a text to my own
mind; I was not thinking of anything leading to it; it came all at once, so that I was surprised. I had
not thought of it a long time before; I did not know at first that it was Scripture; I did not remember
that ever I had read it." And it may be, they will add, "One Scripture came flowing in after another,
and so texts all over the Bible, the most sweet and pleasant, and the most apt and suitable which
could be devised; and filled me full as I could hold: I could not but stand and admire: the tears
flowed; I was full of joy, and could not doubt any longer." And thus they think they have
undoubted evidence that their affections must be from God, and of the right kind, and their state
good: but without any manner of grounds. How came they by any such rule, as that if any
affections or experiences arise with promises, and comfortable texts of Scripture, unaccountably
brought to mind, without their recollection, or if a great number of sweet texts follow one another
in a chain, that this is a certain evidence their experiences are saving? Where is any such rule to be
found in the Bible, the great and only sure directory in things of this nature?
What deceives many of the less understanding and considerate sort of people, in this
matter, seems to be this; that the Scripture is the word of God, and has nothing in it which is
wrong, but is pure and perfect; and therefore, those experiences which come from the Scripture
must be right. But then it should be considered, affections may arise on occasion of the Scripture,
and not properly come from the Scripture, as the genuine fruit of the Scripture, and by a right use
of it; but from an abuse of it. All that can be argued from the purity and perfection of the word of
God, with respect to experiences, is this, that those experiences which are agreeable to the word of
God, are right, and cannot be otherwise; and not that those affections must be right, which arise on
occasion of the word of God coming to the mind.
What evidence is there that the devil cannot bring texts of Scripture to the mind, and
misapply them to deceive persons? There seems to be nothing in this which exceeds the power of
Satan. It is no work of such mighty power, to bring sounds or letters to persons' minds, that we
have any reason to suppose nothing short of Omnipotence can be sufficient for it. If Satan has
power to bring any words or sounds at all to persons' minds, he may have power to bring words
contained in the Bible. There is no higher sort of power required in men, to make the sounds
which express the words of a text of Scripture, than to make the sounds which express the words
of an idle story or song. And so the same power in Satan, which is sufficient to renew one of those
kinds of sounds in the mind, is sufficient to renew the other: the different signification, which
depends wholly on custom, alters not the case, as to ability to make or revive the sounds or letters.
Or will any suppose, that texts or Scriptures are such sacred things, that the devil durst not abuse
them, nor touch them? In this also they are mistaken. He who was bold enough to lay hold on
Christ himself, and carry him hither and thither, into the wilderness, and into a high mountain, and
to a pinnacle of the temple, is not afraid to touch the Scripture, and abuse that for his own purpose;
as he showed at the same time that he was so bold with Christ, he then brought one Scripture and
another, to deceive and tempt him. And if Satan did presume, and was permitted to put Christ
himself in mind of texts of Scripture to tempt him, what reason have we determine that he dare not,
or will not be permitted, to put wicked men in the mind of texts of Scripture, to tempt and deceive

30
them? And if Satan may thus abuse one text of Scripture, so he may another. Its being a very
excellent place of Scripture, a comfortable and precious promise, alters not the case, as to his
courage or ability. And if he can bring one comfortable text to the mind, so he may a thousand; and
may choose out such Scriptures as tend most to serve his purpose; and may heap up Scripture
promises, tending, according to the perverse application he makes of them, wonderfully to remove
the rising doubts, and to confirm the false joy and confidence of a poor deluded sinner.
We know the devil's instruments, corrupt and heretical teachers, can and do pervert the
Scripture, to their own and others' damnation, 2 Pet. 3:16. We see they have the free use of
Scripture, in every part of it: there is no text so precious and sacred, but they are permitted to abuse
it, to the eternal ruin of multitudes of souls; and there are no weapons they make use of with which
they do more execution. And there is no manner of reason to determine, that the devil is not
permitted thus to use the Scripture, as well as his instruments. For when the latter do it, they do it
as his instruments and servants, and through his instigation and influence: and doubtless he does
the same he instigates others to do; the devil's servants do but follow their master, and do the same
work that he does himself.
And as the devil can abuse the Scripture, to deceive and destroy men, so may men's own
folly and corruptions as well. The sin which is in men, acts like its father. Men's own hearts are
deceitful like the devil, and use the same means to deceive.
So that it is evident, that any person may have high affections of hope and joy, arising on
occasion of texts of Scripture, yea, precious promises of Scripture coming suddenly and
remarkably to their minds, as though they were spoken to them, yea, a great multitude of such
texts, following one another in a wonderful manner; and yet all this be no argument that these
affections are divine, or that they are any other than the effects of Satan's delusions.
And I would further observe, that persons may have raised and joyful affections, which
may come with the word of God, and not only so, but from the word, and those affections not be
from Satan, nor yet properly from the corruptions of their own hearts, but from some influence of
the Spirit of God with the word and yet have nothing of the nature of true and saving religion in
them. Thus the stony ground hearers had great joy from the word; yea, which is represented as
arising from the word, as growth from a seed; and their affections had, in their appearance, a very
great and exact resemblance with those represented by the growth on the good ground, the
difference not appearing until it was discovered by the consequences in a time of trial: and yet there
was no saving religion in these affections.18
VI. It is no evidence that religious affections are saving, or that they are otherwise, that
there is an appearance of love in them.
There are no professing Christians who pretend, that this is an argument against the truth
and saving nature of religious affections. But, on the other hand, there are some who suppose, it is
a good evidence that affections are from the sanctifying and saving influences of the Holy
Ghost.—Their argument is that Satan cannot love; this affection being directly contrary to the
devil, whose very nature is enmity and malice. And it is true, that nothing is more excellent,
heavenly, and divine, than a spirit of true Christian love to God and men: it is more excellent than
knowledge, or prophecy, or miracles, or speaking with the tongue of men and angels. It is the
chief of the graces of God's Spirit, and the life, essence and sum of all true religion; and that by
which we are most conformed to heaven, and most contrary to hell and the devil. But yet it is in
arguing from hence, that there are no counterfeits of it. It may be observed that the more excellent
anything is, the more will be the counterfeits of it. Thus there are many more counterfeits of silver
and gold, than of iron and copper: there are many false diamonds and rubies, but who goes about
to counterfeit common stones? Though the more excellent things are, the more difficult it is to
make anything that shall be like them, in their essential nature and internal virtues; yet the more
manifold will the counterfeits be, and the more will art and subtlety be displayed, in an exact
imitation of the outward appearance. Thus there is the greatest danger of being cheated in buying of
18Mr. Stoddard in his Guide to Christ, speaks of it as a common thing, for persons

while in a natural condition, and before they have ever truly accepted of Christ, to
have Scripture promises come to them with a great deal of refreshing: which they
take as tokens of God's love, and hope that God has accepted them; and so are
confident of their good estate. Pages 8, 9. Impression anno 1735.

31
medicines that are most excellent and sovereign, though it be most difficult to imitate them with
anything of the like value and virtue, and their counterfeits are good for nothing when we have
them. So it is with Christian virtues and graces; the subtlety of Satan, and men's deceitful hearts,
are wont chiefly to be exercised in counterfeiting those that are in highest repute. So there are
perhaps no graces that have more counterfeits than love and humility; these being virtues wherein
the beauty of a true Christian does especially appear.
But with respect to love; it is plain by the Scripture, that persons may have a kind of
religious love, and yet have no saving grace. Christ speaks of many professing Christians that
have such love, whose love will not continue, and so shall fail of salvation, Matt. 24:12, 13: "And
because iniquity shall abound the love of many shall wax cold. But he that shall endure unto the
end, the same shall be saved." Which latter words plainly show, that those spoken of before,
whose love shall not endure to the end, but wax cold, should not be saved.
Persons may seem to have love to God and Christ, yea, to have very strong and violent
affections of this nature, and yet have no grace. For this was evidently the case with many
graceless Jews, such as cried Jesus up so high, following him day and night, without meat, drink,
or sleep; such as said, "Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest," and cried, "Hosanna to
the Son of David."19
The apostle seems to intimate, that there were many in his days who had a counterfeit love
to Christ, in Eph. 6:24: "Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity." The
last word, in the original, signifies incorruption; which shows, that the apostle was sensible that
there were many who had a kind of love to Christ, whose love was not pure and spiritual.
So also Christian love to the people of God may be counterfeited. It is evident by the
Scripture, that there may be strong affections of this kind, without saving grace; as there were in
the Galatians towards the Apostle Paul, when they were ready to pluck out their eyes and give
them to him; although the apostle expresses his fear that their affections were come to nothing, and
that he had bestowed upon them labor in vain, Gal. 4:11, 15.
VII. Persons having religious affections of many kinds, accompanying one another, is not
sufficient to determine whether they have any gracious affections or no.
Though false religion is wont to be maimed and monstrous, and not to have that entireness
and symmetry of parts, which is to be seen in true religion: yet there may be a great variety of false
affections together, that may resemble gracious affections.
It is evident that there are counterfeits of all kinds of gracious affections; as of love to God,
and love to the brethren, as has been just now observed; so of godly sorrow for sin, as in Pharaoh,
Saul, and Ahab, and the children of Israel in the wilderness, Exod. 9:27, 1 Sam. 24:16, 17, and
31:21, 1 Kings 21:27, Numb. 14:39, 40; and of the fear of God, as in the Samaritans, "who
feared the Lord, and served their own gods at the same time," 2 Kings 17:32, 33; and those
enemies of God we read of, Psal. 66:3, who, "through the greatness of God's power, submit
themselves to him," or, as it is in the Hebrew, "lie unto him," i.e., yield a counterfeit reverence
and submission. So of a gracious gratitude, as in the children of Israel, who sang God's praise at
the Red Sea, Psal. 106:12; and Naaman the Syrian, after his miraculous cure of his leprosy, 2
Kings 5:15, &c.
So of spiritual joy, as in the stony ground hearers, Matt. 13:20, and particularly many of
John the Baptist's hearers, John 5:35. So of zeal, as in Jehu, 2 Kings 10:16, and in Paul before
his conversion, Gal. 1:14, Phil. 3:6, and the unbelieving Jews, Acts 22:3, Rom. 10:2. So
graceless persons may have earnest religious desires, which may be like Baalam's desires, which
he expresses under an extraordinary view that he had of the happy state of God's people, as
distinguished from all the rest of the world, Numb. 23:9, 10. They may also have a strong hope of
eternal life, as the Pharisees had.
19Agreeable to this, Mr. Stoddard observes, in his Guide to Christ, that some sinners

have pangs of affection, and give an account that they find a spirit of love to God, and
of their aiming at the glory of God, having that which has a great resemblance of
saving grace; and that sometimes their common affections are stronger than saving.
And supposes, that sometimes natural then may have such violent pangs of false
affection to God, that their may think themselves willing to be damned. Pages 21, and
65.

32
And as men, while in a state of nature, are capable of a resemblance of all kinds of religious
affections, so nothing hinders but that they may have many of them together. And what appears in
fact, does abundantly evince that it is very often so indeed. It seems commonly to be so, that when
false affections are raised high, many false affections attend each other. The multitude that attended
Christ into Jerusalem, after that great miracle of raising Lazarus, seem to have been moved with
many religious affections at once, and all in a high degree. They seem to have been filled with
admiration, and there was a show of a high affection of love, and also of a great degree of
reverence, in their laying their garments on the ground for Christ to tread upon; and also of great
gratitude to him, for the great and good works he had wrought, praising him with loud voices for
his salvation; and earnest desires of the coming of God's kingdom, which they supposed Jesus
was now about to set up, and showed great hopes and raised expectations of it, expecting it would
immediately appear; and hence were filled with joy, by which they were so animated in their
acclamations, as to make the whole city ring with the noise of them; and appeared great in their zeal
and forwardness to attend Jesus, and assist him without further delay, now in the time of the great
feast of the Passover, to set up his kingdom. And it is easy, from nature, and the nature of the
affections, to give an account why, when one affection is raised very high, that it should excite
others; especially if the affection which is raised high, be that of counterfeit love, as it was in the
multitude who cried Hosanna. This will naturally draw many other affections after it. For, as was
observed before, love is the chief of the affections, and as it were the fountain of them. Let us
suppose a person who has been for some time in great exercise and terror through fear of hell, and
his heart weakened with distress and dreadful apprehensions, and upon the brink of despair, and is
all at once delivered, by being firmly made to believe, through some delusion of Satan, that God
has pardoned him, and accepts him as the object of his dear love, and promises him eternal life; as
suppose through some vision, or strong idea or imagination, suddenly excited in him, of a person
with a beautiful countenance, smiling on him, and with arms open, and with blood dropping
down, which the person conceives to be Christ, without any other enlightening of the
understanding, to give a view of the spiritual divine excellency of Christ and his fullness; and of
the way of salvation revealed in the gospel: or perhaps by some voice or words coming as if they
were spoken to him, such as these, "Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee;" or, "Fear
not, it is the Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom," which he takes to be immediately
spoken by God to him, though there was no preceding acceptance of Christ, or closing of the heart
with him: I say, if we should suppose such a case, what various passions would naturally crowd at
once, or one after another, into such a person's mind! It is easy to be accounted for, from mere
principles of nature, that a person's heart, on such an occasion, should be raised up to the skies
with transports of joy; and be filled with fervent affection, to that imaginary God or Redeemer,
who he supposes has thus rescued him from the jaws of such dreadful destruction, that his soul
was so amazed with the fears of, and has received him with such endearment, as a peculiar
favorite; and that now he should be filled with admiration and gratitude, and his mouth should be
opened, and be full of talk about what he has experienced; and that, for a while he should think and
speak of scarce anything else, and should seem to magnify that God who has done so much for
him, and call upon others to rejoice with him, and appear with a cheerful countenance, and talk
with a loud voice: and however, before his deliverance, he was full of quarrellings against the
justice of God, that now it should be easy for him to submit to God, and own his unworthiness,
and cry out against himself, and appear to be very humble before God, and lie at his feet as tame as
a lamb; and that he should now confess his unworthiness, and cry out, "Why me? Why me?" (Like
Saul, who when Samuel told him that God had appointed him to be king, makes answer, "Am not
I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel, and my family the least of all the families of the
tribe of Benjamin? Wherefore then speakest thou so to me?" Much in the language of David, the
true saint, 2 Sam. 7:18, "Who am I, and what is my father's house, that thou has brought me
hitherto?") Nor is it to be wondered at, that now he should delight to be with them who
acknowledge and applaud his happy circumstances, and should love all such as esteem and admire
him and what he has experienced, and have violent zeal against all such as would make nothing of
such things, and be disposed openly to separate, and as it were to proclaim war with all who be not
of his party, and should now glory in his sufferings, and be very much for condemning and
censuring all who seem to doubt, or make any difficulty of these things; and while the warmth of
his affections lasts, should be mighty forward to take pains, and deny himself, to promote the
interest of the party who he imagines favors such things, and seem earnestly desirous to increase

33
the number of them, as the Pharisees compassed sea and land to make one proselyte.20 And so I
might go on, and mention many other things, which will naturally arise in such circumstances. He
must have but slightly considered human nature, who thinks such things as these cannot arise in
this manner, without any supernatural interposition of divine power.
As from true divine love flow all Christian affections, so from a counterfeit love in like
manner naturally flow other false affections. In both cases, love is the fountain, and the other
affections are the streams. The various faculties, principles, and affections of the human nature, are
as it were many channels from one fountain: if there be sweet water in the fountain, sweet water
will from thence flow out into those various channels; but if the water in the fountain be
poisonous, then poisonous streams will also flow out into all those channels. So that the channels
and streams will be alike, corresponding one with another; but the great difference will lie in the
nature of the water. Or, man's nature may be compared to a tree, with many branches, coming
from one root: if the sap in the root be good, there will also be good sap distributed throughout the
branches, and the fruit that is brought forth will be good and wholesome; but if the sap in the root
and stock be poisonous, so it will be in many branches (as in the other case), and the fruit will be
deadly. The tree in both cases may be alike; there may be an exact resemblance in shape; but the
difference is found only in eating the fruit. It is thus (in some measure at least) oftentimes between
saints and hypocrites. There is sometimes a very great similitude between true and false
experiences, in their appearance, and in what is expressed and related by the subjects of them: and
the difference between them is much like the difference between the dreams of Pharaoh's chief
butler and baker; they seemed to be much alike, insomuch that when Joseph interpreted the chief
butler's dream, that he should be delivered from his imprisonment, and restored to the king's
favor, and his honorable office in the palace, the chief baker had raised hopes and expectations,
and told his dream also; but he was woefully disappointed; and though his dream was so much like
the happy and well boding dream of his companion, yet it was quite contrary in its issue.