PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 14 of 14
Christ's Public Triumph

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 14. Christ's Public Triumph.

15. Christ's Public Triumph
It is not only said that judgment shall be victorious, but that Christ will
bring it forth openly to victory. From this we observe that grace will
become glory, and come forth into the sight of all. Now Christ conquers,
and achieves his own ends, but he does so to some extent invisibly. His
enemies in us and outside us seem to prevail. But he will bring forth
judgment unto victory, in full view of all. The wicked that now shut their
eyes to this shall see it to their torment. It shall not be in the power of
subtle men to see or not see what they wish. Christ will have power over
their hearts; and as his wrath shall immediately seize upon their souls
against their wills, so will he have power over the eyes of their souls, that
they may see and know what will increase their misery. Grief shall be
fastened to all their senses, and their senses to grief.
Then all the false glosses which they put upon things shall be wiped off.
Men are desirous to have the reputation of good, and yet the sweetness of
ill; nothing is so cordially opposed by them as that truth which lays them
open to themselves and to the eyes of others, their chief care being how to
deceive the world and their own consciences. But the time will come
when they shall be driven out of this fools' paradise, and the more subtle
their manipulation of things has been, the more shall be their shame.
THE OPEN GLORY OF CHRIST IN HIS MEMBERS
Christ, whom God has chosen to set forth the chief glory of his
excellencies, is now veiled in relation to his body the church, but he will
come before long to be glorious in his saints (2 Thess. 1:10), and not lose
the clear manifestation of any of his attributes. He will declare to all the

world what he is, and then there shall be no glory but that of Christ and
his spouse. Those that are as smoking flax now shall then shine as the sun
in the firmament (Matt. 13:43), and their judgment shall be brought forth
as the noonday (Psa. 37:6).
The image of God in Adam had a commanding majesty in it, so that all
creatures reverenced him. Much more shall the image of God in its
perfection command respect from all. Even now there is a secret awe put
into the hearts of the greatest towards those in whom they see any grace
to shine. So it was that Herod feared John the Baptist; but what will this
be in the day of their bringing forth, which is called `the manifestation of
the sons of God' (Rom. 8:19)?
There will be more glorious times when the kingdoms of this world shall
be the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ (Rev. 11:15), and he shall
reign for ever. Then shall judgment and truth have their victory. Then
Christ will plead his own cause. Truth shall no longer be called heresy and
schism, nor heresy catholic doctrine. Wickedness shall no longer go
masked and disguised. Goodness shall appear in its own luster, and shine
in its own beams. Things shall be what they are, `for there is nothing
covered, that shall not be revealed' (Matt. 10:26).
Iniquity shall not be carried on in a mystery any longer. Deep dissemblers
that think to hide their counsels from the Lord shall walk no longer
invisible as in the clouds. As Christ will not quench the least spark
kindled by himself, so will he damp the fairest blaze of goodly
appearances which are not from above.
FOLLOW SINCERITY AND TRUTH
If this were believed, men would make more account of sincerity, which
alone will give us boldness, and not seek for covers for their shame,
confidence in which, as it makes men now more presumptuous, so it will
expose them hereafter to the greater shame.
If judgment shall be brought forth to victory, then those that have been
ruled by their own deceitful hearts and a spirit of error shall be brought
forth to disgrace. The God that has joined grace and truth with honor has

joined sin and shame together at last. All the wit and power of man will
never be able to sever what God has coupled together. Truth and piety
may be trampled upon for a time, but as the two witnesses (Rev. 11:11),
after they were slain, rose again, and stood upon their feet, so whatever is
of God shall at length stand upon its own foundation. There shall be a
resurrection, not only of bodies but of reputations. Can we think that he
that threw the angels out of heaven will suffer dust and worms' meat to
run a contrary course, and to continue always so? No, as truly as Christ is
`King of kings and Lord of lords' (Rev. 19:16), so will he dash all those
pieces of earth which rise up against him, `as a potter's vessel' (Psa. 2:9).
Was there ever anyone fierce against God and prospered (Job 9:4)? No,
doubtless the wrath of man shall turn to Christ's praise (Psa. 76:10).
What was said of Pharaoh shall be said of all heady enemies, who would
rather lose their souls than their wills, that they are but raised up for
Christ to get himself glory in their confusion.
Let us, then, take heed that we follow not the ways of those men whose
ends we shall tremble at. There is not a more fearful judgment which can
befall the nature of man than to be given up to a reprobate judgment of
persons and things, because it comes under a woe: `Woe unto them that
call evil good, and good evil' (Isa. 5:20).
How will those be laden with curses another day who abuse the judgment
of others by sophistry and flattery, `deceiving and being deceived' (2 Tim.
3:13)? Then the complaint of our first mother Eve will be taken up, but
fruitlessly: `The serpent beguiled me' (Gen. 3:13); Satan has deceived me
in such and such; sin has deceived me; a foolish heart has deceived me. It
is one of the highest points of wisdom to consider on what grounds we
venture our souls. Happy men will they be who have, by Christ's light, a
right judgment of things, and suffer that judgment to prevail over their
hearts.
The souls of most men are drowned in their senses, and carried away with
weak opinions, raised from vulgar mistakes and shadows of things. And
Satan is ready to enlarge the imagination of outward good and outward
ill, and make it greater than it is, and spiritual things less, presenting
them through false glasses. And so men, trusting in vanity, vanquish
themselves in their own apprehensions. A woeful condition, when both

we and that which we highly esteem shall vanish together. And this will
be, as truly as Christ's judgment shall come to victory; and in the measure
that the vain heart of man has been enlarged to conceive a greater good in
the things of this world than there is, by so much the soul shall be
enlarged to be more aware of misery when it sees its error. This is the
difference between a godly, wise man and a deluded worldling: that
which the one now judges to be vain the other shall hereafter feel to be so
when it is too late. But this is the vanity of our natures, that though we
shun above all things to be deceived and mistaken in present things, yet
in the greatest matters of all we are willingly ignorant and misled.
CHRIST ALONE ADVANCES THIS GOVERNMENT
A further conclusion is this, that this government is set up and advanced
by Christ alone. He brings judgment to victory. We both fight and prevail
`in the power of his might' (Eph. 6:10). We overcome by the Spirit,
obtained by `the blood of the Lamb' (Rev. 12:11).
It is he alone who teaches our hands to war and our fingers to fight (Psa.
144:1). Nature, as corrupted, favors its own being, and will maintain itself
against Christ's government. Nature, simply considered, cannot raise
itself above itself to actions which are spiritual and of a higher order and
nature. Therefore the divine power of Christ is necessary to carry us
above all our own strength, especially in duties in which we meet with
greater opposition; for there, not only nature will fail us, but ordinary
grace, unless there is a stronger and a new supply. In taking up a burden
that is weightier than ordinary, if there is not a greater proportion of
strength than weight, the one who undertakes it will lie under the burden;
so for every strong encounter there must be a new supply of strength, as
in the case of Peter, who, when he was assaulted with a stronger
temptation, being not upheld and shored up with a mightier hand,
notwithstanding former strength, foully fell (Matt. 26:69 74). And being
fallen, in our risings up again, it is Christ that must do the work, by (1)
removing, or (2) weakening, or (3) suspending opposite hindrances; and
(4) by advancing the power of his grace in us, to a further degree than we
had before we fell. Therefore when we have fallen, and by falls have been
bruised, let us go to Christ immediately to bind us up again.

WE MUST NOT LOOK TO OURSELVES
Let us know, therefore, that it is dangerous to look for that from ourselves
which we must have from Christ. Since the fall, all our strength lies in
him, as Samson's in his hair (Judg. 16:17). We are but subordinate agents,
moving as we are moved, and working as we are first wrought upon, free
in so far as we are freed, no wiser nor stronger than he makes us to be for
the present in anything we undertake. It is his Spirit who actuates and
enlivens, and applies that knowledge and strength we have, or else it fails
and lies useless in us. We work when we work from a present strength;
therefore dependent spirits are the wisest and the ablest. Nothing is
stronger than humility, which goes out of itself, or weaker than pride,
which rests on its own foundation. Frustra nititur qui non innititur (He
strives in vain who is not dependent). And this should be particularly
observed because naturally we aspire to a kind of divinity, in setting
about actions in the strength of our own abilities; whereas Christ says,
`Without me ye', the apostles, who were in a state of grace, `can do
nothing' (John 15:5). He does not say, you can do a little, but nothing. Of
ourselves, how easily are we overcome! How weak we are to resist! We
are as reeds shaken with every wind. We shake at the very noise and
thought of poverty, disgrace or losses. We give in immediately. We have
no power over our eyes, tongues, thoughts or affections, but let sin pass in
and out. How soon we are overcome by evil, whereas we should overcome
evil with good. How many good purposes stick in the birth, and have no
strength to come forth all which shows that we are nothing without the
Spirit of Christ. We see how weak the apostles themselves were, till they
were endued with strength from above. Peter was blasted with the speech
of a damsel (Matt. 20:69), but after the Spirit of Christ fell upon them,
the more they suffered, the more they were encouraged to suffer. Their
comforts grew with their troubles. Therefore in all, especially difficult
encounters, let us lift up our hearts to Christ, who has Spirit enough for
us all, in all our exigencies, and say with good Jehoshaphat, `We have no
might . . . neither know we what to do: but our eyes are upon thee' (2
Chron. 20:12); the battle we fight is thine, and the strength whereby we
fight must be thine. If thou goest not out with us, we are sure to be foiled.
Satan knows that nothing can prevail against Christ, or those that rely
upon his power. Therefore his study is how to keep us in ourselves, and in

the creature. But we must carry this always in our minds, that that which
is begun in self confidence ends in shame.
CHRIST MAKES US FEEL OUR DEPENDENCE
The manner of Christ's bringing forth judgment to victory is by letting us
see a necessity of dependence on him. Hence proceed those spiritual
desertions in which he often leaves us to ourselves, in regard to both
grace and comfort, that we may know the spring head of these to be
outside ourselves. Hence it is that in the mount, that is, in extremities,
God is most seen (Gen. 22:14). Hence it is that we are saved by the grace
of faith which carries us out of ourselves to rely upon another; and faith
works best alone, when it has least outward support. Hence it is that we
often fail in lesser conflicts and stand firm in greater, because in the
lesser we rest more in ourselves, in the greater we fly to the rock of our
salvation, which is higher than we (Psa. 61:2). Hence also it is that we are
stronger after defeats, because hidden corruption, undiscerned before, is
now discovered, and thence we are brought to make use of mercy
pardoning and power supporting.
One main reason for this dispensation is that we should know it is Christ
that gives both the will and the deed, and that as a voluntary work
according to his own good pleasure. And therefore we should work out
our salvation in a jealous fear and trembling (Phil. 2:12), lest by
irreverent and presumptuous conduct we give him cause to suspend his
gracious influence and leave us to the darkness of our own hearts.
THE TRIUMPH OF GRACE
Those that are under Christ's government have the spirit of revelation,
whereby they see and feel a divine power sweetly and strongly enabling
them to preserve faith when they feel the contrary, and hope in a state
which is hopeless, and love to God under signs of his displeasure, and
heavenly mindedness in the midst of worldly affairs and allurements
which draw a contrary way. They feel a power preserving patience, nay
joy, in the midst of causes of mourning, inward peace in the midst of
assaults. Whence is it that, when assaulted with temptation and
compassed with troubles, we have stood firm, but from a secret strength

upholding us? To make so little grace so victorious over so great a mass of
corruption, this requires a spirit more than human. This is like preserving
fire in the sea, and a part of heaven even, as it were, in hell. Here we know
where to obtain this power, and to whom to return the praise of it. And it
is our happiness that it is so safely hid in Christ for His, in one so near to
God and us. Since the fall, God will not trust us with our own salvation,
but it is both purchased and kept by Christ for us, and we for it through
faith, wrought by the power of God, which we lay hold of. This power is
gloriously set forth by Paul: it is (1) a great power; (2) an exceeding
power; (3) a working and a mighty power; (4) such a power as was
wrought in raising Christ from the dead (Eph. 1:19 20).That grace which
is but a persuasive offer and in our power to receive or refuse is not the
grace which brings us to heaven. But God's people feel a powerful work of
the Spirit, not only revealing to us our misery and deliverance through
Christ, but emptying us of ourselves, as being redeemed from ourselves,
and infusing new life into us, and afterwards strengthening us and
quickening us when we droop and hang the wing, never leaving us till the
conquest is perfect.

16 . Through Conflict to Victory
The text also implies that the prevailing of Christ's government will not
be without fighting. There can be no victory where there is no combat. In
Isaiah it is said, `He shall bring forth judgment unto truth' (Isa. 42:3). In
Matthew it is said that he shall `send forth judgment unto victory' (Matt.
12:20). The word `send forth' has a stronger sense in the original: to send
forth with force; showing that, where his government is in truth, it will be
opposed, until he gets the upper hand. Nothing is so opposed as Christ
and his government are, both within us and outside us; and within us
most in our conversion. Though corruption does not prevail so far as to
make void the powerful work of grace, yet there is not only a possibility of
opposing, but a proneness to oppose, and not only a proneness, but an
actual withstanding of the working of Christ's Spirit, and that in every
action. Yet there is no prevailing resistance so far as to make void the
work of grace, but corruption in the issue yields to grace.

It takes much trouble to bring Christ into the heart, and to set up a
tribunal for him to judge there. There is an army of lusts in mutiny
against him. The utmost strength of most men's endeavors and abilities is
directed to keeping Christ from ruling in the soul. The flesh still labors to
maintain its own government, and therefore it cries down the credit of
whatever crosses it, such as God's blessed ordinances, and highly prizes
anything, though never so dead and empty, if it allows the liberty of the
flesh.
WHY CHRIST'S GOVERNMENT IS OPPOSED
And no marvel if the spiritual government of Christ is so opposed:
First, because it is government, and that limits the course of the will and
casts a bridle on its wanderings. Everything natural resists what opposes
it; so the corrupt will labors to bear down all laws, and counts it a noble
thing not to be awed, and an argument of a low spirit to fear any, even
God himself, until unavoidable danger seizes on men. Then those that
feared least when out of danger fear most in danger, as we see in the case
of Belshazzar (Dan. 5:6).
Secondly, it is spiritual government, and therefore the flesh will endure it
even less. Christ's government brings the very thoughts and desires,
which are the most immediate and free issue of the soul, into obedience.
Though a man were of such controlled behavior that his whole life were
free from outward offences, yet in Christ's eyes to be carnally or worldly
minded is death (Rom. 8:6). He looks on a worldly mind with a greater
detestation than any one particular offence.
One may say, `But Christ's Spirit is in those who are in some degree
earthly minded.' True, but not as an allower and maintainer, but as an
opposer, subduer, and in the end as a conqueror. Carnal men would like
to bring Christ and the flesh together, and could be content, with some
reservation, to submit to Christ. But Christ will be no underling to any
base affection, and therefore, where there is allowance of ourselves in any
sinful lust, it is a sign the keys were never given up to Christ to rule us.
Thirdly, this judgment is opposed, because it is judgment, and men do

not like to be judged and censured. Now Christ, in his truth, arraigns
them, gives sentence against them, and binds them over to the latter
judgment of the great day, and therefore they take upon them to judge
that truth which must judge them. But truth will be too strong for them.
Man has a day now, which Paul calls `man's day' (1 Cor. 4:3 [margin]), in
which he gets on his bench and usurps a judgment over Christ and his
ways; but God has a day in which he will set everything straight, and his
judgment shall stand. And the saints shall have their time, when they
shall sit in judgment on those that judge them now (1 Cor. 6:2). In the
meantime, Christ will rule in the midst of his enemies (Psa. 110:2), even
in the midst of our hearts.
WE MUST EXPECT OPPOSITION
It is therefore no sign of a good condition to find all quiet, with no
opposition; for can we think that corruption, which is the older element
in us, and Satan, the strong man who has many holds over us, will yield
possession quietly? No, there is not so much as a thought of goodness
discovered by him, but he joins with corruption to kill it in the birth. And
as Pharaoh's cruelty was especially against the male children, so Satan's
malice is especially against the most religious and manly resolutions.
This, then, we are always to expect, that wherever Christ comes there will
be opposition. When Christ was born, all Jerusalem was troubled; so
when Christ is born in any man, the soul is in an uproar, and all because
the heart is unwilling to yield up itself to Christ to rule it.
Wherever Christ comes he brings division, not only between man and
himself, but between man and man, and between church and church; of
which disturbance Christ is no more the cause than medicine is of trouble
in a diseased body. Harmful agents are the real cause, for the purpose of
medicine is to bring health. But Christ thinks it fit that the thoughts of
men's hearts should be revealed, and he is set for the fall as well as the
rising of many in Israel (Luke 2:34).
Thus the desperate madness of men is laid open, that they would rather
be under the guidance of their own lusts, and in consequence of Satan
himself, to their endless destruction, than put their feet into Christ's

fetters and their necks under his yoke; though, indeed, Christ's service is
the only true liberty. His yoke is an easy yoke, his burden but as the
burden of wings to a bird which make her fly the higher. Satan's
government is rather a bondage than a government, to which Christ gives
up those that shake off his own, for then he gives Satan and his agents
power over them. Since they will not `receive the love of the truth' (2
Thess. 2:10), take him, Jesuit, take him, Satan, blind him and bind him
and lead him to perdition. Those that take the most liberty to sin are the
greatest slaves, because the most voluntary slaves. The will is either the
best or the worst part in anything. The further men go on in a willful
course, the deeper they sink in rebellion; and the more they oppose
Christ, doing what they will, the more they shall one day suffer what they
would not. In the meantime, they are prisoners in their own souls, bound
over in their consciences to the judgment after death of him whose
judgment they would not accept in their lives. And is it not just that they
should find him a severe judge to condemn them when they would not
have him as a mild judge to rule them?
OUR VICTORY IN CHRIST IS CERTAIN
In conclusion and as a general application to ourselves of all that has
been said, we see the conflicting, but yet sure and hopeful, state of God's
people. The victory lies not with us, but with Christ, who has taken on
him both to conquer for us and to conquer in us. The victory lies neither
in our own strength to get it, nor in our enemies' strength to defeat it. If it
lay with us, we might justly fear. But Christ will maintain his own
government in us and take our part against our corruptions. They are his
enemies as well as ours. Let us therefore be `strong in the Lord, and in
the power of his might' (Eph. 6:10). Let us not look so much at who our
enemies are as at who our judge and captain is, nor at what they threaten,
but at what he promises. We have more for us than against us. What
coward would not fight when he is sure of victory? None is here overcome
but he that will not fight. Therefore, when any base fainting seizes on us,
let us lay the blame where it ought to be laid.
Discouragement rising from unbelief and the ill report brought upon the
good land by the spies moved God to swear in his wrath that they should
not enter into his rest. Let us take heed that a spirit of faint heartedness,

rising from the seeming difficulty and disgrace involved in God's good
ways, does not provoke God to keep us out of heaven. We see here what
we may look for from heaven. O beloved, it is a comfortable thing to
conceive of Christ aright, to know what love, mercy and strength we have
laid up for us in the breast of Christ. A good opinion of the physician, we
say, is half the cure. Let us make use of this mercy and power of his every
day in our daily combats: `Lord Jesus, thou hast promised not to quench
the smoking flax, nor to break the bruised reed. Cherish thy grace in me;
leave me not to myself; the glory shall be thine.' Let us not allow Satan to
transform Christ to us, to make him other than he is to those that are his.
Christ will not leave us till he has made us like himself, all glorious within
and without, and presented us blameless before his Father (Jude 24).
What a comfort this is in our conflicts with our unruly hearts, that it shall
not always be thus! Let us strive a little while, and we shall be happy for
ever. Let us think when we are troubled with our sins that Christ has this
in charge from his Father, that he shall not `quench the smoking flax'
until he has subdued all. This puts a shield into our hands to beat back
`all the fiery darts of the wicked' (Eph. 6:16). Satan will object, `You are a
great sinner.' We may answer, `Christ is a strong Saviour.' But he will
object, `You have no faith, no love.' `Yes, a spark of faith and love.' `But
Christ will not regard that.' `Yes, he will not quench the smoking flax:
`But this is so little and weak that it will vanish and come to naught."
Nay, but Christ will cherish it, until he has brought judgment to victory.'
And this much we have already for our comfort, that, even when we first
believed, we overcame God himself, as it were, by believing the pardon of
all our sins, notwithstanding the guilt of our own consciences and his
absolute justice. Now, having been prevailers with God, what shall stand
against us if we can learn to make use of our faith?
Oh, what a confusion is this to Satan, that he should labour to blow out a
poor spark and yet should not be able to quench it; that a grain of
mustard seed should be stronger than the gates of hell; that it should be
able to remove mountains of oppositions and temptations cast up by
Satan and our rebellious hearts between God and us. Abimelech could not
endure that it should be said, `A woman slew him' (Judg. 9:54); and it
must needs be a torment to Satan that a weak child, a woman, a decrepit

old man should, by a spirit of faith, put him to flight.
TREASURE THE LEAST DEGREE OF GRACE
Since there is such comfort where there is a little truth of grace, that it
will be so victorious, let us often try what God has wrought in us, search
our good as well as our ill, and be thankful to God for the least measure of
grace, more than for any outward thing. It will be of more use and
comfort than all this world which passes away and comes to nothing. Yea,
let us be thankful for that promised and assured victory which we may
rely on without presumption, as Paul does: `But thanks be to God, which
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ' (1 Cor. 15:57). See a
flame in a spark, a tree in a seed. See great things in little beginnings.
Look not so much to the beginning as to the perfection, and so we shall
be, in some degree, joyful in ourselves, and thankful to Christ.
Neither must we reason from a denial of a great measure of grace to a
denial of any at all in us, for faith and grace do not consist in an
indivisible amount, so that he who has not such and such a measure has
none at all. But, as there is a great difference between a spark and a
flame, so there is a great difference between the least measure of grace
and the greatest; and he who has the least measure is within the compass
of God's eternal favor. Though he is not a shining light, yet he is a
smoking wick, which Christ's tender care will not allow him to quench.
ENCOURAGEMENT TO COME TO CHRIST
And let all that has been spoken allure those that are not yet in a state of
grace to come under Christ's sweet and victorious government, for,
though we shall have much opposition, yet, if we strive, he will help us. If
we fail, he will cherish us. If we are guided by him, we shall overcome. If
we overcome, we are sure to be crowned. As for the present state of the
church, we see now how forlorn it is, yet let us comfort ourselves that
Christ's cause shall prevail. Christ will rule, till his enemies become his
footstool (Psa. 110:1), not only to trample upon, but to help him up to
mount higher in glory. Babylon shall fall, `for strong is the Lord God who
judgeth her' (Rev. 18:8). Christ's judgment, not only in his children, but
also against his enemies, shall be victorious, for he is `King of kings and

Lord of lords' (Rev. 19:16). God will not always suffer antichrist and his
supporters to revel and swagger in the church as they do.
CHRIST IS THE HOPE OF THE CHURCH
If we look to the present state of the church of Christ, it is as Daniel in the
midst of lions, as a lily amongst thorns, as a ship not only tossed but
almost covered with waves. It is so low that the enemies think they have
buried Christ, with respect to his gospel, in the grave, and there they
think to keep him from rising. But as Christ rose in his person, so he will
roll away all stones and rise again in his church. How little support has
the church and cause of Christ at this day! How strong a conspiracy is
against it! The spirit of antichrist is now lifted up and marches furiously.
Things seem to hang on a small and invisible thread. But our comfort is
that Christ lives and reigns, and stands on Mount Zion in defense of those
who stand for him (Rev. 14:1); and when states and kingdoms shall dash
one against another Christ will have care of his own children and cause,
seeing there is nothing else in the world that he much esteems. At this
very time the delivery of his church and the ruin of his enemies are in
progress. We see nothing in motion till Christ has done his work, and
then we shall see that the Lord reigns.
Christ and his church, when they are at the lowest, are nearest rising. His
enemies, at the highest, are nearest their downfall. The Jews are not yet
come in under Christ's banner; but God who has persuaded Japheth to
come into the tents of Shem (Gen. 9:27) will persuade Shem to come into
the tents of Japheth. The `fullness of the Gentiles' has not yet come in
(Rom. 11:25), but Christ, who has the uttermost parts of the earth given to
him for his possession (Psa. 2:8), will gather all the sheep his Father has
given him into one fold, that there may be one sheepfold and one
shepherd (John 10:16). The faithful Jews rejoiced to think of the calling
of the Gentiles and why should we not rejoice to think of the calling of the
Jews?
The gospel's course has hitherto been as that of the sun, from east to
west, and so in God's time it may proceed yet further west. No creature
can hinder the course of the sun, nor stop the influence of heaven, nor
hinder the blowing of the wind, much less hinder the prevailing power of

divine truth, until Christ has brought all under one head, and then he will
present all to his Father: `These are those thou hast given to me; these
are those that have taken me for their Lord and King, that have suffered
with me. My will is that they may be where I am and reign with me: And
then he will deliver up the kingdom, even to his Father, and put down all
other rule, and authority, and power (1 Cor. 15:24).
FAITH WILL PREVAIL
Let us then bring our hearts to holy resolutions, and set ourselves upon
that which is good, and against that which is ill, in ourselves or others,
according to our callings, with this encouragement, that Christ's grace
and power will go along with us. What would have become of that great
work of reformation of religion in the latter spring of the gospel if men
had not been armed with invincible courage to overcome all hindrances,
with this faith, that the cause was Christ's, and that he would not fail to
help his own cause? Luther ingenuously confessed that he often acted
inconsiderately and moved by various passions. But when he
acknowledged this, God did not condemn him for his errors, but, the
cause being God's, and his aims being holy, to promote the truth, and
being a mighty man in prayer, and strong in faith, God by him kindled
that fire which all the world shall never be able to quench. According to
our faith, so is our encouragement to all duties, therefore let us
strengthen faith, so that it may strengthen all other graces. The very belief
that faith shall be victorious is a means to make it so indeed. Believe it,
therefore, that, though it is often as smoking flax, yet it shall prevail. If it
prevails with God himself in trials, shall it not prevail over all other
opposition? Let us wait a while, `stand still, and see the salvation of the
LORD' (Exod. 14:13).
The Lord reveal himself more and more to us in the face of his Son Jesus
Christ and magnify the power of his grace in cherishing those beginnings
of grace in the midst of our corruptions, and sanctify the consideration of
our own infirmities to humble us, and of his tender mercy to encourage
us. And may he persuade us that, since he has taken us into the covenant
of grace, he will not cast us off for those corruptions which, as they grieve
his Spirit, so they make us vile in our own eyes. And because Satan labors
to obscure the glory of his mercy and hinder our comfort by

discouragements, the Lord add this to the rest of his mercies, that, since
he is so gracious to those that yield to his government, we may make the
right use of this grace, and not lose any portion of comfort that is laid up
for us in Christ. And may he grant that the prevailing power of his Spirit
in us should be an evidence of the truth of grace begun, and a pledge of
final victory, at that time when he will be all in all, in all his, for all
eternity. Amen.
Back To Top
MONERGISM BOOKS
The Bruised Reed, Copyright © 2018
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of this ebook on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of Monergism Books.
ePub and .mobi Editions February 2018 Requests for information should
be addressed to: Monergism Books, PO Box 491, West Linn, OR 97068