PURITAN GOLD -- The Reformed Pastor by Richard Baxter: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 10
The Oversight of Ourselves: The Motives to This Oversight


Having showed you what it is to take heed to ourselves, I shall next lay
before you some motives to awaken you to this duty.
1. Take heed to yourselves, for you have a heaven to win or lose, and souls
that must be happy or miserable for ever; and therefore it concerneth you to
begin at home, and to take heed to yourselves as well as to others.
Preaching well may succeed to the salvation of others, without the holiness
of your own hearts and lives; it is, at least, possible, though less usual; but it
is impossible it should save yourselves. ‘Many will say in that day, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name?’ to whom he will answer, ‘I
never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.’ O sirs, how many
men have preached Christ, and yet have perished for want of a saving
interest in him! How many, who are now in hell, have told their people of
the torments of hell, and warned them to escape from it! How many have
preached of the wrath of God against sinners, who are now enduring it! O
what sadder case can there be in the world, than for a man, who made it his
very trade and calling to proclaim salvation, and to help others to heaven,
yet after all to be himself shut out! Alas! that we should have so many
books in our libraries which tell us the way to heaven; that we should spend
so many years in reading these books, and studying the doctrine of eternal
life, and after all this to miss it! – that we should study so many sermons of
salvation, and yet fall short of it! – that we should preach so many sermons
of damnation, and yet fall into it? And all because we preached so many
sermons of Christ, while we neglected him; of the Spirit, while we resisted
him; of faith, while we did not ourselves believe; of repentance and
conversion, while we continued in an impenitent and unconverted state; and
of a heavenly life, while we remained carnal and earthly ourselves. If we
will be divines only in tongue and title, and have not the Divine image upon
our souls, nor give up ourselves to the Divine honor and will, no wonder if
we be separated from the Divine presence, and denied the fruition of God

for ever. Believe it, sirs, God is no respecter of persons: he saveth not men
for their coats or callings; a holy calling will not save an unholy man. If you
stand at the door of the kingdom of grace, to light others in, and will not go
in yourselves, you shall knock in vain at the gates of glory, that would not
enter at the door of grace. You shall then find that your lamps should have
had the oil of grace, as well as of ministerial gifts – of holiness, as well as
of doctrine – if you would have had a part in the glory which you preached.
Do I need to tell you, that preachers of the gospel must be judged by the
gospel; and stand at the same bar, and be sentenced on the same terms, and
dealt with as severely, as any other men? Can you think to be saved, then,
by your clergy; and to come off by a ‘He passed for a clergyman,’ when
there is wanting the ‘He believed and lived as a Christian.’ Alas, it will not
be! You know it will not be. Take heed therefore to yourselves, for your
own sakes; seeing you have souls to save or lose, as well as others.
2. Take heed to yourselves, for you have a depraved nature, and sinful
inclinations, as well as others. If innocent Adam had need of heed, and lost
himself and us for want of it, how much more need have such as we! Sin
dwelleth in us, when we have preached ever so much against it; and one
degree prepareth the heart for another, and one sin inclineth the mind to
more. If one thief be in the house, he will let in the rest; because they have
the same disposition and design. A spark is the beginning of a flame; and a
small disease may cause a greater. A man who knows himself to be
purblind, should take heed to his feet. Alas! in our hearts, as well as in our
hearers, there is an averseness to God, a strangeness to him, unreasonable
and almost unruly passions! In us there are, at the best, the remnants of
pride, unbelief, self-seeking, hypocrisy, and all the most hateful, deadly
sins. And doth it not then concern us to take heed to ourselves? Is so much
of the fire of hell yet unextinguished, that was at first kindled in us? Are
there so many traitors in our very hearts, and is it not necessary for us to
take heed? You will scarcely let your little children go themselves while
they are weak, without calling upon them to take heed of falling. And, alas!
how weak are those of us that seem strongest! How apt to stumble at a very
straw! How small a matter will cast us down, by enticing us to folly; or
kindling our passions and inordinate desires, by perverting our judgments,
weakening our resolutions, cooling our zeal, and abating our diligence!
Ministers are not only sons of Adam, but sinners against the grace of Christ,

as well as others; and so have increased their radical sin. These treacherous
hearts of yours will, one time or other, deceive you, if you take not heed.
Those sins that seem now to lie dead will revive: your pride, and
worldliness, and many a noisome vice, will spring up, that you thought had
been weeded out by the roots. It is most necessary, therefore, that men of so
much infirmity should take heed to themselves, and be careful in the
oversight of their own souls.
3. Take heed to yourselves, because the tempter will more ply you with his
temptations than other men. If you will be the leaders against the prince of
darkness, he will spare you no further than God restraineth him. He beareth
the greatest malice to those that are engaged to do him the greatest mischief.
As he hateth Christ more than any of us, because he is the General of the
field, the Captain of our salvation, and doth more than all the world besides
against his kingdom; so doth he hate the leaders under him, more than the
common soldiers: he knows what a rout he may make among them, if the
leaders fall before their eyes. He hath long tried that way of fighting, neither
against great nor small comparatively, but of smiting the shepherds, that he
may scatter the flock: and so great hath been his success this way, that he
will continue to follow it as far as he is able. Take heed, therefore, brethren,
for the enemy hath a special eye upon you. You shall have his most subtle
insinuations, and incessant solicitations, and violent assaults. As wise and
learned as you are, take heed to yourselves, lest he outwit you. The devil is
a greater scholar than you, and a nimbler disputant; he can transform
himself into an angel of light to deceive: he will get within you, and trip up
your heels before you are aware: he will play the juggler with you
undiscerned, and cheat you of your faith or innocency, and you shall not
know that you have lost it; nay, he will make you believe it is multiplied or
increased, when it is lost. You shall see neither hook nor line, much less the
subtle angler himself, while he is offering you his bait. And his bait shall be
so fitted to your temper and disposition, that he will be sure to find
advantages within you, and make your own principles and inclinations
betray you; and whenever he ruineth you, he will make you the instruments
of ruin to others. O what a conquest will he think he hath got, if he can
make a minister lazy and unfaithful, if he can tempt a minister into
covetousness or scandal! He will glory against the Church, and say, ‘These
are your holy preachers! See what their preciseness is, and whither it brings

them.’ He will glory against Jesus Christ himself, and say, ‘These are thy
champions! I can make thy chiefest servants abuse thee; I can make the
stewards of thy house unfaithful.’ If he did so insult God upon a false
surmise, and tell him he could make Job curse him to his face, what will he
do if he should prevail against you? And at last he will insult as much over
you, that he could draw you to be false to your great trust, and to blemish
your holy profession, and to do so much service to him that was your
enemy. O, do not so far gratify Satan; do not make him so much sport;
suffer him not to use you as the Philistines did Samson, first to deprive you
of your strength, and then to put out your eyes, and so to make you the
matter of his triumph and derision.
4. Take heed to yourselves, because there are many eyes upon you, and
there will be many to observe your falls. You cannot miscarry but the world
will ring of it. The eclipses of the sun by day are seldom without witnesses.
As you take yourselves for the lights of the churches, you may expect that
men’s eyes will be upon you. If other men may sin without observation, so
cannot you. And you should thankfully consider how great a mercy this is,
that you have so many eyes to watch over you, and so many ready to tell
you of your faults; and thus have greater helps than others, at least for
restraining you from sin. Though they may do it with a malicious mind, yet
you have the advantage of it. God forbid that we should prove so impudent
as to do evil in the public view of all, and to sin wilfully while the world is
gazing on us! ‘They that sleep sleep in the night; and they that be drunken
are drunken in the night.’ Why, consider that you are ever in the open light:
even the light of your own doctrine will expose your evil doings. While you
are as lights set upon a hill, think not to lie hid. Take heed therefore to
yourselves, and do your work as those that remember that the world looks
on them, and that with the quicksighted eye of malice, ready to make the
worst of all, to find the smallest fault where it is, to aggravate it where they
find it, to divulge it and to take advantage of it to their own designs, and to
make faults where they cannot find them. How cautiously, then, should we
walk before so many ill-minded observers!
5. Take heed to yourselves, for your sins have more heinous aggravations
than other men’s. It was a saying of king Alphonsus, that ‘a great man
cannot commit a small sin,” much more may we say, that a learned man, or

a teacher of others, cannot commit a small sin; or, at least, that the sin is
great as committed by him, which is smaller as committed by another.
(1) You are more likely than others to sin against knowledge, because you
have more than they; at least, you sin against more light, or means of
knowledge. What! do you not know that covetousness and pride are sins?
do you not know what it is to be unfaithful to your trust, and, by negligence
or self-seeking, to betray men’s souls? You know your ‘Master’s will; and,
if you do it not, you shall be beaten with many stripes.’ There must needs
be the more wilfulness, by how much there is the more knowledge.
(2) Your sins have more hypocrisy in them than other men’s, by how much
the more you have spoken against them. O what a heinous thing is it in us,
to study how to disgrace sin to the utmost, and make it as odious in the eyes
of our people as we can, and when we have done, to live in it, and secretly
cherish that which we publicly disgrace! What vile hypocrisy is it, to make
it our daily work to cry it down, and yet to keep to it; to call it publicly all
naught, and privately to make it our bed-fellow and companion; to bind
heavy burdens on others, and not to touch them ourselves with a finger!
What can you say to this in judgment? Did you think as ill of sin as you
spoke, or did you not? If you did not, why would you dissemblingly speak
against it? If you: did, why would you keep it and commit it? O bear not
that badge of a hypocritical Pharisee, ‘They say, but do not.’ Many a
minister of the gospel will be confounded, and not be able to look up, by
reason of this heavy charge of hypocrisy.
(3) Your sins have more perfidiousness in them than other men’s, by how
much the more you have engaged yourselves against them.
Besides all your common engagements as Christians, you have many more
as ministers. How oft have you proclaimed the evil and danger of sin, and
called sinners from it? How oft have you denounced against it the terrors of
the Lord? All this surely implied that you renounced it yourselves. Every
sermon that you preached against it, every exhortation, every confession of
it in the congregation, did lay an engagement upon you to forsake it. Every
child that you baptized, and every administration of the supper of the Lord,
did import your own renouncing of the world and the flesh, and your
engagement to Christ. How oft, and how openly, have you borne witness to

the odiousness and damnable nature of sin? and yet will you entertain it,
notwithstanding all these professions and testimonies of your own? O what
treachery is it to make such a stir against it in the pulpit, and, after all, to
entertain it in thy heart, and give it the room that is due to God, and even
prefer it before the glory of the saints!
6. Take heed to yourselves, because such great works as ours require greater
grace than other men’s. Weaker gifts and graces may carry a man through in
a more even course of life, that is not liable to so great trials. Smaller
strength may serve for lighter works and burdens. But if you will venture on
the great undertakings of the ministry; if you will lead on the troops of
Christ against Satan and his followers; if you will engage yourselves against
principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high places; if you
will undertake to rescue captive sinners out of the devil’s paws; do not think
that a heedless, careless course will accomplish so great a work as this. You
must look to come off with greater shame and deeper wounds of
conscience, than if you had lived a common life, if you think to go through
such momentous things as these with a careless soul. It is not only the work
that calls for heed, but the workman also, that he may be fit for business of
such weight. We have seen many men who lived as private Christians, in
good reputation for parts and piety, when they took upon them either the
magistracy or military employment, where the work was above their gifts,
and temptations did overmatch their strength, they proved scandalous
disgraced men. And we have seen some private Christians of good esteem,
who, having thought too highly of their parts, and thrust themselves into the
ministerial office, have proved weak and empty men, and have become
greater burdens to the Church than some whom we endeavored to cast out.
They might have done God more service in the higher rank of private men,
than they do among the lowest of the ministry. If, then, you will venture
into the midst of enemies, and bear the burden and heat of the day, take
heed to yourselves.
7. Take heed to yourselves, for the honor of your Lord and Master, and of
his holy truth and ways, doth lie more on you than on other men. As you
may render him more service, so you may do him more disservice than
others. The nearer men stand to God, the greater dishonor hath he by their
miscarriages; and the more will they be imputed by foolish men to God

himself. The heavy judgments executed on Eli and on his house were
because they kicked at his sacrifice and offering: ‘Therefore was the sin of
the young men very great before the Lord, for men abhorred the offering of
the Lord.’ It was that great aggravation, of ‘causing the enemies of the Lord
to blaspheme,’ which provoked God to deal more sharply with David, than
he would otherwise have done. If you be indeed Christians, the glory of
God will be dearer to you than your lives. Take heed therefore what you do
against it, as you would take heed what you do against your lives. Would it
not wound you to the heart to hear the name and truth of God reproached
for your sakes; to see men point to you, and say, ‘There goes a covetous
priest, a secret tippler, a scandalous man; these are they that preach for
strictness, while they themselves can live as loose as others; they condemn
us by their sermons, and condemn themselves by their lives;
notwithstanding all their talk, they are as bad as we. ‘O brethren, could your
hearts endure to hear men cast the dung of your iniquities in the face of the
holy God, and in the face of the gospel, and of all that desire to fear the
Lord? Would it not break your hearts to think that all the godly Christians
about you should suffer reproach for your misdoings? Why, if one of you
that is a leader of the flock, should be ensnared but once into some
scandalous crime, there is scarcely a man or woman that seeketh diligently
after their salvation, within the hearing of it, but, besides the grief of their
hearts for your sin, are likely to have it cast in their teeth by the ungodly
about them, however much they may detest it, and lament it. The ungodly
husband will tell his wife, and the ungodly parents will tell their children,
and ungodly neighbors and fellow-servants will be telling one another of it,
saying, ‘These are your godly preachers! See what comes of all your stir.
What better are you than others You are even all alike.’
Such words as these must all the godly in the country hear for your sakes.
‘It must needs be that offenses come; but woe to that man by whom the
offense cometh!’ O take heed, brethren, of every word you speak, and of
every step you tread, for you bear the ark of the Lord, – you are entrusted
with his honor! If you that ‘know his will, and approve the things that are
more excellent, being instructed out of the law, and are confident that ye
yourselves are guides of’ the blind, and lights to them that are in darkness,
instructors of the foolish, teachers of babes,’ – if you, I say, should live
contrary to your doctrine, and ‘by breaking the law should dishonor God,

the name of God will be blasphemed’ among the ignorant and ungodly
‘through you.’ And you are not unacquainted with that standing decree of
heaven, ‘Them that honor me I will honor; and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed.’ Never did man dishonor God, but it proved the greatest
dishonor to himself. God will find out ways enough to wipe off any stain
that is cast upon him; but you will not so easily remove the shame and
sorrow from yourselves.
8. Lastly, Take heed to yourselves, for the success of all your labors doth
very much depend upon this. God useth to fit men for great works, before
he employs them as his instruments in accomplishing them. Now, if the
work of the Lord be not soundly done upon your own hearts, how can you
expect that he will bless your labors for effecting it in others? He may do it,
if he please, but you have much cause to doubt whether he will. I shall here
mention some reasons which may satisfy you, that he who would be a
means of saving others, must take heed to himself, and that God doth more
seldom prosper the labors of unsanctified men.
(1) Can it be expected that God will bless that man’s labors, (I mean
comparatively, as to other ministers) who worketh not for God, but for
himself? Now, this is the case with every unsanctified man. None but
converted men do make God their chief end, and do all or any thing heartily
for his honor; others make the ministry but a trade to live by. They choose it
rather than another calling, because their parents did destine them to it, or
because it affordeth them a competent maintenance; because it is a life
wherein they have more opportunity to furnish their intellects with all kind
of science; or because it is not so toilsome to the body, to those that have a
mind to favor their flesh; because it is accompanied with some reverence
and respect from men, and because they think it a fine thing to be leaders
and teachers, and have others ‘receive the law at their mouth.’ For such
ends as these are they ministers, and for these do they preach; and, were it
not for these, or similar objects, they would soon give over. And can it be
expected, that God should much bless the labors of such men as these? It is
not for him they preach, but themselves, and their own reputation or gain. It
is not him, but themselves, that they seek and serve; and, therefore, no
wonder if he leave them to themselves for the success, and if their labors

have no greater a blessing than themselves can give, and if the word reach
no further than their own strength can make it reach.
(2) Can you think that he is likely to be as successful as others, who dealeth
not heartily and faithfully in his work, who believeth not what he saith, and
is not truly serious when he seemeth to be most diligent? And can you think
that any unsanctified man can be hearty and serious in the ministerial work?
A kind of seriousness indeed he may have, such as proceedeth from a
common faith or opinion, that the Word is true; or he may be actuated by a
natural fervor, or by selfish ends: but the seriousness and fidelity of a sound
believer, who ultimately intendeth God’s glory, and men’s salvation, this he
hath not. O sirs, all your preaching and persuading of others, will be but
dreaming and vile hypocrisy, till the work be thoroughly done upon your
own hearts. How can you set yourselves, day and night, to a work that your
carnal hearts are averse to? How can you call, with serious fervor, upon
poor sinners to repent and return to God, that never repented or returned
yourselves? How can you heartily follow poor sinners, with importunate
solicitations to take heed of sin, and to lead a holy life, that never felt
yourselves the evil of sin, or the worth of holiness?
These things are never well known till they are felt, nor well felt till they are
possessed; and he that feeleth them not himself, is not likely to speak
feelingly of them to others, nor to help others to the feeling of them. How
can you follow sinners, with compassion in your hearts and tears in your
eyes, and beseech them, in the name of the Lord, to stop their course, and
return and live, and never had so much compassion on your own soul, as to
do this much for yourselves? What! can you love other men better than
yourselves Can you have pity on them, who have no pity upon yourselves?
Sirs, do you think they will be heartily diligent to save men from hell, that
be not heartily persuaded that there is a hell? Or to bring men to heaven,
that do not truly believe that there is a heaven? As Calvin saith on my text;
‘For never will the man take diligent care for the salvation of others who
neglects his own salvation.’ He that hath not so strong a belief of the Word
of God, and of the life to come, as will withdraw his own heart from the
vanities of this world, and excite him to holy diligence for salvation, cannot
be expected to be faithful in seeking the salvation of other men. Surely he
that dare damn himself, dare let others alone in the way to damnation; he

that, like Judas, will sell his Master for silver, will not stick to make
merchandise of the flock; he that will let go his hopes of heaven, rather than
leave his worldly and fleshly delights, will hardly leave them for the saving
of others. We may naturally conceive, that he will have no pity on others,
that is wilfully cruel to himself; that he is not to be trusted with other men’s
souls, who is unfaithful to his own, and will sell it to the devil for the short
pleasures of sin. I confess that man shall never have my consent to have the
charge of other men’s souls and to oversee them in order to their salvation
that takes not heed to himself but is careless of his own, except it were in
case of absolute necessity, that no better could be had.
(3) Do you think it is a likely thing, that he will fight against Satan with all
his might, who is himself a servant to Satan? Will he do any great harm to
the kingdom of the devil, who is himself a member and a subject of that
kingdom? Will he be true to Christ who is in covenant with his enemy?
Now, this is the case of all unsanctified men, of whatsoever rank or
profession they be. They are the servants of Satan, and the subjects of his
kingdom; it is he that ruleth in their hearts; and are they like to be true to
Christ that are ruled by the devil? What prince will choose the friends and
servants of his enemy to lead his armies in war against him? This is it that
hath made so many preachers of the gospel to be enemies to the work of the
gospel which they preach. No wonder if such deride the holy obedience of
the faithful; and if while they take on them to preach a holy life, they cast
reproaches on them that practice it! O how many such traitors have been in
the Church of Christ in all ages, who have done more against him, under his
colors, than they could have done in the open field! They speak well of
Christ and of godliness in the general, and yet slyly do what they can to
bring them into disgrace, and make men believe that those who set
themselves to seek God with all their hearts are a company of enthusiasts or
hypocrites. And when they cannot for shame speak that way in the pulpit,
they will do it in private among their acquaintance. Alas! how many such
wolves have been set over the sheep! If there was a traitor among the twelve
in Christ’s family, no wonder if there be many now. It cannot be expected
that a slave of Satan, ‘whose god is his belly, and who mindeth earthly
things,’ should be any better than ‘an enemy to the cross of Christ.’ What
though he live civilly, and preach plausibly, and maintain outwardly a
profession of religion? He may be as fast in the devil’s snares, by

worldliness, pride, a secret distaste of diligent godliness, or by an unsound
heart that is not rooted in the faith, nor unreservedly devoted to Christ, as
others are by drunkenness, uncleanness, and similar disgraceful sins.
Publicans and harlots do sooner enter heaven than Pharisees, because they
are sooner convinced of their sin and misery.
And, though many of these men may seem excellent preachers, and may cry
down sin as loudly as others, yet it is all but an affected fervency, and too
commonly but a mere useless bawling; for he who cherisheth sin in his own
heart doth never fall upon it in good earnest in others. I know, indeed, that a
wicked man may be more willing of the reformation of others than of his
own, and hence may show a kind of earnestness in dissuading them from
their evil ways; because he can preach against sin at an easier rate than he
can forsake it, and another man’s reformation may consist with his own
enjoyment of his lusts. And, therefore, many a wicked minister or parent
may be earnest with their people or children to amend, because they lose
not their own sinful profits or pleasures by another’s reformation, nor doth
it call them to that self-denial which their own doth. But yet for all this,
there is none of that zeal, resolution, and diligence, which are found in all
that are true to Christ. They set not against sin as the enemy of Christ, and
as that which endangereth their people’s souls. A traitorous commander,
that shooteth nothing against the enemy but powder, may cause his guns to
make as great a sound or report as those that are loaded with bullets; but he
doth no hurt to the enemy. So one of these men may speak as loudly, and
mouth it with an affected fervency, but he seldom doth any great execution
against sin and Satan. No man can fight well, but where he hateth, or is very
angry; much less against them whom he loveth, and loveth above all. Every
unrenewed man is so far from hating sin to purpose, that it is his dearest
treasure. Hence you may see, that an unsanctified man, who loveth the
enemy, is very unfit to be a leader in Christ’s army; and to draw others to
renounce the world and the flesh, seeing he cleaveth to them himself as his
chief good.
(4) It is not likely that the people will much regard the doctrine of such
men, when they see that they do not live as they preach. They will think that
he doth not mean as he speaks, if he do not live as he speaks. They will
hardly believe a man that seemeth not to believe himself. If one bid you run

for your lives, because a bear, or an enemy is at your backs, and yet do not
mend his own pace, you will be tempted to think that he is but in jest, and
that there is really no such danger as he alleges. When preachers tell people
of the necessity of holiness, and that without it no man shall see the Lord,
and yet remain unholy themselves, the people will think that they do but
talk to pass away the hour, and because they must say somewhat for their
money, and that all these are but words of course. Long enough may you lift
up your voice against sin, before men will believe that there is any such evil
or danger in it as you talk of, while they see the same man that reproacheth
it, cherishing it in his bosom, and making it his delight. You rather tempt
them to think that there is some special good in it, and that you dispraise it
as gluttons do a dish which they love, that they may have it all to
themselves. As long as men have eyes as well as ears, they will think they
see your meaning as well as hear it; and they are apter to believe their sight
than their hearing, as being the more perfect sense of the two. All that a
minister doth, is a kind of preaching; and if you live a covetous or a careless
life, you preach these sins to your people by your practice. If you drink, or
game, or trifle away your time in vain discourse, they take it as if you said
to them, ‘Neighbours, this is the life you should all live; on this course you
may venture without any danger.’ If you are ungodly, and teach not your
families the fear of God, nor contradict the sins of the company you are in,
nor turn the stream of their vain talking, nor deal with them plainly about
their salvation, they will take it as if you preached to them that such things
are needless, and that they may boldly do so as well as you. Nay, you do
worse than all this, for you teach them to think evil of others that are better
than yourselves. How many a faithful minister, and private Christian, is
hated and reproached for the sake of such as you! What say the people to
them? ‘You are so precise, and tell us so much of sin, and duty, and make
such a stir about these matters, while such or such a minister, that is as great
a scholar as you, and as good a preacher, will be merry and jest with us, and
let us alone, and never trouble himself or us with such discourse. You can
never be quiet, but make more ado than needs; and love to frighten men
with talk of damnation, when sober, learned, peaceable divines are quiet,
and live with us like other men.’ Such are the thoughts and talk of people,
which your negligence doth occasion. They will give you leave to preach
against their sins, and to talk as much as you will for godliness in the pulpit,
if you will but let them alone afterwards, and be friendly and merry with

them when you have done, and talk as they do, and live as they, and be
indifferent with them in your conversation. For they take the pulpit to be but
a stage; a place where preachers must show themselves, and play their
parts; where you have liberty for an hour to say what you list; and what you
say they regard not, if you show them not, by saying it personally to their
faces, that you were in good earnest, and did indeed mean them, Is that man
then likely to do much good, or fit to be a minister of Christ, that will speak
for him an hour on the Sabbath, and, by his life, will preach against him all
the week besides, yea, and give his public words the lie?
And if any of the people be wiser than to follow the examples of such men,
yet the loathsomeness of their lives will make their doctrine the less
effectual. Though you know the meat to be good and wholesome, yet it may
make a weak stomach rise against it, if the cook or the servant that carrieth
it have leprous or even dirty hands. Take heed therefore to yourselves, if
ever you mean to do good to others.
Lastly, Consider whether the success of your labors depends not on the
assistance and blessing of the Lord. And where hath he made any promise
of his assistance and blessing to ungodly men? If he do promise his Church
a blessing even by such, yet doth he not promise them any blessing. To his
faithful servants he hath promised that he will be with them, that he will put
his Spirit upon them, and his word into their mouths, and that Satan shall
fall before them as lightning from heaven. But where is there any such
promise to ungodly ministers Nay, do you not, by your hypocrisy and your
abuse of God, provoke him to forsake you, and to blast all your endeavors,
at least as to yourselves,’ though he may bless them to his chosen? For I do
not deny but that God may do good to his Church by wicked men; yet doth
he it not so ordinarily, nor so eminently, as by his own servants. And what I
have said of the wicked themselves, doth hold in part of the godly, while
they are scandalous and backsliding, in proportion to the measure of their
sin.

CHAPTER 2
THE OVERSIGHT OF THE FLOCK
SECTION 1 — THE NATURE OF THIS OVERSIGHT
