PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 14
Why Are We Saved by Faith?

---

WHY ARE WE SAVED BY FAITH?

W

HY IS FAITH SELECTED as the channel of salvation? No
doubt this inquiry is often made. “By grace are ye saved
through faith,” is assuredly the doctrine of Holy Scripture, and
the ordinance of God; but why is it so? Why is faith selected rather than
hope, or love, or patience?
It becomes us to be modest in answering such a question, for God’s ways
are not always to be understood; nor are we allowed presumptuously to
question them. Humbly we would reply that, as far as we can tell, faith
has been selected as the channel of grace, because there is a natural
adaptation in faith to be used as the receiver. Suppose that I am about to
give a poor man an alms: I put it into his hand — why? Well, it would
hardly be fitting to put it into his ear, or to lay it upon his foot; the hand
seems made on purpose to receive. So, in our mental frame, faith is created
on purpose to be a receiver: it is the hand of the man, and there is a fitness
in receiving grace by its means.
Do let me put this very plainly. Faith which receives Christ is as simple an
act as when your child receives an apple from you, because you hold it out
and promise to give him the apple if he comes for it. The belief and the
receiving relate only to an apple; but they make up precisely the same act
as the faith which deals with eternal salvation. What the child’s hand is to
the apple, that your faith is to the perfect salvation of Christ. The child’s
hand does not make the apple, nor improve the apple, nor deserve the
apple; it only takes it; and faith is chosen by God to be the receiver of
salvation, because it does not pretend to create salvation, nor to help in it,
but it is content humbly to receive it. “Faith is the tongue that begs
pardon, the hand which receives it, and the eye which sees it; but it is not
the price which buys it.” Faith never makes herself her own plea, she rests
all her argument upon the blood of Christ. She becomes a good servant to
bring the riches of the Lord Jesus to the soul, because she acknowledges
whence she drew them, and owns that grace alone entrusted her with them.
Faith, again, is doubtless selected because it gives all the glory to God. It is
of faith that it might be by grace, and it is of grace that there might be no

42

boasting; for God cannot endure pride. “The proud he knoweth afar off,”
and He has no wish to come nearer to them. He will not give salvation in a
way which will suggest or foster pride. Paul saith, “Not of works, lest any
man should boast.” Now, faith excludes all boasting. The hand which
receives charity does not say, “I am to be thanked for accepting the gift”;
that would be absurd. When the hand conveys bread to the mouth it does
not say to the body, “Thank me; for I feed you.” It is a very simple thing
that the hand does though a very necessary thing; and it never arrogates
glory to itself for what it does. So God has selected faith to receive the
unspeakable gift of His grace, because it cannot take to itself any credit,
but must adore the gracious God who is the giver of all good. Faith sets the
crown upon the right head, and therefore the Lord Jesus was wont to put
the crown upon the head of faith, saying, “Thy faith hath saved thee; go in
peace.”
Next, God selects faith as the channel of salvation because it is a sure
method, linking man with God. When man confides in God, there is a point
of union between them, and that union guarantees blessing. Faith saves us
because it makes us cling to God, and so brings us into connection with
Him. I have often used the following illustration, but I must repeat it,
because I cannot think of a better. I am told that years ago a boat was
upset above the falls of Niagara, and two men were being carried down the
current, when persons on the shore managed to float a rope out to them,
which rope was seized by them both. One of them held fast to it and was
safely drawn to the bank; but the other, seeing a great log come floating by,
unwisely let go the rope and clung to the log, for it was the bigger thing of
the two, and apparently better to cling to. Alas! the log with the man on it
went right over the vast abyss, because there was no union between the log
and the shore. The size of the log was no benefit to him who grasped it; it
needed a connection with the shore to produce safety. So when a man
trusts to his works, or to sacraments, or to anything of that sort, he will
not be saved, because there is no junction between him and Christ; but
faith, though it may seem to be like a slender cord, is in the hands of the
great God on the shore side; infinite power pulls in the connecting line, and
thus draws the man from destruction. Oh the blessedness of faith, because
it unites us to God!

43

Faith is chosen again, because it touches the springs of action. Even in
common things faith of a certain sort lies at the root of all. I wonder
whether I shall be wrong if I say that we never do anything except through
faith of some sort. If I walk across my study it is because I believe my legs
will carry me. A man eats because he believes in the necessity of food; he
goes to business because he believes in the value of money; he accepts a
check because he believes that the bank will honor it. Columbus discovered
America because he believed that there was another continent beyond the
ocean; and the Pilgrim Fathers colonized it because they believed that God
would be with them on those rocky shores. Most grand deeds have
beessession of the battery and now He can send the sacred current to
every part of our nature. When we believe in Christ, and the heart has
come into the possession of God, then we are saved from sin, and are
moved toward repentance, holiness, zeal, prayer, consecration, and every
other gracious thing. “What oil is to the wheels, what weights are to a
clock, what wings are to a bird, what sails are to a ship, that faith is to all
holy duties and services.” Have faith, and all other graces will follow and
continue to hold their course.
Faith, again, has the power of working by love; it influences the affections
toward God, and draws the heart after the best things. He that believes in
God will beyond all question love God. Faith is an act of the
understanding; but it also proceeds from the heart. “With the heart man
believeth unto righteousness”; and hence God gives salvation to faith
because it resides next door to the affections, and is near akin to love; and
love is the parent and the nurse of every holy feeling and act. Love to God
is obedience, love to God is holiness. To love God and to love man is to be
conformed to the image of Christ; and this is salvation.
Moreover, faith creates peace and joy; he that hath it rests, and is tranquil,
is glad and joyous, and this is a preparation for heaven. God gives all
heavenly gifts to faith, for this reason among others, that faith worketh in
us the life and spirit which are to be eternally manifested in the upper and
better world. Faith furnishes us with armor for this life, and education for
the life to come. It enables a man both to live and to die without fear; it
prepares both for action and for suffering; and hence the Lord selects it as
a most convenient medium for conveying grace to us, and thereby securing
us for glory.

44

Certainly faith does for us what nothing else can do; it gives us joy and
peace, and causes us to enter into rest. Why do men attempt to gain
salvation by other means? An old preacher says, “A silly servant who is
bidden to open a door, sets his shoulder to it and pushes with all his might;
but the door stirs not, and he cannot enter, use what strength he may.
Another comes with a key, and easily unlocks the door, and enters right
readily. Those who would be saved by works are pushing at heaven’s gate
without result; but faith is the key which opens the gate at once.” Reader,
will you not use that key? The Lord commands you to believe in His dear
Son, therefore you may do so; and doing so you shall live. Is not this the
promise of the gospel, “He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved”?
(Mark 16:16). What can be your objection to a way of salvation which
commends itself to the mercy and the wisdom of our gracious God?

45