PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 8 of 10
Chapters 37 through 42

---

We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach. In these chapters, Ben Sira counsels us on choosing advisors wisely, on sickness and physicians, on mourning the dead, the dignity of skilled labor, and the things of which a man ought to be ashamed.

CHAPTER 37

Verse 1. Every friend saith, I am his friend also; but there is a friend which is only a friend in name.

Verse 2. Is it not a grief unto death, when a companion and friend is turned to an enemy?

Verse 3. O wicked imagination, whence camest thou in to cover the earth with deceit?

Verse 4. There is a companion which rejoiceth in the prosperity of a friend, but in the time of trouble will be against him.

Verse 5. There is a companion which helpeth his friend for the belly, and taketh up the buckler against the enemy.

Verse 6. Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful of him in thy riches.

Verse 7. Every counselor extolleth counsel, but there is some that counseleth for himself.

Verse 8. Beware of a counselor, and know before what need he hath; for he also will counsel for himself, lest he cast the lot upon thee.

Verse 9. And say unto thee, Thy way is good; and afterward he stand on the other side, to see what shall befall thee.

Verse 10. Consult not with one that suspecteth thee, and hide thy counsel from such as envy thee.

Verse 11. Neither consult with a woman touching her of whom she is jealous, neither with a coward in matters of war, nor with a merchant concerning exchange, nor with a buyer of selling, nor with an envious man of thankfulness.

Verse 12. Nor with an unmerciful man touching kindness, nor with the slothful for any work, nor with a hireling for a year of finishing work, nor with an idle servant of much business. Hearken not unto these in any matter of counsel.

Verse 13. But be continually with a godly man, whom thou knowest to keep the commandments of the Lord, whose mind is according to thy mind, and will sorrow with thee if thou shalt miscarry.

Verse 14. And let the counsel of thine own heart stand, for there is no man more faithful unto thee than it.

Verse 15. For a man's mind is sometimes wont to tell him more than seven watchmen that sit above in a high tower.

Verse 16. And above all this pray to the Most High, that He will direct thy way in truth.

Verse 17. Let reason go before every enterprise, and counsel before every action.

Verse 18. The countenance is a sign of changing of the heart.

Verse 19. Four manner of things appear: good and evil, life and death; but the tongue ruleth over them continually.

Verse 20. There is one that is wise and teacheth many, and yet is unprofitable to himself.

Verse 21. There is one that showeth wisdom in words, and is hated; he shall be destitute of all food.

Verse 22. For grace is not given him from the Lord, because he is deprived of all wisdom.

Verse 23. Another is wise to himself; and the fruits of understanding are commendable in his mouth.

Verse 24. A wise man instructeth his people, and the fruits of his understanding fail not.

Verse 25. A wise man shall be filled with blessing, and all they that see him shall count him happy.

Verse 26. The days of the life of man may be numbered, but the days of Israel are innumerable.

Verse 27. A wise man shall inherit glory among his people, and his name shall be perpetual.

Verse 28. My son, prove thy soul in thy life, and see what is evil for it, and give not that unto it.

Verse 29. For all things are not profitable for all men, neither hath every soul pleasure in every thing.

Verse 30. Be not insatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon meats.

Verse 31. For excess of meats bringeth sickness, and surfeiting will turn into choler.

Verse 32. By surfeiting have many perished; but he that taketh heed prolongeth his life.

CHAPTER 38

Verse 1. Honor a physician with the honor due unto him for the uses which ye may have of him; for the Lord hath created him.

Verse 2. For of the Most High cometh healing, and he shall receive honor of the king.

Verse 3. The skill of the physician shall lift up his head, and in the sight of great men he shall be in admiration.

Verse 4. The Lord hath created medicines out of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them.

Verse 5. Was not the water made sweet with wood, that the virtue thereof might be known?

Verse 6. And He hath given men skill, that He might be honored in His marvelous works.

Verse 7. With such doth He heal men and taketh away their pains.

Verse 8. Of such doth the apothecary make a confection; and of His works there is no end; and from Him is peace over all the earth.

Verse 9. My son, in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and He will make thee whole.

Verse 10. Leave off from sin, and order thine hands aright, and cleanse thy heart from all wickedness.

Verse 11. Give a sweet savor, and a memorial of fine flour, and make a fat offering, as not being.

Verse 12. Then give place to the physician, for the Lord hath created him; let him not go from thee, for thou hast need of him.

Verse 13. There is a time when in their hands there is good success.

Verse 14. For they shall also pray unto the Lord, that He would prosper that which they give for ease and remedy to prolong life.

Verse 15. He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the hand of the physician.

Verse 16. My son, let tears fall down over the dead, and begin to lament as if thou hadst suffered great harm thyself; and then cover his body according to the custom, and neglect not his burial.

Verse 17. Weep bitterly, and make great moan, and use lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken of; and then comfort thyself for thy heaviness.

Verse 18. For of heaviness cometh death, and the heaviness of the heart breaketh strength.

Verse 19. In affliction also sorrow remaineth, and the life of the poor is the curse of the heart.

Verse 20. Take no heaviness to heart; drive it away, and remember the last end.

Verse 21. Forget it not, for there is no turning again; thou shalt not do him good, but hurt thyself.

Verse 22. Remember my judgment, for thine also shall be so: yesterday for me, and today for thee.

Verse 23. When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest; and be comforted for him when his spirit is departed from him.

Verse 24. The wisdom of a learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure, and he that hath little business shall become wise.

Verse 25. How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough, and he that glorieth in the goad, that driveth oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and whose talk is of bullocks?

Verse 26. He giveth his mind to make furrows, and is diligent to give the kine fodder.

Verse 27. So every carpenter and workmaster, that laboreth night and day; and they that cut and grave seals, and are diligent to make great variety, and give themselves to counterfeit imagery, and watch to finish a work.

Verse 28. The smith also sitting by the anvil, and considering the iron work; the vapor of the fire wasteth his flesh, and he fighteth with the heat of the furnace. The noise of the hammer and the anvil is ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the pattern of the thing that he maketh; he setteth his mind to finish his work, and watcheth to polish it perfectly.

Verse 29. So doth the potter sitting at his work, and turning the wheel about with his feet, who is always carefully set at his work, and maketh all his work by number.

Verse 30. He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and boweth down his strength before his feet; he applieth himself to lead it over; and he is diligent to make clean the furnace.

Verse 31. All these trust to their hands, and every one is wise in his work.

Verse 32. Without these cannot a city be inhabited, and they shall not dwell where they will, nor go up and down.

Verse 33. They shall not be sought for in public counsel, nor sit high in the congregation. They shall not sit on the judge's seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment; they cannot declare justice and judgment, and they shall not be found where parables are spoken.

Verse 34. But they will maintain the state of the world, and all their desire is in the work of their craft.

CHAPTER 39

Verse 1. But he that giveth his mind to the law of the Most High, and is occupied in the meditation thereof, will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients, and be occupied in prophecies.

Verse 2. He will keep the sayings of the renowned men, and where subtil parables are he will be there also.

Verse 3. He will seek out the secrets of grave sentences, and be conversant in dark parables.

Verse 4. He shall serve among great men, and appear before princes; he will travel through strange countries, for he hath tried the good and the evil among men.

Verse 5. He will give his heart to resort early to the Lord that made him, and will pray before the Most High, and will open his mouth in prayer, and make supplication for his sins.

Verse 6. When the great Lord will, he shall be filled with the spirit of understanding; he shall pour out wise sentences, and give thanks unto the Lord in his prayer.

Verse 7. He shall direct his counsel and knowledge, and in His secrets shall he meditate.

Verse 8. He shall show forth that which he hath learned, and shall glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord.

Verse 9. Many shall commend his understanding, and so long as the world endureth it shall not be blotted out; his memorial shall not depart away, and his name shall live from generation to generation.

Verse 10. Nations shall show forth his wisdom, and the congregation shall declare his praise.

Verse 11. If he die, he shall leave a greater name than a thousand; and if he live, he shall increase it.

Verse 12. Yet have I more to say, which I have thought upon; for I am filled as the moon at the full.

Verse 13. Hearken unto me, ye holy children, and bud forth as a rose growing by the brook of the field.

Verse 14. And give ye a sweet savor as frankincense, and flourish as a lily; send forth a smell, and sing a song of praise; bless the Lord in all His works.

Verse 15. Magnify His name, and show forth His praise with the songs of your lips, and with harps; and in praising Him ye shall say after this manner:

Verse 16. All the works of the Lord are exceeding good, and whatsoever He commandeth shall be accomplished in due season.

Verse 17. And none may say, What is this? Wherefore is that? For at time convenient they shall all be sought out. At His commandment the waters stood as a heap, and at the words of His mouth the receptacles of waters.

Verse 18. At His commandment is done whatsoever pleaseth Him, and none can hinder when He will save.

Verse 19. The works of all flesh are before Him, and nothing can be hid from His eyes.

Verse 20. He seeth from everlasting to everlasting, and there is nothing wonderful before Him.

Verse 21. A man need not to say, What is this? Wherefore is that? For He hath made all things for their uses.

Verse 22. His blessing covered the dry land as a river, and watered it as a flood.

Verse 23. As He hath turned the waters into saltness, so shall the heathen inherit His wrath.

Verse 24. As His ways are plain unto the holy, so are they stumbling blocks unto the wicked.

Verse 25. For the good are good things created from the beginning; so evil things for sinners.

Verse 26. The principal things for the whole use of man's life are water, fire, iron, and salt, flour of wheat, honey, milk, and the blood of the grape, and oil, and clothing.

Verse 27. All these things are for good to the godly, so to the sinners they are turned into evil.

Verse 28. There be spirits that are created for vengeance, which in their fury lay on sore strokes; in the time of destruction they pour out their force, and appease the wrath of Him that made them.

Verse 29. Fire and hail, and famine and death, all these were created for vengeance:

Verse 30. Teeth of wild beasts, and scorpions, serpents, and the sword, punishing the wicked to destruction.

Verse 31. They shall rejoice in His commandment, and they shall be ready upon earth when need is, and when their time is come they shall not transgress His word.

Verse 32. Therefore from the beginning I was resolved, and thought upon it, and have left it in writing.

Verse 33. All the works of the Lord are good, and He will give every needful thing in due season.

Verse 34. So that a man cannot say, This is worse than that; for in time they shall all be well approved.

Verse 35. And therefore praise ye the Lord with the whole heart and mouth, and bless the name of the Lord.

CHAPTER 40

Verse 1. Great travail is created for every man, and a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of their mother's womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all things.

Verse 2. Their imagination of things to come, and the day of death, trouble their thoughts and cause fear of heart.

Verse 3. From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes;

Verse 4. From him that weareth purple and a crown, unto him that is clothed with a linen frock:

Verse 5. Wrath and envy, trouble and unquietness, fear of death and anger and strife, and in the time of rest upon his bed his night sleep doth change his knowledge.

Verse 6. A little or nothing is his rest, and afterward he is in his sleep as in a day of keeping watch, troubled in the vision of his heart, as if he were escaped out of a battle.

Verse 7. When all is safe, he awaketh and marvelleth that the fear was nothing.

Verse 8. Such things happen unto all flesh, both man and beast, and that is sevenfold more upon sinners:

Verse 9. Death and bloodshed, strife and sword, calamities, famine, tribulation, and the scourge.

Verse 10. These things are created for the wicked, and for their sakes came the flood.

Verse 11. All things that are of the earth shall turn to the earth again, and that which is of the waters doth return into the sea.

Verse 12. All bribery and injustice shall be blotted out, but true dealing shall endure forever.

Verse 13. The goods of the unjust shall be dried up like a river, and shall vanish with noise, like a great thunder in rain.

Verse 14. While he openeth his hand he shall rejoice; so shall transgressors come to nought.

Verse 15. The children of the ungodly shall not bring forth many branches, but are as unclean roots upon a hard rock.

Verse 16. The weed growing upon every water and bank of a river shall be pulled up before all grass.

Verse 17. Bountifulness is as a most fruitful garden, and mercifulness endureth forever.

Verse 18. To labor and to be content with that a man hath is a sweet life; but he that findeth a treasure is above them both.

Verse 19. Children and the building of a city continue a man's name, but a blameless wife is counted above them both.

Verse 20. Wine and music rejoice the heart, but the love of wisdom is above them both.

Verse 21. The pipe and the psaltery make sweet melody, but a pleasant tongue is above them both.

Verse 22. Thine eye desireth favor and beauty, but more than both, corn while it is green.

Verse 23. A friend and companion never meet amiss, but above both is a wife with her husband.

Verse 24. Brethren and help are against time of trouble, but alms shall deliver more than them both.

Verse 25. Gold and silver make the foot stand sure, but counsel is esteemed above them both.

Verse 26. Riches and strength lift up the heart, but the fear of the Lord is above them both. There is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it needeth not to seek help.

Verse 27. The fear of the Lord is a fruitful garden, and covereth him above all glory.

Verse 28. My son, lead not a beggar's life, for better it is to die than to beg.

Verse 29. The life of him that dependeth on another man's table is not to be counted for a life, for he polluteth himself with other men's meat; but a wise man well nurtured will beware thereof.

Verse 30. Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless, but in his belly there shall burn a fire.

CHAPTER 41

Verse 1. O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that liveth at rest in his possessions, unto the man that hath nothing to vex him, and that hath prosperity in all things; yea, unto him that is yet able to receive meat!

Verse 2. O death, acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy, and unto him whose strength faileth, that is now in the last age, and is vexed with all things, and to him that despaireth and hath lost patience!

Verse 3. Fear not the sentence of death; remember them that have been before thee and that come after; for this is the sentence of the Lord over all flesh.

Verse 4. And why art thou against the pleasure of the Most High? There is no inquisition in the grave, whether thou have lived ten, or a hundred, or a thousand years.

Verse 5. The children of sinners are abominable children, and they that are conversant in the dwelling of the ungodly.

Verse 6. The inheritance of sinners' children shall perish, and their posterity shall have a perpetual reproach.

Verse 7. The children will complain of an ungodly father, because they shall be reproached for his sake.

Verse 8. Woe be unto you, ungodly men, which have forsaken the law of the Most High God! For if ye increase, it shall be to your destruction.

Verse 9. And if ye be born, ye shall be born to a curse; and if ye die, a curse shall be your portion.

Verse 10. All that are of the earth shall turn to earth again; so the ungodly shall go from a curse to destruction.

Verse 11. The mourning of men is about their bodies, but an ill name of sinners shall be blotted out.

Verse 12. Have regard to thy name, for that shall continue with thee above a thousand great treasures of gold.

Verse 13. A good life hath but few days, but a good name endureth forever.

Verse 14. My children, keep discipline in peace; for wisdom that is hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in them both?

Verse 15. A man that hideth his foolishness is better than a man that hideth his wisdom.

Verse 16. Therefore be shamefaced according to my word; for it is not good to retain all bashfulness, neither is it altogether approved in every thing.

Verse 17. Be ashamed of whoredom before father and mother, and of a lie before a prince and a mighty man;

Verse 18. Of an offense before a judge and ruler; of iniquity before a congregation and people; of unjust dealing before thy partner and friend;

Verse 19. And of theft in regard of the place where thou sojournest, and in regard of the truth of God and His covenant; and to lean with thine elbow upon the meat; and of scorning to give and take.

Verse 20. And of silence before them that salute thee; and to look upon a harlot;

Verse 21. And to turn away thy face from thy kinsman; or to take away a portion or a gift; or to gaze upon another man's wife;

Verse 22. Or to be over-busy with his maid, and come not near her bed; or of upbraiding speeches before friends; and after thou hast given, upbraid not.

Verse 23. Or of repeating and speaking again that which thou hast heard; and of revealing of secrets.

Verse 24. So shalt thou be truly shamefaced, and find favor before all men.

CHAPTER 42

Verse 1. Of these things be not thou ashamed, and accept no person to sin thereby:

Verse 2. Of the law of the Most High, and His covenant; and of judgment to justify the ungodly;

Verse 3. Of reckoning with thy partners and travelers; or of the gift of the heritage of friends;

Verse 4. Of exactness of balance and weights; or of getting much or little;

Verse 5. And of merchants' indifferent selling; or of much correction of children; and to make the side of an evil servant to bleed.

Verse 6. Sure keeping is good, where an evil wife is; and shut up, where many hands are.

Verse 7. Deliver all things in number and weight, and put all in writing that thou givest out or receivest in.

Verse 8. Be not ashamed to inform the unwise and foolish, and the extreme aged that contendeth with those that are young; thus shalt thou be truly learned, and approved of all men living.

Verse 9. The father waketh for the daughter when no man knoweth, and the care for her taketh away sleep; when she is young, lest she pass away the flower of her age; and being married, lest she should be hated;

Verse 10. In her virginity, lest she should be defiled and gotten with child in her father's house; and having a husband, lest she should misbehave herself; and when she is married, lest she should be barren.

Verse 11. Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter, lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude.

Verse 12. Behold not every body's beauty, and sit not in the midst of women.

Verse 13. For from garments cometh a moth, and from women wickedness.

Verse 14. Better is the churlishness of a man than a courteous woman which bringeth shame and reproach.

Verse 15. I will now remember the works of the Lord, and declare the things that I have seen. In the words of the Lord are His works.

Verse 16. The sun that giveth light looketh upon all things, and the work of the Lord is full of His glory.

Verse 17. The Lord hath not given power to the saints to declare all His marvelous works, which the Almighty Lord firmly settled, that whatsoever is might be established for His glory.

Verse 18. He seeketh out the deep and the heart, and considereth their crafty devices; for the Lord knoweth all that may be known, and He beholdeth the signs of the world.

Verse 19. He declareth the things that are past and for to come, and revealeth the steps of hidden things.

Verse 20. No thought escapeth Him, neither any word is hidden from Him.

Verse 21. He hath garnished the excellent works of His wisdom, and He is from everlasting to everlasting; unto Him may nothing be added, neither can He be diminished, and He hath no need of any counselor.

Verse 22. Oh how desirable are all His works! And that a man may see even to a spark.

Verse 23. All these things live and remain forever for all uses, and they are all obedient.

Verse 24. All things are double one against another, and He hath made nothing imperfect.

Verse 25. One thing establisheth the good of another; and who shall be filled with beholding His glory?

This concludes Part 8 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 37 through 42. In our next reading, we shall hear of the glory of God in His creation and the praise of the famous men of Israel.