PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 5 of 10
The Wisdom of the Elect One — Chapters 49 through 60


We continue now with the Parables of Enoch. In these chapters, the wisdom and authority of the Elect One are revealed, the dead are raised, mountains of metal are melted away, and the deep secrets of nature — lightning, thunder, and the great creatures Leviathan and Behemoth — are made known.

CHAPTER 49

Verse 1. For wisdom is poured out like water, and glory faileth not before him for evermore.

Verse 2. For he is mighty in all the secrets of righteousness, and unrighteousness shall disappear as a shadow, and have no continuance; because the Elect One standeth before the Lord of Spirits, and his glory is for ever and ever, and his might unto all generations.

Verse 3. And in him dwelleth the spirit of wisdom, and the spirit which giveth insight, and the spirit of understanding and of might, and the spirit of those who have fallen asleep in righteousness.

Verse 4. And he shall judge the secret things, and none shall be able to utter a lying word before him; for he is the Elect One before the Lord of Spirits, according to His good pleasure.

CHAPTER 50

Verse 1. And in those days a change shall take place for the holy and elect, and the light of days shall abide upon them, and glory and honour shall turn to the holy.

Verse 2. On the day of affliction, evil shall be gathered upon the sinners. But the righteous shall be victorious in the name of the Lord of Spirits, and He will cause the others to witness this, that they may repent and forsake the works of their hands.

Verse 3. They shall have no honour through the name of the Lord of Spirits, yet through His name shall they be saved, and the Lord of Spirits will have compassion on them, for His compassion is great.

Verse 4. And He is righteous also in His judgment, and in the presence of His glory unrighteousness also shall not maintain itself; at His judgment the unrepentant shall perish before Him.

Verse 5. And from henceforth I will have no mercy on them, saith the Lord of Spirits.

CHAPTER 51

Verse 1. And in those days shall the earth also give back that which has been entrusted to it, and Sheol also shall give back that which it has received, and hell shall give back that which it owes.

Verse 2. For in those days the Elect One shall arise, and he shall choose the righteous and holy from among them; for the day has drawn nigh that they should be saved.

Verse 3. And the Elect One shall in those days sit on My throne, and his mouth shall pour forth all the secrets of wisdom and counsel; for the Lord of Spirits hath given them to him and hath glorified him.

Verse 4. And in those days shall the mountains leap like rams, and the hills also shall skip like lambs satisfied with milk, and the faces of all the angels in heaven shall be lighted up with joy.

Verse 5. And the earth shall rejoice, and the righteous shall dwell upon it, and the elect shall walk thereon.

CHAPTER 52

Verse 1. And after those days, in that place where I had seen all the visions of that which is hidden — for I had been carried off in a whirlwind and they had borne me towards the west —

Verse 2. There mine eyes saw all the secret things of heaven that shall be: a mountain of iron, and a mountain of copper, and a mountain of silver, and a mountain of gold, and a mountain of soft metal, and a mountain of lead.

Verse 3. And I asked the angel who went with me, saying: What things are these which I have seen in secret?

Verse 4. And he said unto me: All these things which thou hast seen shall serve the dominion of His Anointed, that he may be potent and mighty on the earth.

Verse 5. And that angel of peace answered, saying unto me: Wait a little, and there shall be revealed unto thee all the secret things which surround the Lord of Spirits.

Verse 6. And these mountains which thine eyes have seen, the mountain of iron, and the mountain of copper, and the mountain of silver, and the mountain of gold, and the mountain of soft metal, and the mountain of lead — all these shall be in the presence of the Elect One as wax before the fire, and like the water which streams down from above upon those mountains, and they shall become powerless before his feet.

Verse 7. It shall come to pass in those days that none shall be saved, either by gold or by silver, and none shall be able to escape.

Verse 8. And there shall be no iron for war, nor shall one clothe oneself with a breastplate. Bronze shall be of no service, and tin shall be of no avail and shall not be esteemed, and lead shall not be desired.

Verse 9. And all these things shall be denied and destroyed from the surface of the earth, when the Elect One shall appear before the face of the Lord of Spirits.

CHAPTER 53

Verse 1. There mine eyes saw a deep valley with open mouths, and all who dwell on the earth and sea and islands shall bring to him gifts and presents and tokens of homage, but that deep valley shall not become full.

Verse 2. And their hands commit lawless deeds, and the sinners devour all whom they lawlessly oppress; yet the sinners shall be destroyed before the face of the Lord of Spirits, and they shall be banished from off the face of His earth, and they shall perish for ever and ever.

Verse 3. For I saw all the angels of punishment abiding there and preparing all the instruments of Satan.

Verse 4. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me: For whom are they preparing these instruments?

Verse 5. And he said unto me: They prepare these for the kings and the mighty of this earth, that they may thereby be destroyed.

Verse 6. And after this the Righteous and Elect One shall cause the house of his congregation to appear; henceforth they shall be no more hindered in the name of the Lord of Spirits.

Verse 7. And these mountains shall not stand as the earth before his righteousness, but the hills shall be as a fountain of water, and the righteous shall have rest from the oppression of sinners.

CHAPTER 54

Verse 1. And I looked and turned to another part of the earth, and saw there a deep valley with burning fire.

Verse 2. And they brought the kings and the mighty, and began to cast them into this deep valley.

Verse 3. And there mine eyes saw how they made these their instruments, iron chains of immeasurable weight.

Verse 4. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me, saying: For whom are these chains being prepared?

Verse 5. And he said unto me: These are being prepared for the hosts of Azazel, so that they may take them and cast them into the abyss of complete condemnation, and they shall cover their jaws with rough stones as the Lord of Spirits commanded.

Verse 6. And Michael, and Gabriel, and Raphael, and Phanuel shall take hold of them on that great day, and cast them on that day into the burning furnace, that the Lord of Spirits may take vengeance on them for their unrighteousness in becoming subject to Satan and leading astray those who dwell on the earth.

Verse 7. And in those days shall punishment come from the Lord of Spirits, and He will open all the chambers of waters which are above the heavens, and of the fountains which are beneath the earth.

Verse 8. And all the waters shall be joined with the waters; that which is above the heavens is the masculine, and the water which is beneath the earth is the feminine.

Verse 9. And they shall destroy all who dwell on the earth and those who dwell under the ends of the heaven.

Verse 10. And when they have recognized their unrighteousness which they have wrought on the earth, then by these shall they perish.

CHAPTER 55

Verse 1. And after that the Head of Days repented and said: In vain have I destroyed all who dwell on the earth.

Verse 2. And He sware by His great name: Henceforth I will not do so to all who dwell on the earth, and I will set a sign in the heaven; and this shall be a pledge of good faith between Me and them for ever, so long as heaven is above the earth. And this is in accordance with My command.

Verse 3. When I have desired to take hold of them by the hand of the angels on the day of tribulation and pain because of this, I will cause My chastisement and My wrath to abide upon them, saith God, the Lord of Spirits.

Verse 4. Ye mighty kings who dwell on the earth, ye shall have to behold Mine Elect One, how he sits on the throne of glory and judges Azazel, and all his associates, and all his hosts in the name of the Lord of Spirits.

CHAPTER 56

Verse 1. And I saw there the hosts of the angels of punishment going, and they held scourges and chains of iron and bronze.

Verse 2. And I asked the angel of peace who went with me, saying: To whom are these who hold the scourges going?

Verse 3. And he said unto me: To their elect and beloved ones, that they may be cast into the chasm of the abyss of the valley.

Verse 4. And then that valley shall be filled with their elect and beloved, and the days of their lives shall be at an end, and the days of their leading astray shall not thenceforward be reckoned.

Verse 5. And in those days the angels shall return and hurl themselves to the east upon the Parthians and Medes; they shall stir up the kings, so that a spirit of unrest shall come upon them, and they shall rouse them from their thrones, that they may break forth as lions from their lairs, and as hungry wolves among their flocks.

Verse 6. And they shall go up and tread under foot the land of His elect ones, and the land of His elect ones shall be before them a threshing-floor and a highway.

Verse 7. But the city of my righteous shall be a hindrance to their horses. And they shall begin to fight among themselves, and their right hand shall be strong against themselves, and a man shall not know his brother, nor a son his father or his mother, till there be no number of the corpses through their slaughter, and their punishment be not in vain.

Verse 8. In those days Sheol shall open its jaws, and they shall be swallowed up therein, and their destruction shall be at an end; Sheol shall devour the sinners in the presence of the elect.

CHAPTER 57

Verse 1. And it came to pass after this that I saw another host of chariots, and men riding thereon, and coming on the winds from the east, and from the west to the south.

Verse 2. And the noise of their chariots was heard, and when this turmoil took place the holy ones from heaven remarked it, and the pillars of the earth were moved from their place, and the sound thereof was heard from the one end of heaven to the other, in one day.

Verse 3. And they shall all fall down and worship the Lord of Spirits. And this is the end of the second parable.

CHAPTER 58

Verse 1. And I began to speak the third parable concerning the righteous and elect.

Verse 2. Blessed are ye, ye righteous and elect, for glorious shall be your lot.

Verse 3. And the righteous shall be in the light of the sun, and the elect in the light of eternal life; the days of their life shall be unending, and the days of the holy without number.

Verse 4. And they shall seek the light and find righteousness with the Lord of Spirits; there shall be peace to the righteous in the name of the Eternal Lord.

Verse 5. And after this it shall be said to the holy in heaven that they should seek out the secrets of righteousness, the heritage of faith; for it has become bright as the sun upon earth, and the darkness is past.

Verse 6. And there shall be a light that never endeth, and to a limit of days they shall not come, for the darkness shall first have been destroyed, and the light established before the Lord of Spirits, and the light of uprightness established for ever before the Lord of Spirits.

CHAPTER 59

Verse 1. In those days mine eyes saw the secrets of the lightnings and of the lights, and the judgments they execute; and they lighten for a blessing or a curse as the Lord of Spirits willeth.

Verse 2. And there I saw the secrets of the thunder, and how when it resoundeth above in the heaven, the sound thereof is heard, and he caused me to see the judgments executed on the earth, whether they be for well-being and blessing, or for a curse according to the word of the Lord of Spirits.

Verse 3. And after that all the secrets of the lights and lightnings were shown to me, and they lighten for blessing and for satisfying.

CHAPTER 60

Verse 1. In the year five hundred, in the seventh month, on the fourteenth day of the month in the life of Enoch. In that parable I saw how a mighty quaking made the heaven of heavens to quake, and the host of the Most High, and the angels, a thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, were disquieted with a great disquiet.

Verse 2. And the Head of Days sat on the throne of His glory, and the angels and the righteous stood around Him.

Verse 3. And a great trembling seized me, and fear took hold of me, and my loins gave way, and dissolved were my reins, and I fell upon my face.

Verse 4. And Michael sent another angel from among the holy ones and he raised me up, and when he had raised me up my spirit returned; for I had not been able to endure the look of this host, and the commotion and the quaking of the heaven.

Verse 5. And Michael said unto me: Why art thou disquieted with such a vision? Until this day lasted the day of His mercy; and He hath been merciful and long-suffering towards those who dwell on the earth.

Verse 6. And when the day, and the power, and the punishment, and the judgment come, which the Lord of Spirits hath prepared for those who worship not the righteous law, and for those who deny the righteous judgment, and for those who take His name in vain — that day is prepared, for the elect a covenant, but for sinners a visitation.

Verse 7. And on that day were two monsters parted, a female monster named Leviathan, to dwell in the abysses of the ocean over the fountains of the waters.

Verse 8. But the male is named Behemoth, who occupied with his breast a waste wilderness named Duidain, on the east of the garden where the elect and righteous dwell, where my grandfather was taken up, the seventh from Adam, the first man whom the Lord of Spirits created.

Verse 9. And I besought the other angel that he should show me the might of those monsters, how they were parted on one day and cast, the one into the abysses of the sea, and the other unto the dry land of the wilderness.

Verse 10. And he said to me: Thou son of man, herein thou dost seek to know what is hidden.

Verse 11. And the other angel who went with me and showed me what was hidden told me what is first and last in the heaven in the height, and beneath the earth in the depth, and at the ends of the heaven and on the foundation of the heaven.

Verse 12. And the chambers of the winds, and how the winds are divided, and how they are weighed, and how the portals of the winds are reckoned, each according to the power of the wind, and the power of the lights of the moon, and according to the power that is fitting; and the divisions of the stars according to their names, and how all the divisions are divided.

Verse 13. And the thunders according to the places where they fall, and all the divisions that are made among the lightnings that it may lighten, and their host that they may at once obey.

Verse 14. For the thunder has places of rest which are assigned to it while it is waiting for its peal; and the thunder and lightning are inseparable, and although not one and undivided, they both go together through the spirit and separate not.

Verse 15. For when the lightning lightens, the thunder uttereth its voice, and the spirit enforceth a pause during the peal, and divideth equally between them; for the treasury of their peals is like the sand, and each one of them as it peals is held in with a bridle, and turned back by the power of the spirit, and pushed forward according to the many quarters of the earth.

Verse 16. And the spirit of the sea is masculine and strong, and according to the might of his strength he draweth it back with a rein, and in like manner it is driven forward and disperseth amid all the mountains of the earth.

Verse 17. And the spirit of the hoar-frost is his own angel, and the spirit of the hail is a good angel.

Verse 18. And the spirit of the snow has forsaken his chambers on account of his strength — there is a special spirit therein, and that which ascendeth from it is like smoke, and its name is frost.

Verse 19. And the spirit of the mist is not united with them in their chambers, but it hath a special chamber; for its course is glorious both in light and in darkness, and in winter and in summer, and in its chamber is an angel.

Verse 20. And the spirit of the dew hath its dwelling at the ends of the heaven, and is connected with the chambers of the rain, and its course is in winter and summer; and the clouds and the mist are associated, and the one giveth to the other.

Verse 21. And when the spirit of the rain goes forth from its chamber, the angels come and open the chamber and lead it out, and when it is diffused over the whole earth it unites with the water on the earth.

Verse 22. For the waters are for those who dwell on the earth; for they are nourishment for the earth from the Most High who is in heaven; therefore there is a measure for the rain, and the angels take charge of it.

Verse 23. And these things I saw towards the Garden of the Righteous.

Verse 24. And the angel of peace who was with me said unto me: These two monsters, prepared conformably to the greatness of God, shall feed.

This concludes Part Five of our reading of the Book of Enoch. In our next episode, we shall continue with Chapter Sixty-One and the Third Parable, wherein the Elect One takes His seat upon the throne of glory.
