PURITAN GOLD -- The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 13
Our Birth and Upbringing


The Mystery of Providence. By John Flavel.

Chapter 2. Our Birth and Upbringing.

Chapter 2: Our Birth and Upbringing
Having proved that the affairs of the saints in this world are certainly
conducted by the wisdom and care of a special Providence, my next
work is to show you in what affairs and concerns of theirs the
Providence of God more especially appears, or what are the most
remarkable performances of Providence for them in this world.
And here I am not led directly by my text to speak of the most
internal and spiritual performances of Providence immediately
related to the souls of His people, though they all relate to their souls
mediately and eventually, but of the more visible and external
performances of Providence for them. It is not to be supposed that I
should touch all these – they are more than the sands – but what I
aim at is to discourse to you on some more special and more
observable performances of Providence for you.
To start with, let us consider how well Providence has performed the
first work that ever it did for us: in our formation and protection in
the womb. Certainly this is a very glorious and admirable
performance; it is that which the Psalmist admires: ‘My substance
was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth’ (139. 15). The womb is so
called for this reason, that as skilful artists, when they have some
choice piece in hand, perfect it in private, and then bring it into the

light for all to gaze at; so it was here. Two things are admirable in
this performance of Providence for us.
First, the rare structure and excellent composition of the body. ‘I am
wonderfully made’; that word ruchampti is very full. The vulgate
renders it, ‘painted as with a needle,’ i.e., richly embroidered with
nerves and veins. O, the skilful workmanship that is in that one part,
the eye! How has it forced some to acknowledge a God upon the
examination of it! Providence, when it went about this work, had its
model or pattern before it, according to which it moulded every part,
‘In thy book all my members were written’ (verse 16). Have you an
integral perfection and fulness of members? It is because He wrote
them all in His book, or painted your body according to that exact
model which He drew of you in His own gracious purpose before you
had a being. Had an eye, an ear, a hand, a foot been wanting in the
plan, you had now been sadly aware of the defect. This world had
been but a dungeon to you without those windows, and you had
lived, as many do, an object of pity to others. If you have low
thoughts of this mercy, ask the blind, the deaf, the lame and the
dumb, the value and worth of those mercies, and they will tell you.
There is a world of cost bestowed upon your very body. You might
have been cast into another mould, and created a worm or a toad. I
remember Luther tells us of two cardinals riding in great pomp to the
Council of Constance, and by the way they heard a man in the fields
bitterly weeping and wailing. When they came to him they found him
intently viewing an ugly toad; and asking him why he wept so
bitterly, he told them his heart was melted with this consideration,
that God had not made him such a loathsome and deformed
creature. ‘This is what I love to weep at,’ said he; whereupon one of
them cries out: well said the father, ‘The unlearned will rise and take
heaven, and we with all our learning shall be cast into hell.’ No part
of the common lump was so figured and polished as man is. Galen

gave Epicurus a hundred years to imagine a more commodious
station, configuration or composition of any one member of a human
body. And if all the angels had studied to this day, they could not
have cast the body of man into a better mould.
And yet all this is but the enamelling of the case, or polishing the
casket in which the rare jewel lies. Providence has not only built the
house, but brought the inhabitant (I mean the soul) into the
possession of it. A glorious piece it is, that bears the very image of
God upon it, being all in all, and all in every part. How noble are its
faculties and affections! How nimble, various and indefatigable are
its motions! How comprehensive is its capacity! It is a companion for
angels, nay, capable of espousal to Christ and eternal communion
with God. It is the wonder of earth, and the envy of hell.
Suppose now (and why should you not suppose what you so
frequently behold in the world?) that Providence had so permitted
and ordered it, that your soul had entered into your body with one or
two of its faculties wounded and defective. Suppose its
understanding had been cracked; what a miserable life you would
have lived in this world, being capable of neither service nor comfort.
And truly, when I have considered those works of Providence, in
bringing into the world in all countries and ages some such
spectacles of pity; some deprived of the use of reason and differing
from beasts in little more than shape and figure; and others, though
sound in their understandings, yet deformed or defective in their
bodies, monstrous, mis-shapen and loathsome creatures; I can
resolve the design of this Providence into nothing else but a
demonstration of His sovereign power; unless they are designed as
foils to set off the beauty of other rare and exquisite pieces, and
intended to stand before your eyes and monitors of God’s mercy to

you, that your hearts, as often as you behold them, might be melted
into thankfulness for distinguishing favour to you.
Look then, but not proudly, upon your outside and inside. See and
admire what Providence has done for you, and how well it has
performed the first service that ever it did for you in this world. And
yet, this was not all it did for you. Before you saw this world, it
preserved you, as well as formed you in the womb, else you had been
as those embryos Job speaks of ‘which never saw light’ (3. 16).
Abortives go for nothing in the world, and there are multitudes of
them. Some never had a reasonable soul breathed into them, but
only the rudiments and rough draft of a body; these come not into
the account of men, but perish as the beast does. Others die in, or
shortly after they come out of the womb, and though their life was
but a moment, yet that moment entails an eternity upon them. Had
this been your case, as it is the case of millions, then, supposing your
salvation, yet you had been utterly unserviceable to God in the world;
none had been the better for you, nor you the better for any in the
world. You had been utterly incapable of all that good which
throughout your life you have either done to others or received from
others.
And if we consider the nature of that obscure life we lived in the
womb, how small an accident, had it been permitted by Providence,
could have extinguished our life, like a bird in the shell? We cannot
therefore but admire the tender care of Providence over us, and say
with the Psalmist: ‘Thou hast covered me in my mother’s womb’
(139. 13): and not only so, ‘But thou art he that took me out of the
womb’ (22. 9). He preserved you there to the fulness of time and,
when that time was come, brought you safely through manifold
hazards into that place in the world which He from eternity prepared
for you.

Another great performance of Providence for the people of God
respects the place and time of their birth. And truly, this is no small
concern to every one of us, but of vast consequence, either to our
good or evil, though it is little considered by most men. I am
persuaded the thoughts of few Christians penetrate deep enough into
this Providence, but slide too slightly and superficially over an abyss
of much mercy, rich and manifold mercy wrapped up in this gracious
performance of Providence for them.
Ah friends! can you think it an indifferent thing into what part of the
world the womb of nature has cast you out? Does nothing depend
upon what spot of the creation, or in what age of the world, your lot
has fallen? It may be you have not seriously thought about this
matter. And because this point is so seldom touched, I will therefore
dive a little more particularly and distinctly into it, and endeavour to
warm your affections with a representation of the many and rich
benefits you owe to this one performance of Providence for you.
We will consider it under a double respect or relation, as it respects
your present comfort in this world, and as it relates to your eternal
happiness in the world to come.
This performance of Providence for you very much concerns your
present comfort in this world. All the rooms in this great house are
not alike pleasant and commodious for the inhabitants of it. You read
of ‘the dark places of the earth,’ which ‘are full of the habitations of
cruelty’ (Ps. 74. 20); and many such dismal places are found in the
habitable earth. What a vast tract of the world lies as a waste
wilderness!
Suppose your mothers had brought you forth in America, among the
savage Indians, who herd together as brute beasts, are scorched with
heat, and starved with cold, being naked, destitute and defenceless.

How poor, miserable, and unprovided with earthly comfort and
accommodations are many millions of the inhabitants of this world!
What mercies do you enjoy in respect of the amenity, fertility,
temperature, and civility of the place of your habitation? What is it
but a garden enclosed out of a wilderness? I may without partiality or
vanity say, God has, even upon temporal accounts, provided you with
one of the healthiest, pleasantest, and in all respects the best
furnished room in all the great house of this world. Hear what our
own chronicler says of it: ‘It is the fortunate island, the paradise of
pleasure, the garden of God; whose valleys are like Eden, whose hills
are as Lebanon, whose springs are as Pisgah, whose rivers are as
Jordan, whose wall is the ocean, and whose defence is the Lord
Jehovah.’
You are here provided with necessary and comfortable
accommodations for your bodies, that a great part of the world are
unacquainted with. It is not with the poorest among us, as it is said
to be with the poor Russians, whose poverty pinches and bites with
such sharp teeth that their poor cry at the doors: ‘Give me and cut
me! give me and kill me!’
Do not say that the barbarous nations excel you in that they possess
the mines of silver and gold, which it may be you think enough to
make up for all other inconveniences of life. Alas, poor creatures!
better had it been for them if their country had brought forth briars
and thorns, instead of gold, silver, and precious stones; for this has
been the occasion of ruining all their other comforts in this world,
this has invited their cruel avaricious enemies among them, under
whose servitude they groan and die without mercy, and thousands of
them have chosen death rather than life on the terms they enjoyed it.
And why might not your lot have fallen there as well as where it is?
Are not they made of the same clay and endowed with as good a

nature as yourselves? O what a distinction has divine mercy made,
where nature made none! Consider, ungrateful man, you might have
fallen into some of those regions where a tainted air frequently cloys
the jaws of death, where the inhabitants differ very little from the
beasts in the manner of their living; but God has provided for you,
and given the poorest among us far better accommodations of life
than the greatest among them are ordinarily provided with. O what
Providence has done for you!
But all that I have said is very inconsiderable in comparison with the
spiritual mercies and advantages you here enjoy for your souls. O
this is such an advantageous cast of Providence for you as obliges you
to a thankful acknowledgment of it to all eternity. For let us here
make but a few suppositions in the case before us, and the glory of
Providence will shine like a sunbeam full in your faces.
Suppose it had been your lot to have fallen in any of those vast
continents possessed by pagans and heathens at this day, who bow
down to the stock of a tree, and worship the host of heaven. This is
the case of millions, and millions of millions, for pagan idolaters, as
that searching scholar, Brerewood, informs us, do not only fill the
circumference of nine hundred miles in Europe, but almost the one
half of Africa, more than the half of Asia, and almost the whole of
America.
O how deplorable had your case been if a pagan idolatress had
brought you forth, and idolatry had been sucked in with your
mother’s milk! Then, in all probability, you had been at this day
worshipping devils, and racing at full speed in the direct road to
damnation, for these are the people of God’s wrath: ‘Pour out thy
fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the families that
call not upon thy name’ (Jer. 10. 25). How dreadful is that

imprecation against them, which takes hold of them and all that is
theirs! ‘Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of idols’ (Ps. 97. 7).
Or suppose your lot had fallen among Mahometans, who next to
pagans spread over the greatest tract of the earth, for though Arabia
bred that unclean bird, yet that cage could not long contain him; for
not only the Arabians, but the Persians, Turks, and Tartans, do all
bow down their backs under that grand impostor. This poison has
dispersed itself through the veins of Asia, over a great part of Africa,
even the circumference of seven thousand miles, and does not stop
there, but has tainted a considerable part of Europe also.
Had your lot fallen here, O what unhappy men and women had you
been, notwithstanding the natural amenity and pleasantness of your
native soil! You had then adored a grand imposter, and died in a
fool’s paradise. Instead of God’s living oracles, you had been, as they
now are, deceived to your eternal ruin with such fond, mad and wild
dreams, as whoso considers would think the authors had more need
of manacles and fetters than arguments or sober answers.
Or if neither of these had been your lot, suppose you had been
emptied by the womb of nature into this little spot of the earth which
is Christianized by profession, but nevertheless for the most part
overrun by popish idolatry and anti-christian delusions. What
unhappy men and women had you been had you sucked a Popish
breast! for his people are to be the subjects of the vials of God’s wrath
to be poured out successively upon them (Rev. 16), and the
Scriptures in round and plain language tell us what their fate must
be: ‘And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed

not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness’ (2 Thess. 2. 11,
12).
Nay, you might have fallen into the same land in which your
habitation now is, and yet have had no advantage by it as to
salvation, if He that chose the bounds of your habitation had not also
graciously ‘determined the times’ for you (Acts 17. 26).
Suppose your lot had fallen where it is, during the pagan state of
England, where for many hundred years were gross and vile
idolators. Thick darkness overspread the people of this island and, as
in other countries, the devil was worshipped, and his lying oracles
zealously believed.
The shacking of the top of Jupiter’s oak in Dodona, the cauldron
smitten with the rod in the hand of Jupiter’s image, the laurel and
fountain in Daphne: these were the ordinances on which the poor,
deluded wretches waited. So in this nation they worshipped idols
also. The sun and moon were adored for gods, together with many
abominable idols which our ancestors worshipped and whose
memorials are not to this day quite obliterated among us.
Or suppose our lot had fallen in those later miserable days in which
Queen Mary sent so many hundreds to heaven in a fiery chariot,
when the poor Protestants skulked up and down in holes and woods
to preserve themselves from popish inquisitors, who, like bloodhounds, hunted up and down through all the cities, towns and
villages of the nation, to seek out the poor sheep of Christ for a prey.
But such has been the special care of Providence towards us, that our
turn to be brought upon the stage of this world was graciously
reserved for better days, so that if we had had our own option, we
could not have chosen for ourselves as Providence has done. We are

not only furnished with the best room in this great house, but before
we were put into it, it was swept with the broom of national
Reformation from idolatry, yea, and washed by the blood of martyrs
from popish filthiness, and adorned with Gospel lights, shining in as
great lustre in our days, as ever they did since the apostles’ days. You
might have been born in England for many ages, and not have found
a Christian in it; yea, and since Christianity was here owned, and not
have met a Protestant in it. O what an obligation has Providence laid
you under, by such a merciful performance as this for you!
If you say: ‘All this indeed is true, but what is this to eternal
salvation? Do not multitudes that enjoy these privileges eternally
perish notwithstanding them; yea, and perish with an aggravation of
sin and misery beyond other sinners?’
True, they do so, and it is very sad that it should be so; but yet we
cannot deny this to be a very choice and singular mercy, to be born in
such a land, and at such a time. For let us consider what helps for
salvation men here enjoy, beyond what they could enjoy had their lot
fallen according to the forementioned suppositions.
Here we enjoy the ordinary means of salvation, which elsewhere men
are denied and cut off from. So that if any among the heathen are
saved and brought to Christ, it must be in some miraculous or
extraordinary way, for ‘how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard, and how shall they hear without a preacher?’ (Rom.
10. 14). Alas! were there a desire awakened in any of their hearts
after a Gospel-discovery of salvation, which ordinarily is not nor can
be rationally supposed, yet, poor creatures, they might travel from
sea to sea to hear the Word, and not find it; whereas you can hardly
miss the opportunities of hearing the Gospel. Sermons meet you
frequently, so that you can scarcely shun or avoid the ordinances and

instruments of your salvation. And is this nothing? Christ even forces
Himself upon us.
Here, in this age of the world, the common prejudices against
Christianity are removed by the advantage it has of a public
profession among the people, and protection by the laws of the
country. Whereas were your habitation among Jews, Mahometans,
or heathen idolaters, you would find Christ and Christianity the
common odium of the country, every one defying and deriding both
name and thing, and such yourselves likely had been, if your birth
and education had been among them. For you may observe that
whatever is traditionally delivered down from father to son, every
one is fond of and zealous in its defence. The Jews, heathens and
Mahometans are at this day so tenacious of their errors that, with
spitting, hissing, and clapping of hands, and all other signs of
indignation and abhorrence, they chase away all others from among
them.
Is it not then a special mercy to you to be cast into such a country
and age, where, as a learned divine observes, the true religion has the
same advantages over every false one, as in other countries they have
over it? Here you have the presence of precious means, and the
absence of soul-destroying prejudices—two signal mercies.
Here, in this age of the world, Christianity confronts you as soon as
you are capable of any sense or impressions of religion upon you;
and so, by an happy anticipation, blocks up the passages by which a
false religion would else certainly enter. Here you suck in the first
notions and principles of Christianity, even with the mother’s milk,
and certainly such a prepossession is a choice advantage. Quo semel
est imbuta, recens servabit odorem testa diu. (For many a day the
pot will keep the scent of that which first it held, when freshly

baked.) ‘Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old,
he will not depart from it’ (Prov. 22. 6).
Here you have, or may have, the help and assistance of Christians to
direct your way, resolve your doubts, support your burdens and help
you through those difficulties that attend the new birth. Alas! if a
poor soul had any beginnings or faint workings and stirrings after
Christ and true religion in many other countries, the hand of every
man would presently be against him, and none would be found to
relieve, assist or encourage, as you may see in that example of
Galeacius. The nearest relations would, in that case, prove the
greatest enemies, the country would quickly hoot at him as a
monster and cry: ‘Away with the heretic to the prison or stake.’
Whether these eventually prove blessings to your souls or not,
certain I am that in themselves they are singular mercies, and helps
to salvation that are denied to millions besides you. So that if Plato
when he was near his death could bless God for three things, viz.,
that he was a man and not a beast, that he was born in Greece, and
that he was brought up in the time of Socrates, much more cause
have you to admire Providence, that you are men and not beasts; that
you were born in England, and that you are brought up in Gospel
days. This is a land the Lord has espied for you, as the expression is
(Ezek. 20. 6), and concerning it you have abundant cause to say, as
in another case the Psalmist does: ‘The lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage’ (16. 6).
Another performance of Providence which must be carefully noticed
and weighed is the designation of the stock and family out of which
we should spring and rise. And truly this is of special consideration,
both as to our temporal and eternal good. For whether the famlies in
which we grew up were great or small in Israel, whether our parents

were of the higher or lower class and rank among men, yet if they
were such as feared God and wrought righteousness, if they took any
care to educate you religiously and train you up ‘in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord,’ you are bound to reckon it among your chief
mercies, that you sprang from the loins of such parents, for from this
spring a double stream of mercy rises to you.
First, temporal and external mercies to your outward man. You
cannot but know that as godliness entails a blessing, so wickedness
and unrighteousness a curse upon posterity. An instance of the
former you have in Genesis 17. 18-20; on the contrary you have the
threatening, Zechariah 5. 4, and both together in this passage: ‘The
curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked; but he blesseth the
habitation of the just’ (Prov. 3. 33). True it is that both these imply
the children’s treading in the steps of their parents (Ezek. 18), but
how frequently is it seen that wicked men breed their children vainly
and wickedly; so that as it is said of Abijam: ‘and he walked in all the
sins of his father, which he had done before him’ (1 Kings 15. 3); and
so the curse is entailed from generation to generation. To escape this
curse is a choice providence.
But especially take notice what a stream of spiritual blessings and
mercies flows from this Providence to the inner man. O, it is no
common mercy to descend from pious parents. Some of us do not
only owe our natural life to them, as instruments of our beings, but
our spiritual and eternal life also. It was no small mercy to Timothy
to be descended from such progenitors (2 Tim. 1. 5), nor to
Augustine that he had such a mother as Monica, who planted in his
mind the precepts of life with her words, watered them with her
tears, and nourished them with her example. We will a little more
particularly inspect this mercy, and in so doing we shall find
manifold mercies contained in it.

What a mercy was it to us to have parents that prayed for us before
they had us, as well as in our infancy, when we could not pray for
ourselves? Thus did Abraham (Gen. 15. 2) and Hannah (1 Sam. 1. 10,
11), and probably some here are the fruits and returns of their
parents’ prayers. This was that holy course they continued all their
days for you, carrying all your concerns, especially your eternal ones,
before the Lord with their own; and pouring out their souls to God so
affectionately for you, when their eye-strings and heart-strings were
breaking. O put a value upon such mercies, for they are precious. It is
a greater mercy to descend from praying parents than from the loins
of nobles. See Job’s pious practice (1. 5).
What a special mercy was it to us to have the excrescences of
corruption nipped in the bud by their pious and careful discipline!
We now understand what a critical and dangerous season youth is,
the wonderful proclivity of that age to every thing that is evil. Why
else are they called youthful lusts (2 Tim. 2. 22)? When David asks:
‘Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?’ it is plainly enough
implied in the very question that the way he takes lies through the
pollutions of the world in his youth (Ps. 119. 9). When you find a
David praying that God would ‘not remember the sins of my youth’
(Ps. 25. 7), and a Job bitterly complaining that God ‘made me to
possess the iniquities of my youth’ (13. 26), surely you cannot but
reflect with a very thankful heart upon those happy means by which
the corruption of your nature was happily prevented, or restrained in
your youth.
And how great a mercy was it that we had parents who carefully
instilled the good knowledge of God into our souls in our tender
years? How diligent was Abraham in this duty (Gen. 18. 19), and
David (1 Chron. 28. 9)! We have some of us had parents who might
say to us, as the apostle: ‘My little children of whom I travail in birth

again until Christ be formed in you’ (Gal. 4. 19). As they longed for us
before they had us and rejoiced in us when they had us, so they could
not endure to think that when they could have us no more, the devil
should. As they thought no pains, care or cost too much for our
bodies, to feed them, clothe and heal them; so did they think no
prayers, counsels, or tears, too much for our souls, that they might be
saved. They knew a parting time would come between them and us,
and did strive to make it as easy and comfortable to them as they
could, by leaving us in Christ and within the blessed bond of His
covenant.
They were not glad that we had health and indifferent whether we
had grace. They felt the miseries of our souls as much as of our
bodies; and nothing was more desirable to them than that they might
say in the great day: ‘Lord, here am I and the children which thou
hast given me.’
And was it not a special favour to us to have parents that went before
us as patterns of holiness, and beat the path to heaven for us by their
examples? They could say to us: ‘those things ye have heard and seen
in me, do’ (Phil. 4. 9); and ‘be ye followers of me, as also I am of
Christ’ (1 Cor. 11. 1). The parents’ life is the child’s copy. O. it is no
common mercy to have a fair copy set before us, especially in the
moulding age; we saw what they did, as well as heard what they said.
It was Abraham’s commendation, ‘that he commanded his children,
and his household after him, to keep the way of the Lord.’ And such
mercies some of us have had also.
Ah, my friends, let me beg you that you will take special notice of this
Providence which so graciously wrought for you; and that your
hearts may be more thoroughly warmed in the sense of it, compare
your condition with others, and seriously consider the following.

How many children there are among us that are drawn headlong to
hell by their cruel and ungodly parents, who teach them to curse and
swear as soon as they can speak! Many families there are in which
little other language is heard but what is the dialect of hell. These,
like the old logs and small spray, are preparing for the fire of hell,
where they must burn together. Of such children that Scripture will
one day be verified, except they repent: ‘He shall go to the
generatioin of his fathers; they shall never see light’ (Ps. 49. 19).
And how many families there are, though not so profane, who yet
breed up their children vainly and sensually, and take no care what
becomes of their souls, if they can but provide for their bodies (Job
21. 11)! If they can but teach them to carry their bodies, no matter if
the devil actuate their souls. If they can but leave them lands or
monies, they think they have very fully discharged their duties. O,
what will the language be with which such parents and children shall
greet each other at the judgment-seat, and in hell for ever!
And how many there are who are more sober and yet hate the least
appearances of godliness in their children! Instead of cherishing,
they do all that they can to break bruised reeds and quench smoking
flax, to stifle and strangle the first appearances and offers they make
towards Christ! They would rather accompany them to their graves
than to Christ, doing all that in them lies, Herod-like, to kill Christ in
the cradle! Ah, sirs, you little know what a mercy you enjoy or have
enjoyed in godly parents and what a good lot Providence cast for you
in this affair of your bodies and souls.
If any shall say this was not their case, they had little help
heavenward from their parents, so such I reply as follows.
If you had little furtherance, yet own it as a special providence that
you had no hindrance; or, if you had opposition, yet admire the grace

of God in plucking you out by a wonderful distinguishing hand of
mercy from among them and keeping alive the languishing sparks of
grace amidst the floods of opposition. And learn from hence, if God
give you a posterity of your own, to be so much the more strict and
careful of family duties, by how much you have acutely felt the want
of it in yourselves.
But seeing such a train of blessings, both as to this life and that to
come, follow upon an holy education of children, I will not dismiss
the point till I have discharged my duty in exhorting parents and
children to their duties.
And first for you that are parents, or to whom the education of
children is committed, I beseach you mind the duty which lies on
you. That I may effectually press it, consider how near the relation is
between you and your children, and therefore how much you are
concerned in their happiness or misery. Consider but the Scripture
account of the dearness of such relation, expressed by longings for
them (Gen. 15. 2; 30. 1, 2), by our joy when we have them, as Christ
expresses it (John 16. 21), the high value set on them (Gen. 42. 38),
the sympathy with them in all their troubles (Mark 9. 22) and by our
sorrow at parting (Gen. 37. 35). Now shall all this be to no purpose?
For to what purpose do we desire them before we have them, rejoice
in them when we have them, value them so highly, sympathize with
them so tenderly, grieve for their death so excessively, if in the
meantime no care be taken what shall become of them to eternity?
Consider how God has charged you with their souls, as well as
bodies, and this appears by precepts directly laid upon you (Deut. 6.
6, 7; Eph. 6. 4) and by precepts laid on them to obey you (Eph. 6. 1),
which plainly implies your duty as well as expresses theirs.

What shall comfort you at the parting time, if they die through your
neglect in a Christless condition? O this is the cutting consideration:
My child is in hell, and I did nothing to prevent it! I helped him
there. Duty discharged is the only root of comfort in that day.
If you neglect to instruct them in the way of holiness, will the devil
neglect to instruct them in the way of wickedness? No, no, if you will
not teach them to pray, he will teach them to curse, swear and lie. If
ground be uncultivated, weeds will spring up.
If the season of their youth is neglected, how little probability is there
of any good fruit afterwards? Youth is the moulding age (Prov. 22. 6).
How few are converted in old age? A twig is brought to any form, but
grown limbs will not bend.
You are instrumental causes of all their spiritual misery, and that by
generation and imitation. They lie spiritually dead of the plague
which you brought home among them: ‘Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive [or warm] me’ (Ps. 51. 5).
There is none in the world so likely as you to be instruments of their
eternal good. You have peculiar advantages that no one else has;
such as the interest you have in their affections; your opportunities
to instil the knowledge of Christ into them, being daily with them
(Deut. 6. 7); your knowledge of their character. If therefore you
neglect, who shall help them?
Again, the consideration of the great day should move your bowels of
pity for them. O remember that text: ‘And I saw the dead small and
great stand before God’ (Rev. 20. 12). What a sad thing will it be, to
see your dear children at Christ’s left hand? O friends, do your
utmost to prevent this misery. ‘Knowing the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men.’

And you, children, especially you that sprang from religious parents,
I beseech you, obey their counsels, and tread in the steps of their
pious examples. To press this, I offer the following considerations:
Your disobedience to them is a resisting of God’s authority:
‘Children, obey your parents in the Lord’ (Eph. 6. 1). There is the
command; your rebellion therefore runs higher than you think. It is
not man, but God that you disobey; and for your disobedience God
will punish you. It may be their tenderness will not suffer them, or
you are grown beyond their correction. All they can do is to complain
to God, and if so, He will handle you more severely than they could
do.
Your sin is greater than the sin of young heathens and infidels; and
so will your account be also. O better, if a wicked child, that you had
been the offspring of savage Indians, nay, of beasts, than of such
parents. So many counsels disobeyed, hopes and prayers frustrated,
will turn to sad aggravations.
It is usual with God to retaliate men’s disobedience to their parents
in kind; commonly our own children shall pay us home for it. I have
read in a grave author of a wicked wretch that dragged his father
along the house. The father begged his mot to drag him beyond such
a place, for, said he, I dragged my father no further. Oh, the sad, but
just retributions of God!
And for you in whose hearts grace has been planted by the blessings
of education, I beseech you to admire God’s goodness to you in this
providence. O what a happy lot has God cast for you! How few
children are partakers of your mercies!
See that you honour such parents; the tie is double upon you so to
do. Be you the joy of their hearts, and comfort of their lives, if they

are alive. If not, yet still remember the mercy while you live, and
tread in their pious path, that you and they may both rejoice together
in the great day, and bless God for each other to all eternity.
