PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 10
The Text Explained: Keep Thy Heart with All Diligence

---

Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 2. The Text Explained: Keep Thy Heart with All Diligence.

5. It includes a constant holy jealousy over our own hearts;
quicksighted self-jealousy is an excellent preservative from sin; he
that will keep his heart must have the eyes of his soul awake and
open upon all the disorderly and tumultuous stirrings of his
affections; if the affections break loose, and the passions be stirred,
the soul must discover and suppress them before they get to an
height: O my soul, dost thou well in this? My tumultuous thoughts
and passions, where is your commission?
State viri, quœ causa viœ? quive estis in armis. Vir.
Happy is the man that thus feareth always, Prov. 28:14. By this fear
of the Lord it is that men depart from evil, shake off security, and
preserve themselves from iniquity; he that will keep his heart, must
feed with fear, rejoice with fear, and pass the whole time of his
sojourning here in fear, and all little enough to keep the heart from
sin.
6. And, lastly, To add no more, it includes the realizing of God's
presence with us, and setting the Lord always before us: This the
people of God have found a singular mean to keep their hearts
upright, and awe them from sin; when the eye of our faith is fixed
upon the eye of God's omniscience, we dare not let out our thoughts
and affections to vanity: Holy Job durst not suffer his heart to yield
to an impure, vain thought; and what was it that moved him to so
great a circumspection? Why, he tells you, Job 31:4. "Doth he not see
my ways, and count all my steps? Walk before me (saith God to
Abraham) and be thou perfect," Gen. 17:1. Even as parents use to set
their children in the congregation before them, knowing that else
they will be toying and playing; so would the heart of the best man
too, were it not for the eye of God.
In these and such like particulars, do gracious souls express the care
they have of their hearts; they are as careful to prevent the breaking
loose of their corruptions in times of temptation, as seamen are to
bind fast the guns, that they break not loose in a storm; as careful to

preserve the sweetness and comfort they have got from God in any
duty, as one that comes out of an hot bath, or great sweat, is of taking
cold, by going forth into the chill air. This is the work, and of all
works in religion it is the most difficult, constant, and important
work.
1. It is the hardest work; heart-work is hard work indeed. To shuffle
over religious duties with a loose and heedless spirit, will cost no
great pains; but to set thyself before the Lord, and tie up thy loose
and vain thoughts to a constant and serious attendance upon him:
this will cost thee something: To attain a facility and dexterity of
language in prayer, and put thy meaning into apt and decent
expressions, is easy; but to get thy heart broken for sin whilst thou
art confessing it; melted with free grace whilst thou art blessing God
for it; to be really ashamed and humbled through the apprehensions
of God's infinite holiness, and to keep thy heart in this frame, not
only in, but after duty, will surely cost thee some groans and
travailing pain of soul: To repress the outward acts of sin, and
compose the external part of thy life in a laudable and comely
manner, is no great matter; even carnal persons by the force of
common principles can do this; but to kill the root of corruption
within, to set and keep up an holy government over thy thoughts, to
have all things lie straight and orderly in the heart, this is not easy.
2. It is a constant work. The keeping of the heart is such a work as is
never done till life be done: this labour and our life end together: It is
with a Christian in this business, as it is with seamen that have
sprung a leak at sea, if they tug not constantly at the pump, the water
increases upon them, and will quickly sink them. It is in vain for
them to say the work is hard, and we are weary; there is no time or
condition in the life of a Christian, which will suffer an intermission
of this work. It is in the keeping watch over our hearts, as it was in
the keeping up of Moses' hand, whilst Israel and Amalek were
fighting below, Exod. 17:12. No sooner do Moses' hands grow heavy
and sink down, but Amalek prevails. You know it cost David and

Peter many a sad day and night for intermitting the watch over their
own hearts but a few minutes.
3. It is the most important business of a Christian's life. Without this
we are but formalists in religion; all our professions, gifts, and duties
signify nothing: "My son, give me thine heart," Prov. 23:26. God is
pleased to call that a gift, which is indeed a debt; he will put this
honour upon the creature to receive it from him in the way of a gift;
but if this be not given him, he regards not whatever else you bring to
him: There is so much only of worth and value in what we do, as
there is of heart in it. Concerning the heart, God seems to say, as
Joseph of Benjamin, "If you bring not Benjamin with you, you shall
not see my face." Among the heathens, when the beast was cut up for
sacrifice, the first thing the priest looked upon was the heart, and if
that was unsound and naught, the sacrifice was rejected. God rejects
all duties (how glorious soever in other respects) offered him without
a heart. He that performs duty without a heart, viz. heedlessly, is no
more accepted with God than he that performs it with a double heart,
viz. hypocritically, Isa. 66:3. And thus I have briefly opened the
nature of the duty, what is imported in this phrase, "Keep thy heart."
2. Next I shall give you some rational account why Christians should
make this the great business of their lives to keep their hearts.
The importance and necessity of making this our great and main
business, will manifestly appear in that, 1. The honour of God; 2. The
sincerity of our profession; 3. The beauty of our conversation; 4. The
comfort of our souls; 5. The improvement of our graces; and, 6. Our
stability in the hour of temptation; all are wrapt up in, and
dependent on our sincerity and care in the management of this work.
1. The glory of God is much concerned therein; heart-evils are very
provoking evils to the Lord. The schools do well observe, that
outward sins are majoris infamœ, sins of great infamy; but heart-sins
are majoris reatus, sins of deeper guilt. How severely hath the great
God declared his wrath from heaven against heart-wickedness; the

great crime for which the old world stands indicted, Gen. 6:5, 6, 7. is
heart-wickedness, "God saw that every imagination (or fiction) of
their heart was only evil, and that continually;" for which he sent the
dreadfullest judgment that was ever executed since the world began:
"And the Lord said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the
face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping things and
the fowls of heaven, for it repenteth me that I have made man," ver.
7. We find not their murders, adulteries, blasphemies, (though they
were defiled with these) particularly alleged against them; but the
evils of their hearts: Yea, that which God was so provoked by, as to
give up his peculiar inheritance into the enemy's hand, was the evil of
their hearts, Jer. 4:14. "O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from
wickedness, that thou mayest be saved; how long shall vain thoughts
lodge within thee?" The wickedness and vanity of their thoughts God
took special notice of; and because of this the Chaldean must come
upon them as a lion from his thicket, ver. 7. and tear them to pieces.
For the very sin of thoughts it was that God threw down the fallen
angels from heaven, and keeps them still in everlasting chains to the
judgment of the great day; by which expression is not obscurely
intimated some extraordinary judgment to which they are reserved,
as prisoners that have most irons laid upon them, may be supposed
to be the greatest malefactors: and what was their sin? Why, only
spiritual wickedness! For they, having no bodily organs, could act
nothing externally against God. Yea, mere heart-evils are so
provoking, that for them he rejects with indignation all the duties
that some men perform unto him, Isa. 66:3. "He that killeth an ox is
as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, is as if he cut off a
dog's neck; he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine's
blood; he that burneth incense, as if he blessed an idol." In what
words could the abhorrence of a creature's actions be more fully
expressed by the holy God? Murder and idolatry are not more vile in
his account, than their sacrifices, though materially such as himself
appointed: And what made them so? The following words inform us,
"their soul delighteth in their abominations."

To conclude, such is the vileness of mere heart-sins, that the
scriptures sometimes intimate the difficulty of pardon for them. So
in the case of Simon Magus, Acts 8:21. his heart was not right, he had
vile thoughts of God, and the things of God; the apostle bids him
"repent and pray, if perhaps the thoughts of his heart might be
forgiven him." O then, never slight heart-evils; for by these God is
highly wronged and provoked; and for this reason let every Christian
make it his work to keep his heart with all diligence.
2. The sincerity of our profession much depends upon the care and
conscience we have in keeping our hearts; for it is most certain, that
a man is but an hypocrite in his profession, how curious soever he be
in the externals of religion, that is heedless and careless of the frame
of his heart: You have a pregnant instance of this in the case of Jehu,
2 Kings 10:31. "But Jehu took no heed to walk in the ways of the Lord
God of Israel with his heart." That context gives us an account count
of the great service performed by Jehu against the house of Ahab and
Baal, as also of a great temporal reward given him by God for that
service, even that his children to the fourth generation, should sit
upon the throne of Israel. And yet, in these words, Jehu is censured
for an hypocrite; though God approved and rewarded the work, yet
he abhorred and rejected the person that did it as hypocritical: And
wherein lay his hypocrisy? but in this, that he took no heed to walk in
the ways of the Lord with his heart, i.e. he did all insincerely, and for
self-ends; and though the work he did was materially good, yet he,
not purging his heart from those unworthy self-designs in doing it,
was an hypocrite: And Simon, of whom we spake before, though he
appeared such a person, that the apostle could not regularly refuse
him; yet his hypocrisy was quickly discovered: And what discovered
it but this, that though he professed and associated himself with the
saints, yet he was a stranger to the mortification of heart sins? "Thy
heart is not right with God," Acts 8:21. It is true there is a great
difference among Christians themselves, in their diligence and
dexterity about heart-work; some are more conversant and
successful in it than others are; but he that takes no heed to his heart,
that is not careful to order it aright before God, is but a hypocrite,

Ezek. 33:31, 32. "And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and
sit before thee (as my people) and they hear thy words, but they will
not do them; for with their mouths they shew much love, but their
heart goeth after their covetousness." Here were a company of formal
hypocrites, as is evident by that expression (as my people) like them
but not of them. And what made them so? Their outside was fair;
here were reverend postures, high professions, much seeming joy
and delight in ordinances, "Thou art to them as a lovely song:" yea,
but for all that they kept not their hearts with God in those duties,
their hearts were commanded by their lusts, they went after their
covetousness: had they kept their hearts with God, all had been well;
but not regarding which way their hearts went in duty, there lay the
score of their hypocrisy.
Objection. If any upright soul should hence infer, that I am an
hypocrite too, for many times my heart departs from God in duty; do
what I can, yet I cannot hold it close with God.
Solution. To this I answer, The very objection carries in it its own
solution. Thou sayest, do what I can, yet I cannot keep my heart with
God. Soul, if thou dost what thou canst, thou hast the blessing of an
upright, though God sees good to exercise thee under the affliction of
a discomposed heart. There remains still some wildness in the
thoughts and fancies of the best to humble them; but if you find a
care before to prevent them, and opposition against them when they
come, grief and sorrow afterwards; you will find enough to clear you
from reigning hypocrisy.
(1.) This fore-care is seen partly in laying up the word in thine heart
to prevent them, Psal. 119:11. "Thy word have I hid in mine heart,
that I might not sin against thee:" partly in our endeavours to engage
our hearts to God, Jer. 30:21. and partly in begging preventing grace
from God in our onsets upon duty, Psal. 119:36, 37. it is a good sign
where this care goes before a duty.

And, (2.) It is a sweet sign of uprightness to oppose them in their first
rise, Psal. 119:113. "I hate vain thoughts," Gal. 5:17. "The spirit
lusteth against the flesh."
And, (3.) Thy after-grief discovers thy upright heart. If, with
Hezekiah, thou art humbled for the evils of thy heart, thou hast no
reason, from those disorders, to question the integrity of it; but to
suffer sin to lodge quietly in the heart, to let thy heart habitually and
uncontrolledly wander from God, is a sad and dangerous symptom
indeed.
3. The beauty of our conversation arises from the heavenly frame and
holy order of our spirits; there is a spiritual lustre and beauty in the
conversation of saints: "The righteous is more excellent than his
neighbour," they shine as the lights of the world; but whatever lustre
and beauty is in their lives, comes from the excellency of their spirits;
as the candle within puts a lustre upon the Ian thorn in which it
shines. It is impossible that a disordered and neglected heart should
ever produce well-ordered conversation; and since (as the text
observes) the issues or streams of life flow out of the heart as their
fountain, it must needs follow, that such as the heart is, the life will
be: hence 1 Pet. 2:11, 12. "Abstain from fleshly lusts,—having your
conversation honest,"* or beautiful, as the Greek word imports. So
Isa. 55:7. "Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts." His way notes the course of his life, his thoughts the
frame of his heart; and therefore since the way and course of his life
flows from his thoughts, or the frame of his heart, both or neither
will be forsaken: the heart is the womb of all actions, these actions
are virtually and seminally contained in our thoughts, these thoughts
being once made up into affections, are quickly made up into suitable
actions and practices. If the heart be wicked, then, as Christ saith,
Mat. 15:19. "Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries," &c. Mark the order; first, wanton, or revengeful
thoughts, then unclean or murderous practices.

And if the heart be holy and spiritual, then, as David speaks, from
sweet experience, Psal. 45:1. "My heart is (inditing) a good matter, I
speak of things which (I have made), my tongue is as the pen of a
ready writer." Here is a life richly beautified with good works, some
ready made; "I will speak of the things which I have made;" others
upon the wheel making, my heart is inditing, but both proceeding
from the heavenly frame of his heart.
Put but the heart in frame, and the life will quickly discover that it is
so. I think it is not very difficult to discern, by the duties and
converses of Christians, what frames their spirits are under; take a
Christian in a good frame, and how serious, heavenly, and profitable,
will his converses and duties be! what a lovely companion is he
during the continuance of it! It would do any one's heart good to be
with him at such a time, Psal. 37:30, 31. "The mouth of the righteous
speaketh wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment, the law of his
God is in his heart."
When the heart is up with God, and full of God, how dexterously and
ingeniously will he wind in spiritual discourse, improving every
occasion and advantage to some heavenly purpose? Few words run
then at the waste spout.
And what else can be the reason why the discourses and duties of
many Christians, are become so frothy and unprofitable, their
communion both with God, and one another, becomes as a dry stalk,
but because their hearts are neglected? Surely this must be the
reason of it, and verily it is an evil greatly to be bewailed; for want of
this Christian-fellowship, it is become a sapless thing; so the
attracting beauty that was wont to shine from the conversations of
the saints upon the faces and consciences of the world, (which, if it
did not allure, and bring them in love with the ways of God, yet at the
least left a testimony in their consciences of the excellency of those
men and their ways) this is in a great measure lost, to the
unspeakable detriment of religion.

Time was, when Christians did carry it at such a rate, that the world
stood at a gaze at them, as the word ξενιζονται, 1 Pet. 4:4. imports.
Their life and language were of a different strain from others, their
tongues discovered them to be Galileans, wherever they came; but
now, since vain speculations and fruitless controversies have so
much obtained, and heart-work, practical godliness, so much
neglected among professors, the case is sadly altered; their discourse
is become like other men's: if they come among you now, they may
(to allude to that, Acts 2:6) "hear every man speak in his own
language." And truly I have little hope to see this evil redressed, and
the credit of religion again repaired, till Christians fall to their old
work; till they ply heart-work closer; when the salt of heavenlymindedness is cast into the spring, the streams will run clearer, and
sweeter.
4. The comfort of our souls doth much depend upon the keeping of
our hearts; for he that is negligent in attending his own heart, is
(ordinarily) a great stranger to assurance, and the sweet comforts
flowing from it.
Indeed, if the Antinomian doctrine were true, which teaches you to
reject all marks and signs for the trial of your conditions, telling you
it is only the Spirit that immediately assures you, by witnessing your
adoption directly without them, then you might be careless of your
hearts, yea, strangers to them, and yet no strangers to comfort: but
since both scripture and experience do confute this dotage, I hope
you will never look for comfort in that unscriptural way. I deny not
but it is the work and office of the Spirit, to assure you, and yet do
confidently affirm, that if ever you attain assurance, in the ordinary
way wherein God dispenses it, you must take pains with your own
hearts; you may expect your comforts upon easier terms, but I am
mistaken if ever you enjoy them upon any other; "Give all diligence,
prove yourselves;" this is the scripture way. I remember Mr. Roberts,
in his Treatise of the covenant, tells us, that he knew a Christian, who
in the infancy of his Christianity, so vehemently panted after the
infallible assurance of God's love, that for a long time together he

earnestly desired some voice from heaven, yea, sometimes walking in
the solitary fields, earnestly desired some miraculous voice from the
trees and stones there; this, after many desires and longings, was
denied him; but in time a better was afforded in the ordinary way of
searching the word, and his own heart. An instance of the like nature
the learned Gerson gives us of one that was driven by temptation
upon the very borders of desperation; at last being sweetly settled,
and assured, one asked him how he attained it? He answered, Non ex
nova aliqua revelatione, &c. Not by any extraordinary revelation, but
by subjecting his understanding to the scriptures, and comparing his
own heart with them. The Spirit, indeed, assures by witnessing our
adoption; and he witnesseth two ways.
(1.) Objectively, i.e. by working those graces in our souls which are
the conditions of the promise, and so the Spirit and his graces in us,
are all one: the Spirit of God dwelling in us, is a mark of our
adoption. Now the Spirit cannot be discerned in his essence, but in
his operations; and to discern these, is to discern the Spirit; and how
these should be discerned, without serious searching, and diligent
watching of the heart, I cannot imagine.
(2.) The other way of the Spirit's witnessing is effectively, i.e. by
irradiating the soul with a grace-discovering light, shining upon his
own work; and this in order of nature follows the former work; he
first infuses the grace, and then opens the eye of the soul to see it.
Now since the heart is the subject of that infused grace, even this way
of the Spirit's witnessing also includes the necessity of keeping
carefully our own hearts: For,
(1.) A neglected heart is so confused and dark, that the little grace
which is in it, is not ordinarily discernible: the most accurate and
laborious Christians, that take most pains, and spend most time
about their hearts, do yet find it very difficult to discover the pure
and genuine workings of the Spirit there: how then shall the
Christian who is (comparatively) negligent and remiss about heartwork, be ever able to discover it? Sincerity, which is the quœsitum,

the thing sought for, lies in the heart like a small piece of gold in the
bottom of a river, he that will find it, must stay till the water is clear,
and settled, and then he shall see it sparkling at the bottom. And that
the heart may be clear, and settled, how much pains and watching,
care and diligence, will it cost?
(2.) God doth not usually indulge lazy and negligent souls with the
comforts of assurance; he will not so much as seem to patronize sloth
and carelessness; he will give it, but it shall be in his own way: his
command hath united our care and comfort together; they are
mistaken that think the beautiful child of assurance may be born
without pangs: ah, how many solitary hours have the people of God
spent in heart-examination! how many times have they looked into
the word, and then into their hearts? Sometimes they thought they
discovered sincerity, and were even ready to draw forth the
triumphant conclusion of assurance; then comes a doubt they cannot
resolve, and dashes all again; many hopes and fears, doubtings and
reasonings, they have had in their own breasts, before they arrived at
a comfortable settlement.
To conclude, suppose it possible for a careless Christian to attain
assurance, yet it is impossible he should long retain it: For, as for
those whose hearts are filled with the joys of assurance, if
extraordinary care be not used, it is a thousand to one if ever they
long enjoy it: for a little pride, vanity, carelessness, will dash to
pieces all that for which they have been labouring a long time, in
many a weary duty. Since, then, the joy of our life, the comfort of our
souls, rises and falls with our diligence in this work, keep your hearts
with all diligence.
5. The improvement of our graces depends upon the keeping our
hearts; I never knew grace thrive in a negligent and careless soul: the
habits and roots of grace are planted in the heart; and the deeper
they are radicated there, the more thriving and flourishing grace is.
In Eph. 3:17 we read of "being rooted in grace;" grace in the heart is
the root of every gracious word in the mouth, and of every holy work

in the hand, Psal. 116:10. 2 Cor. 4:13. It is true, Christ is the root of a
Christian; but Christ is origo originans, the originating root; and
grace origo originata, a root originated, planted, and influenced by
Christ; according as this thrives under divine influences, so the acts
of grace are more or less fruitful, or vigorous. Now in a heart not kept
with care and diligence, these fructifying influences are stopt and cut
off, multitudes of vanities break in upon it, and devour its strength;
the heart is, as it were the pasture, in which multitudes of thoughts
are fed every day; a gracious heart diligently kept, feeds many
precious thoughts of God in a day, Psal. 139:17. "How precious are
thy thoughts to me, O God! how great is the sum of them? If I should
count them, they are more in number than the sand; and when I
awake, I am still with thee." And as the gracious heart feeds and
nourishes them, so they refresh and feast the heart, Psal. 63:5, 6.
"My soul is filled as with marrow and fatness whilst I think upon
thee," &c. But in the disregarded heart, swarms of vain and foolish
thoughts are perpetually working, and justle out those spiritual
ideas, and thoughts of God, by which the soul should be refreshed.
Besides, the careless heart makes nothing out of any duty or
ordinance it performs or attends on, and yet these are the conduits of
heaven, from whence grace is watered and made fruitful: a man may
go with an heedless spirit from ordinance to ordinance, abide all his
days under the choicest teaching, and yet never be improved by
them; for heart-neglect is a leak in the bottom, no heavenly
influences, how rich soever, abide in that soul, Mat. 13:3, 4. The
heart that lies open and common, like the high-way, free for all
passengers; when the seed fell on it, the fowls came and devoured it.
Alas! it is not enough to hear, unless we take heed how we hear; a
man may pray, and never be the better, unless he watch unto prayer.
In a word, all ordinances, means, and duties, are blessed unto the
improvement of grace, according to the care and strictness we use in
keeping our hearts in them.
6. Lastly, The stability of our souls in the hour of temptation, will be
much according to the care and conscience we have of keeping our

hearts; the careless heart is an easy prey to Satan in the hour of
temptation, his main batteries are raised against that fort royal, the
heart; if he wins that, he wins all; for it commands the whole man:
and, alas! how easy a conquest is a neglected heart? It is no more
difficult to surprize it, than for an enemy to enter that city whose
gates are open and unguarded: it is the watchful heart that discovers
and suppresses the temptation before it comes to its strength.
Divines observe this to be the method in which temptations are
ripened and brought to their full strength.
There is, (1.) Ορεξις, The irritation of the object, or that power it hath
to work upon, and provoke our corrupt nature; which is either done
by the real presence of the object, or else by speculation, when the
object (though absent) is held out by the phantasy before the soul.
(2.) Then follows Ορμη, the motion of the sensitive appetite, which is
stirred and provoked by the phantasy, representing it as a sensual
good, as having profit or pleasure in it.
(3.) Then there is Βουλησις, a consultation in the mind about it,
deliberating about the likeliest means of accomplishing it.
(4.) Next follows Αιρησις, the election, or choice of the will.
(5.) And lastly Βουλημα, The desire, or full engagement of the will to
it; all this may be done in a few moments, for the debates of the soul
are quick, and soon ended: when it comes thus far, then the heart is
won, Satan hath entered victoriously, and displayed his colours upon
the walls of that royal fort; but had the heart been well guarded at
first, it had never come to this height: the temptation had been
stopped in the first or second act. And indeed there it is stopped
easily: for it is the motions of a tempted soul to sin, as in the motion
of a stone falling from the brow of a hill; it is easily stopped at first,
but when it is set agoing, Vires acquirit eundo: And therefore it is the
greatest wisdom in the world to observe the first motions of the
heart, to check and stop sin there. The motions of sin are weakest at