PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 14
What Mortification Is and Is Not


Chapter 6

WHAT MORTIFICATION IS
What it is to mortify a sin in general, which will make further way for particular directions,
is next to be considered. 48
The mortification of a lust consists in three things. The first thing in mortification is the
weakening of this habit of sin or lust. The second thing in mortification is a constant fighting
and contending against sin. The third part of mortification is a frequent success against any
lust.

1. Habitual Weakening of Sin
The first thing in mortification is the weakening of this habit of sin. Every lust is a depraved
habit or disposition, continually inclining the heart to evil. Thence is that description of him
who has no lust truly mortified: “Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually” (Gen 6:5). He is always under the power of a strong bent and inclination to sin.
And the reason why a natural man is not always perpetually in the pursuit of one lust, night
and day, is because he has many to serve, every one crying to be satisfied. Thence he is carried
on with great variety, but still in general he lies towards the satisfaction of self.
We will suppose, then, the lust or distemper whose mortification is inquired after to be in
itself a strong, deeply-rooted, habitual inclination and bent of will and affections to some actual sin as to the matter of it—though not, under that formal consideration, always stirring up
imaginations, thoughts, and contrivances about the object of it. Hence, men are said to have
their “hearts…fully set in them to do evil” (Ecc 8:11), that is, the bent of their spirits lies towards it, to make “provision for the flesh” (Rom 13:14).
A sinful, depraved habit—as in many other things, so in this—differs from all natural or
moral habits whatever. Whereas moral habits incline the soul gently and suitably to itself, sinful habits drive with violence and impetuousness. 49 From this, lusts are said to fight or wage
“war against the soul” (1Pe 2:11), that is, to rebel or rise up in war with that conduct and opposition which is usual therein (Rom 7:23), to lead captive, or effectively capturing upon success in battle—all works of great violence and impetuousness. 50
48

This chapter is a continuation of the first head (I.) describing mortification, begun in Chapter 5 with section 1 detailing what mortification is not. This chapter is section 2 of that same head.
49
impetuousness – strong emotion.
50
I might manifest fully, from that description we have of it in Romans 7, how it will darken the mind, extinguish convictions, dethrone reason, interrupt the power and influence of any considerations that may be
brought to hamper it, and break through all into a flame. But this is not my present business.—from the
original

6. What Mortification Is

27

Now, the first thing in mortification is the weakening of this habit of sin or lust, that it shall
not—with that violence, earnestness, and frequency—rise up, conceive, disturb, provoke, entice, or disquiet as naturally it is apt to do (Jam 1:14-15).

a. Limitations to this truth
I shall desire to give one caution or rule by the way, and it is this: though every lust does in
its own nature, equally and universally, incline and impel to sin, yet this must be granted with
these two limitations.
1). The strength of lusts varies
One lust, or a lust in one man, may receive many accidental improvements, heightenings,
and strengthenings, which may give it life, power, and vigor exceedingly above what another
lust has, or above the same kind of lust in another man. When a lust falls in with the natural
constitutions and temper, with a suitable course of life, with occasions, or when Satan has got
a fit handle to it to manage it—as he has a thousand ways so to do—that lust grows violent
and impulsive above others, or more than the same lust in another man. Then the steams of it
darken the mind, so that though a man knows the same things as formerly, yet they have no
power nor influence on the will, but corrupt affections and passions are set at liberty by it.
But especially, lust gets strength by temptation. When a suitable temptation falls in with a
lust, it gives it a new life, vigor, power, violence, and rage, which before it seemed not to have
or to be capable of. Instances to this purpose might be multiplied, but it is the design of some
part of another treatise to prove this observation.
2). Some lusts more discernible
Some lusts are far more sensible and discernible in their violent actings than others. Paul
51
puts a difference between uncleanness and all other sins: “Flee fornication. Every sin that a
man doeth is without the body; but he that committeth fornication sinneth against his own
body” (1Co 6:18). Hence, the motions of that sin are more sensible, more discernible than of
others. When perhaps the love of the world, or the like, is in a person no less habitually predominant than uncleanness, yet it makes not so great a combustion in the whole man.
And on this account some men may go for mortified men in their own thoughts and in the
eyes of the world, who yet have in them no less predominance of lust than those who cry out
with astonishment upon the account of its perplexing disturbances—yea, than those who have
by the power of it been hurried into scandalous sins. However, it is only that their lusts are in
and about things which raise not such a tumult in the soul, about which they are exercised
with a calmer frame of spirit, their very temperament being not so nearly concerned in them
as in some other.

b. Crucifying the flesh
I say, then, that the first thing in mortification is the weakening of this habit so that it shall
not impel and disturb as formerly—that it shall not entice and draw aside; that it shall not disquiet and perplex the killing of its life, vigor, promptness, and readiness to be stirring. This is
called crucifying “the flesh with the affections and lusts” (Gal 5:24); that is, taking away its

51

uncleanness – unlawful indulgence of sexual desire.

28

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

blood and spirits that give it strength and power, the wasting of the body of death “day by day”
(2Co 4:16).
A man nailed to the cross first struggles, strives, and cries out with great strength and
might; but, as his blood and spirits waste, his strivings are faint and seldom, his cries low and
hoarse, scarce to be heard. Similarly, when a man first sets on a lust or distemper to deal with
it, it struggles with great violence to break loose; it cries with earnestness and impatience to
be satisfied and relieved. But when by mortification the blood and spirits of it are let out, it
moves seldom and faintly, cries sparingly, and is scarce heard in the heart. It may have sometimes a dying pang that makes an appearance of great vigor and strength, but it is quickly
over, especially if it be kept from considerable success.
This the apostle describes, as in the whole chapter, so especially in Romans 6:6, the “old
man is crucified with” Christ. Sin, he says, is crucified; it is fastened to the cross. To what end?
“That the body of sin might be destroyed,” the power of sin weakened and abolished little by
little, that “henceforth we should not serve sin”; that is, that sin might not incline us, drive us,
with such effectiveness as to make us servants to it as it has done up until now.
And this is spoken not only with respect to carnal and sensual affections, or desires of
worldly things—not only in respect of the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life (1Jo 2:16)—but also as to the flesh, that is, in the mind and will, in that opposition unto
God which is in us by nature. Of whatever nature the troubling corruption is, by whatever
ways it makes itself out, either by driving to evil or hindering from that which is good, the rule
is the same. Unless this mortification be done effectively, all after-contention will not reach
the goal aimed at. A man may beat down the bitter fruit from an evil tree until he is weary
while the root abides in strength and vigor. The beating down of the present fruit will not hinder it from bringing forth more. This is the folly of some men: they set themselves with all
earnestness and diligence against the appearing eruption of lust; but, leaving the principle and
root untouched, perhaps unsearched out, they make but little or no progress in this work of
mortification.

2. Constant Fighting and Contending against Sin
To be able always to be laying load on sin is no small degree of mortification. When sin is
strong and vigorous the soul is scarce able to make any head against it. It sighs, groans,
mourns, and is troubled, but seldom has sin in the pursuit. David speaks of himself, complaining that his sin had “taken fast hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up” (Psa 40:12).
How little then was he able to fight against it!
Now, various things are required for and involved in this fighting against sin.

a. Recognize the battle
To know that a man has such an enemy to deal with, to take notice of it, to consider it as an
enemy indeed, and one that is to be destroyed by all means possible, is required hereunto. As I
said before, the contest is vigorous and hazardous: it is about the things of eternity. When
therefore men have slight and transient thoughts of their lusts, it is no great sign that they are
mortified or that they are in a way for their mortification. This is every man’s knowing “the
plague of his own heart” (1Ki 8:38), without which no other work can be done. It is to be
feared that very many have little knowledge of the main enemy that they carry about with

6. What Mortification Is

29

them in their bosoms. This makes them ready to justify themselves and to be impatient with
reproof or admonition, not knowing that they are in any danger (2Ch 16:10).

b. Know the enemy
To labor to be acquainted with the ways, wiles, methods, advantages, and occasions of sin’s
success is the beginning of this warfare. This is the way men deal with enemies. They inquire
about their counsels and designs, ponder their goals, consider how and by what means they
have formerly prevailed, so that they may be prevented. In this consists the greatest skill in
conduct. Take this away, and all waging of war would be brutish, even where there is the
greatest use of human wisdom and industry.
Indeed, men who mortify lust deal with it in this way. Not only when lust is actually vexing,
enticing, and seducing, but in their quiet moments they consider, “This is our enemy; this is
his way and progress, these are his advantages, thus has he prevailed, and thus he will do, if
not prevented.” So it was with David: “My sin is ever before me” (Psa 51:3). Indeed, one of the
choicest and most eminent parts of spiritual wisdom, practically applied, consists in finding
out the subtleties, policies, and depths of any indwelling sin. A good part of our warfare is to
consider and know
- wherein its greatest strength lies;
- what advantage it takes of occasions, opportunities, and temptations;
- what are its pleas, pretenses, and reasonings;
- and what are its strategies, colors, 52 and excuses.
A good part of our warfare is
- to set the wisdom of the Spirit against the craft of the old man;
- to trace this serpent in all its turnings and windings;
53
- to be able to say, at its most secret and (to a common frame of heart) imperceptible actings: “This is your old way and course; I know what you aim at”;
- and so to be always in readiness.

c. Attack daily
The height of this contest is to load sin daily with all the things that are grievous, killing,
and destructive to sin, which shall be mentioned later. Such a one never thinks his lust dead
because it is quiet, but labors still to give it new wounds, new blows every day. So the apostle
says in Colossians 3:5, “Mortify therefore your members…” etc.
Now, while the soul is thus dealing in this condition, it certainly has the upper hand: sin is
under the sword and dying.

3. Success against Sin
Frequent success against any lust is another part and evidence of mortification. By “success” I do not mean a mere disappointment of sin, so that it is not brought forth nor accomplished, but a victory over it and pursuit of it, resulting in a complete conquest. For instance,
when the heart finds sin at work at any time—seducing, forming imaginations to make provi52
53

colors – disguises; pretenses.
imperceptible – so slight as not to be detected.

30

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

sion for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof—it instantly apprehends sin, brings it to the Law of
God and love of Christ, condemns it, and follows it with execution to the uttermost.
Now, I say, sin is mortified in some considerable measure when a man comes to this state
and condition: that lust is weakened in the root and principle, that its motions and actions are
fewer and weaker than formerly, so that they are not able to hinder his duty nor interrupt his
peace. Sin is mortified in some considerable measure when he can, in a quiet, sedate frame of
spirit, discover and fight against sin, and have success against it. Then, notwithstanding all
sin’s opposition, a man may have peace with God all his days.

4. Summary
Unto these heads, then, I refer the mortification aimed at—the mortification, that is, of any
one perplexing distemper, whereby the general depravity and corruption of our nature attempts to exert itself.
First, the foundation of mortification is the weakening of sin’s indwelling disposition—
whereby it inclines, entices, impels to evil, rebels, opposes, and fights against God—by the implanting, habitual residence, and cherishing of a principle of grace that stands in direct opposition to sin and is destructive of it. So pride is weakened by the implanting and growth of
humility, passion is weakened by patience, uncleanness is weakened by purity of mind and
conscience, love of this world is weakened by heavenly-mindedness. These latter are graces of
the Holy Spirit, or the same habitual grace variously acting itself by the Spirit according to the
variety or diversity of the objects about which it is exercised. The former are various lusts, or
the same natural corruption variously acting itself according to the various advantages and
occasions that it meets with.
A second thing required for mortification is the promptness, eagerness, and vigor of the
Spirit, or new man (Col 3:10), in contending with, cheerfully fighting against, the lust spoken
of, by all the ways and with all the means that are appointed thereunto, constantly using the
support provided against its motions and actings.
Success unto several degrees attends these two.
If the distemper has not an unconquerable advantage from its natural situation, this may
possibly be to such a universal conquest as the soul may never again sensibly feel its opposition. The soul shall assuredly arise to an allowance of peace to the conscience according to the
54
tenor of the Covenant of Grace.

54

tenor of the Covenant of Grace – nature and character of what God has provided in Christ by the Covenant.
