PURITAN GOLD -- Human Nature in Its Fourfold State by Thomas Boston: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 13
The Eternal State: Difference Between the Righteous and the Wicked in their Death

---

Hence we may see the difference between true sanctification, and that
shadow of it—which is to be found among some strict professors of
Christianity, who yet are not true Christians, are not regenerated by the
Spirit of Christ, and is of the same kind with what has appeared in many
sober heathens. True sanctification is the result of the soul's
union with the holy Jesus, the first and immediate receptacle of the
sanctifying Spirit; out of whose fullness, his members do, by virtue of
their union with him, receive sanctifying influences. The other is the mere
product of the man's own spirit, which, whatever it has, or seems to have,
of the matter of true holiness—yet does not arise from the supernatural
principles, nor to the high aims and ends thereof: for, as it comes from
self, so it runs out into the dead sea of self again; and lies as wide of true
holiness, as nature does of grace. They who have this species of holiness,
are like common boatmen, who serve themselves with their own oars:
whereas the ship bound for Immanuel's land, sails by the blowings of the
divine Spirit.
How is it possible there should be true satisfaction without Christ? Can
there be true sanctification without partaking of the Spirit of holiness?
Can we partake of that Spirit—but by Jesus Christ, "the way, the truth,
and the life?" The falling dew shall as soon make its way through the
flinty rock, as the influences of grace come from God to sinners, any other
way than through him whom the Father has appointed the head of
influences, Col. 1:19, "For it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell:" and, chapter 2:19, "And not holding the head, from which
all the body, by joints and bands, having nourishment ministered and
knit together, increases with the increase of God." Hence see how it
comes to pass, that many fall away from their seeming sanctification, and
never recover: it is because they are not branches truly knit to the true
vine. Meanwhile, others recover from their decays, because of their union

with the life-giving stock, by the quickening Spirit, 1 John 2:19, "They
went out from us—but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us."
5. A fifth benefit is GROWTH IN GRACE. "Having nourishment
ministered, they increase with the increase of God," Col. 2:19. "The
righteous shall flourish like the palm-tree: he shall grow like a cedar in
Lebanon," Psalm 92:12. Grace is of a growing nature; in the way to Zion,
they go from strength to strength. Though the holy man is at first a little
child in grace—yet at length he becomes a young man; then a father, 1
John 2:13. Though he does but creep in the way to heaven sometimes—
yet afterwards he walks, he runs, he mounts up with wings as eagles,
Isaiah 40:31. If a branch grafted into a stock never grows, it is a plain
evidence of its not having knit with the stock.
But some perhaps may say, "If all true Christians are growing ones, what
shall be said of those who, instead of growing, are going backwards?" I
answer,
First, There is a great difference between the Christians
growing simply, and his growing at all times. All true Christians
do grow—but I do not say that they grow at all times. A tree, that has life
and nourishment, grows to its perfection—yet it is not always growing; it
grows not in the winter. Christians also have their winters, wherein the
influences of grace, necessary for their growth, cease, Cant. 5:2, "I sleep."
It is by faith the believer derives gracious influences from Jesus Christ; as
each lamp in the candlestick received oil from the bowl, by the pipe going
between them, Zech. 4:2. Now, if that pipe is stopped up, if the saint's
faith lies dormant and inactive, then all the rest of the graces will become
dim, and seem ready to be extinguished. In consequence whereof,
depraved nature will gather strength, and become active. What, then, will
become of the soul? Why, there is still one sure ground of hope. The
saint's faith is not as the hypocrite's, like a pipe laid short of the fountain,
whereby there can be no conveyance: it still remains a bond of union
between Christ and the soul; and therefore, because Christ lives, the
believer shall live also, John 14:19. The Lord Jesus "puts in his hand by
the hole of the door," and clears the means of conveyance; and then
influences for growth flow, and the believer's graces look fresh and green

again, Hos. 14:7, "They that dwell under his shadow shall return: they
shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine."
In the worst of times, the saints have a principle of growth in them, 1
John 3:9, "His seed remains in him." Therefore, after decays, they revive
again: namely, when the winter is over, and the Sun of righteousness
returns to them with his warm influences. Mud thrown into a pool may
lie there at ease; but if it be cast into a fountain, the spring will at length
work it out, and run as clear as formerly.
Secondly, Christians may MISTAKE their growth, and that two
ways.
(1.) By judging of their case according to their present feeling. They
observe themselves, and cannot perceive themselves to be growing; but
there is no reason thence to conclude they are not growing, Mark 4:27,
"The seed springs and grows up—he knows not how." Were a person to
fix his eye ever so steadfastly on a growing tree, he would not see it
growing; but if he compares the tree as it now is, with what it was some
years ago, he will certainly perceive that it has grown. In like manner may
the Christian know whether he be in a growing or declining state, by
comparing his present with his former condition.
(2.) Christians may mistake their case, by measuring their growth by the
advances of the top only, not of the root. Though a man be not growing
taller, he may be growing stronger. If a tree be uniting with the ground,
fixing itself in the earth, and spreading out its roots, it is certainly
growing, although it be not higher than formerly. So, although a Christian
may lack the sweet consolations and flashes of affection which he had;
yet, if he is growing in humility, self-denial, and sense of needy
dependence on Jesus Christ, he is a growing Christian, Hos. 14:5, "I will
be as the dew unto Israel, he shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon."
Question. "But do hypocrites grow at all? And if so, how shall we
distinguish between their growth, and true Christian growth?"
Answer. To the first part of the question, hypocrites do grow. The tares
have their growth, as well as the wheat: the seed that fell among thorns

did spring up, Luke 8:7. Only it brought no fruit to perfection, ver. 14.
Yes, a true Christian may have a false growth. James and John seemed to
grow in the grace of holy zeal, when their spirits grew so hot in the cause
of Christ, that they would have burned a whole village, for not receiving
their Lord and Master, Luke 9:54, "They said, Lord, command fire to
come down from heaven and consume them, even as Elijah did!" But it
was, indeed, no such thing; and therefore, he turned and rebuked them,
ver. 55, and said, "You know not what manner of spirit you are of."
To the second part of the question, it is answered, that there is a peculiar
beauty in the true Christian growth, distinguishing it from all false
growth: it is universal, regular, proportionable. It is a "growing up into
him in all things, which is the head," Eph. 4:15. The growing Christian
grows proportionably, in all the parts of the new man. Under the kindly
influences of the Sun of righteousness, believers "grow up as calves of the
stall," Mal. 4:2.
You would think it a monstrous growth, in any creatures—if you saw their
heads grow, and not their bodies; or if you saw one leg grow, and another
not; if all the parts do not grow proportionably. Yes—but such is the
growth of many in religion. They grow like rickety children, who have a
big head—but a slender body; they get more knowledge into their heads—
but no more holiness into their hearts and lives. They grow very hot
outwardly—but very cold inwardly; like men in a fit of the ague. They are
more taken up about the externals of religion than formerly; yet as great
strangers to the power of godliness as ever.
If a garden is watered with the hand, some of the plants will readily get
much, some little, and some no water at all; and therefore, some wither,
while others are coming forward: but after a shower from the clouds, all
come forward together. In like manner, all the graces of the Spirit grow
proportionably, by the special influences of divine grace. The branches
engrafted in Christ, growing aright, do grow in all the several ways of
growth at once. They grow inward, growing into Christ, Eph. 4:15,
uniting more closely with him; and cleaving more firmly to him, as the
head of influences, which is the spring of all other true Christian growth.
They grow outward in good works, in their life and conversation. They
not only, with Naphtali, give goodly words; but, like Joseph, they are

fruitful boughs. They grow upward in heavenly-mindedness, and
contempt of the world; for their conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3:20. And
finally, they grow downward in humility and self-loathing. The
branches of the largest growth in Christ, are, in their own eyes, "less than
the least of all saints," Eph. 3:8; "the chief of sinners," 1 Tim. 1:15; "more
brutish than any man," Proverbs 30:2. They see that they can do nothing,
no, not so much as "think anything, as of themselves," 2 Cor. 3:5; that
they deserve nothing, being "not worthy of the least of all the mercies
showed unto them," Gen. 32:10; and that they are nothing, 2 Cor. 12:11.
6. A sixth benefit is FRUITFULNESS. The branch engrafted into Christ
is not barren—but brings forth fruit, John 15:6, "He who abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit." For that very end are
souls united to Christ, that they may bring forth fruit unto God, Romans
7:4. Those who are barren may be branches in Christ by profession—but
not by real implantation. Whoever are united to Christ, bring forth the
fruit of gospel-obedience and true holiness. Faith is always followed with
good works. The believer is not only come out of the grave of his natural
state; but he has put off his grave-clothes, namely, reigning lusts, in
which he walked, like a spirit; being dead while he lived in them, Col. 3:7,
8. For Christ has said of him, as of Lazarus, "Loose him, and let him go."
Now that he has put on Christ, he personates him, so to speak, as a
beggar in borrowed robes represents a king on the stage, walking as he
also walked. Now the fruit of the Spirit in him, is in all goodness, Eph.
5:9.
The fruits of holiness will be found in the hearts, lips, and lives
of those who are united to Christ. The hidden man of the heart is
not only a temple built for God, and consecrated to him; but used and
employed for him, where love, fear, trust, and all the other parts of
unseen religion, are exercised, Phil. 3:3, "For we are the true
circumcision, who worship God in the Spirit." The heart is no more the
devil's playground, where thoughts go free; for there even vain thoughts
are hated, Psalm 119:113. But it is God's enclosure, hedged about as a
garden for him, Cant. 4:16. It is true, there are weeds of corruption there,
because the ground is not yet perfectly cleared: but the man, in the day of
his new creation, is set to dress it, and keep it.

A live coal from the altar has touched his lips, and they are purified.
Psalm 15:1-3, "Lord, who shall abide in your tabernacle? who shall dwell
in your holy hill? He who speaks the truth in his heart; he who backbites
not with his tongue, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor."
There may be, indeed, a smooth tongue—where there is a false
heart. The voice may be Jacob's—while the hands are Esau's. But, "if any
man among you seem to be religious, and bridles not his tongue—but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is vain," James 1:26. The
power of godliness will rule over the tongue, though a world of iniquity. If
one be a Galilean—his speech will betray him; he will not speak the
language of Ashdod—but the language of Canaan. He will neither be
silent in true religion, nor will his tongue walk at random, seeing, to the
double guard which nature has given the tongue (the teeth and the lips),
grace has added a third.
The fruits of holiness will be found in his outward life; for he has clean
hands, as well as a pure heart, Psalm 24:4. He is a godly man, and piously
discharges the duties of the first table of the law; he is a righteous man,
and honestly performs the duties of the second table. In his life he is a
good Christian, and a good neighbor too. He behaves towards God,
as if men's eyes were upon him; and towards men, as believing
God's eyes to be upon him. Those things which God has joined in his
law, he dares not put asunder in his practice.
Thus the branches in Christ are full of good fruits. And those fruits are a
cluster of vital actions, whereof Jesus Christ is the principle and end. The
principle: for he lives in them, and "the life they live is by faith in the Son
of God," Gal. 2:20. The end: for they live to him, and "to them to live is
Christ," Phil. 1:21. The duties of true piety are in the world, like fatherless
children, in rags: some will not take them in, because they never loved
them nor their Father; some take them in, because they may be
serviceable to them. But the saints take them in for their Father's sake,
that is, for Christ's sake: and they are lovely in their eyes, because they
are like him. O! whence is this new life of the saints? Surely it could never
have been hammered out of the natural powers of their souls, by the
united force of all created power. In eternal barrenness would they have
continued; but that being "married to Christ, they bring forth fruit unto

God," Romans 7:4.
If you ask me, "How can your nourishment, growth, and
fruitfulness be forwarded?" I offer these few advices:
(1.) Make sure work, as to your knitting with the stock by sincere faith;
and beware of hypocrisy: a branch that is not sound at the heart will
certainly wither. The trees of the Lord's planting are trees of
righteousness, Isaiah 61:3. So, when false professors fade—they continue
to bring forth fruit. Hypocrisy is a disease in the vitals of religion, which
will consume all at length. It is a leak in the ship, which will certainly sink
it. Sincerity of grace will make it lasting, be it ever so weak: as the
smallest twig, which is sound at the heart, will draw nourishment from
the stock and grow; while the greatest bough that is rotten can never
recover, because it receives no nourishment.
(2.) Labor to be steadfast in the truths and way of God. An unsettled and
wavering judgment is a great enemy to Christian growth and fruitfulness,
as the apostle teaches, Eph. 4:14, 15, "That we henceforth be no more
children, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine.
But speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things into
Christ—who is the head." A rolling stone gathers no moss, and a wavering
judgment makes a fruitless life. Though a tree be ever so sound—yet how
can it grow, or be fruitful, if you be always moving it out of one soil into
another?
(3.) Endeavor to cut off the suckers, as gardeners do, that their trees may
thrive. These are unmortified lusts; therefore, "mortify your members
which are upon the earth," Col. 3:5. When the Israelites got food for their
lusts, they got leanness to their souls. She that has many hungry children
about her hand, and must be still putting into their mouths, will have
much ado to get a bit put into her own mouth. They must refuse the
cravings of inordinate affections, who would have their souls to prosper.
(4.) Improve, for these ends, the ordinances of God. It is in the courts of
our God where the trees of righteousness flourish, Psalm 92:13. The
waters of the sanctuary are the means appointed of God, to cause his
people to grow as willows by the water courses. Therefore, drink in with

"desire, the sincere milk of the word, that you may grow thereby," 1 Pet.
2:2. Come to these wells of salvation: not to look at them only—but to
draw water out of them. The sacrament of the Lord's supper is in a special
manner appointed for these ends. It is not only a solemn public
profession, and a seal of our union and communion with Christ; but it is a
means of most intimate communion with him, and strengthens our union
with him, our faith, love, repentance, and other graces, 1 Cor. 10:16, "The
cup of blessing, which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ?" And, chapter 12:13, "We have been all made to drink into one
Spirit." Give yourselves unto prayer; open your mouths wide, and he will
fill them.
By these means the branches in Christ may be farther nourished, grow
up, and bring forth much fruit.
7. A seventh benefit is, The acceptance of their fruits of holiness
before the Lord. Though they may be very imperfect, they are
accepted, because they savor of Christ, the blessed stock, which the
branches grow upon; while the fruits of others are rejected by God, Gen.
4:4, 5, "And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and his offering; but unto
Cain and his offering he had no respect." Compare Heb. 11:3, "By faith,
Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain." O, how
defective are the saints' duties in the eye of the law! The believer himself
sees many faults in his best performances; yet the Lord graciously
receives them.
There is no grace planted in the heart—but there is a weed of corruption
near by its side, while the saints are in the lower world. Their very
sincerity is not without a mixture of deception or hypocrisy, Gal. 2:13.
Hence there are defects in the exercise of every grace; in the performance
of every duty; depraved nature always drops something to stain their best
works. There is still a mixture of darkness with their clearest light. Yet
this does not mar their acceptance with God, Cant. 6:10, "Who is she that
looks forth as the morning?" or, as the dawning? Behold how Christ's
spouse is esteemed and accepted of her Lord, even when she looks forth
as the dawn, whose beauty is mixed with the blackness of the night!
"When the morning was looking out," as the word is, Jud. 19:26, that is,

"In the dawning of the day," as we read it. So the very dawning of grace,
and good will to Christ, grace peeping out from under a mass of darkness
in believers, is pleasant and acceptable to him, as the break of day is to
the weary traveler.
Though the remains of unbelief make the hand of faith to shake and
tremble; yet the Lord is so well pleased with it, that he employs it to carry
away pardons and supplies of grace, from the throne of grace, and the
fountain of grace. His faith was effectual, who "cried out and said with
tears, Lord, I believe, help you my unbelief!" Mark 9:24. Though the
remains of sensual affections make the flame of their love weak and
smoky; he turns his eyes from the smoke, and beholds the flame, how fair
it is, Cant. 4:10, "How fair is your love, my sister, my spouse!" "The smell
of their" under "garment" of inherent holiness, as imperfect as it is, "is
like the smell of Lebanon," ver. 11; and that because they are covered with
their elder brother's clothes, which makes the sons of God to "smell as a
field which the Lord has blessed."
Their good works are accepted: their cups of cold water given to a
disciple, in the name of a disciple, shall not lack a reward. Though they
cannot offer for the tabernacle—gold, silver, and brass, and onyx stones—
let them come forward with what they have: if it were but goats' hair, it
shall not be rejected; if it were but ram's skins, they shall be kindly
accepted; for they are dyed red, dipped by faith in the Mediator's blood,
and so presented unto God. A very ordinary work done in faith, and from
faith, if it were but the building of a wall about the holy city, is a great
work, Neh. 6:3. If it were but the bestowing of a box of ointment on
Christ, it shall never be forgotten, Matt. 26:13. Even "a cup of cold water
only given to one of Christ's little ones, in the name of a disciple, shall be
rewarded," Matt. 10:42. Nay, not a good word for Christ shall drop from
their mouths—but it shall be registered in God's "book of remembrance,"
Mal. 3:16.
Nor shall a tear drop from their eyes for him—but he will "put it in his
bottle," Psalm 56:8. Their will is accepted for the deed; their sorrow for
the lack of will, for the will itself, 2 Cor. 8:12, "For if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not." Their groanings, when they cannot well

express their desires, are heard in heaven; the meaning of those groans is
well known there, and they will be returned like the dove with an olive
branch of peace in her mouth. See Romans 8:26, 27. Their mites are
better than other men's talents. Their lisping and broken sentences are
more pleasant to their Father in heaven, than the most fluent or
flourishing speeches of those who are not in Christ. Their voice is sweet,
even when they are ashamed it should be heard; their countenance is
lovely, even when they blush, and draw a veil over it, Cant. 2:14. The
Mediator takes their petitions, blots out some parts, rectifies others, and
then presents them to the Father, in consequence whereof they are
accepted in the court of heaven.
Every true Christian is a temple to God. If you look for sacrifices, they are
not lacking there; they offer the sacrifice of praise, and do good. With
such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13:15, 16. Christ himself is the
altar which sanctifies the gift, ver. 10. If we look for incense, it is there
too. The graces of the Spirit are found in their hearts: and the Spirit of the
crucified Christ fires them, and puts them in exercise; as the fire was
brought from the altar of burnt-offering, to set the incense in flame: then
they mount heavenward, like pillars of smoke, Cant. 3:6. But the best of
incense will leave ashes behind it; yes, indeed: but as the priest took away
the ashes of the incense in a golden dish, and threw them out; so our
great High Priest takes away the ashes and refuse of all the saint's
services, by his mediation in their behalf.
8. An eighth benefit flowing from union with Christ, is
PRESERVATION. The Christian cannot fall away—but must persevere
unto the end; John 10:28, "they shall never perish, neither shall any man
pluck them out of my hand." Indeed, if a branch does not knit with the
stock, it will fall away when shaking winds arise: but the branch knit to
the stock stands fast whatever wind blows.
Sometimes a stormy wind of temptation blows from hell, and shakes the
branches in Christ, the true vine: but their union with him is their
security; moved they may be—but removed they never can be. The Lord
"will with the temptation, also make a way of escape," 1 Cor. 10:13. Calms
are never of any continuance; there is almost always some wind blowing;
and therefore, branches are rarely altogether at rest. But sometimes

violent winds arise, which threaten to rend them from off their stock.
Even so it is with saints; they are daily put to it to keep their ground
against temptation: sometimes the wind from hell rises so high, and
blows so furiously, that it makes even top branches to sweep the ground;
yet being knit to Christ their stock, they get up again, in spite of the most
violent efforts of the prince of the power of the air. Psalm 94:18, "When I
said, my foot slips, your mercy, O Lord, held me up."
But the Christian improves by his trial; and is so far from being damaged,
that he is benefitted by it, as it discovers what hold the soul has of Christ,
and what hold Christ has of the soul. Look—as the wind in the bellows,
which would blow out the candle, blows up the fire; even so it often
comes to pass, that such temptations enliven the true Christian,
awakening the graces of the Spirit in him; and by that means, discover
both the reality and the strength of grace in him. And hence, as Luther,
that great man of God, says, "One Christian, who has had experience of
temptation, is worth a thousand others."
Sometimes a stormy wind of trouble and persecution from the men of
the world, blows upon the vine, that is, mystical Christ; but union with
the stock is a sufficient security to the branches. In a time of the church's
peace and outward prosperity, while the angels hold the winds, that they
blow not, there are a great many branches taken up and put into the
stock, which never knit with it, nor live by it, though they are bound up
with it by the bonds of external ordinances. Now, these may stand a while
on the stock, and stand with great ease while the calm lasts; but when
once the storms arise, and the winds blow, they will begin to fall off one
after another; and the stronger the wind rises, the greater will the number
be, which fall. Yes, some strong boughs of that sort, when they fall, will,
by their weight, carry others of their own kind, quite down to the earth
with them; and will bruise and press down some true branches in such a
manner, that they would also fall off—were it not for that fast hold which
the stock has of them. Then it is that many branches, which before were
high and eminent, are found lying on the ground withered, and fit to be
gathered up and cast into the fire, Matt. 13:6, "When the sun was up, they
were scorched: and because they had no root, they withered away." John
15:6, "If a man abides not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is

withered and men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are
burned."
But however violently the winds blow, none of the truly engrafted
branches which are knit with the stock are found missing, when the storm
is changed into a calm, John 17:12, "Those whom you gave me, I have
kept, and none of them is lost." The least twig growing in Christ shall
persevere; when the tallest cedars growing on their own root, shall be laid
flat on the ground, Romans 8:35, "Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?" See ver. 36-39. However severely
spiritual Israel is "sifted—yet shall not the least grain," or, as it is in the
original language, a little stone, "fall to the ground," Amos 9:9. It is an
allusion to the sifting of fine pebble stones from among heaps of dust and
sand: though the sand and dust falls to the ground, be blown away with
the wind, and trampled under foot; yet there shall not fall to the ground
so much as a little stone, such is the exactness of the sieve, and the care of
the sifter. There is nothing more ready to fall on the earth than a stone:
yet, if professors of religion be living stones, built on Christ, the chief
corner-stone, although they be little stones, they shall not fall to the
earth, whatever storm beats upon them. See 1 Pet. 2:4-6.
All the good grain in the church of Christ is of this kind: they are stones,
in respect of solidity; and living stones in respect of activity. If men are
solid, substantial Christians, they will not be like chaff tossed to and fro
with every wind. And if they are lively Christians, whose spirits will stir in
them, as Paul's did, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry, Acts
17:16, they will not lie like stones, to be turned over, hither and there, cut
and carved, according to the lusts of men; having so much of the stone, as
leaves nothing of liveliness in them.
Our God's house is a great house, wherein are not only vessels of gold—
but also of earth, 2 Tim. 2:20. Both these are apt to contract filthiness;
and therefore, when God brings trouble upon the church, he has an eye to
both. As for the vessels of gold, they are not destroyed; but purified by a
fiery trial in the furnace of affliction, as goldsmiths refine their gold,
Isaiah 1:25, "And I will turn my hand upon you, and purely purge away
your dross." But destruction is to the vessels of earth; they shall be

broken in shivers, as a potter's vessel, ver. 28, "And the destruction," or
breaking "of the transgressors, and of the sinners, shall be together." It
seems to be an allusion to that law, for breaking the vessels of earth,
when unclean; while vessels of wood, and consequently vessels of gold,
were only to be rinsed, Lev. 15:12.
9. A ninth benefit is SUPPORT. If you are a branch engrafted in Christ,
the root supports you. The believer leans on Christ, as a weak woman in a
journey leaning upon her beloved husband, Cant. 8:5. He supports
himself upon him, as a feeble old man stays himself on his staff, Isaiah
50:10. He rolls himself on him, as one rolls a burden he is not able to
walk under, off his own back, upon another who is able to bear it, Psalm
22:8, marg. There are many weights to hang upon and press down the
branches in Christ, the true vine. But you know, whatever weights hang
on the branches, the stock bears all; it bears the branch, and the weight
that is upon it too.
(1.) Christ supports believers in him, under a weight of outward
troubles. That is a large promise, Isaiah 43:2, "When you pass through
the waters, I will be with you: and through the rivers, they shall not
overflow you." See how David was supported under a heavy load, 1 Sam.
30:6. His city Ziglag was burnt, his wives were taken captives, his men
spoke of stoning him: nothing was left him but his God and his faith; but
by his faith, he encouraged himself in his God. The Lord comes, and lays
his cross on his people's shoulders; it presses them down, and they are
likely to sink under it, and therefore cry, "Master, save us, we perish!" But
he supports them under their burden; he bears them up, and they bear
their cross. Thus the Christian, with a weight of outward troubles upon
him, goes lightly under his burden, having the everlasting arms
underneath him. The Christian has a spring of comfort, which he cannot
lose; and therefore never lacks something to support him.
If a man has all his riches in money, robbers may take these away; and
then what more has he? But if the landed proprietor is robbed of his
money—yet his lands remain for his support. Those who build their
comfort on worldly goods, may quickly be comfortless; but those who are
united to Christ shall find comfort, when all the streams of worldly
enjoyments are dried up, Job 6:13, "Is not my help in me? and is wisdom

driven quite from me?" That is, Though my substance is gone; though my
servants, my children, my health, and soundness of body, are all gone; yet
my grace is not gone! Though the Sabeans have driven away my oxen and
donkeys, and the Chaldeans have driven away my camels; they have not
driven away my faith, and my hope too: these are yet in me; they are not
driven from me; so that by them I can fetch comfort from heaven, when I
can have none from earth.
(2.) Christ supports his people under a weight of inward troubles and
discouragements. Many times "heart and flesh fail them;" but then
"God is the strength of their heart," Psalm 73:26. They may have a weight
of guilt pressing them. This is a load that will make their backs bend, and
their spirits sink: but he takes it off, and puts a pardon into their hand,
while they cast their burden upon him. Christ takes the soul, as one
marries a widow under a burden of debt: and so when the creditors come
to Christ's spouse, she carries them to her husband, confesses the debt,
declares she is not able to pay—and lays all upon him.
The Christian sometimes, through carelessness, losses his sense of
pardon; he cannot find it, however he searches for it. The law takes that
opportunity, and proceeds against him for a debt paid already. God hides
his face, and the soul is distressed. Many arrows go through the heart
now; many long accounts are laid before the man, which he reads and
acknowledges. Often does he see the officers coming to apprehend him,
and the prison door open to receive him. What else keeps him from
sinking utterly under discouragements in this case—but the everlasting
arms of a Mediator underneath him, and that he relies upon the great
Surety.
Farther, they may have a weight of strong lusts pressing them. They
have a body of death upon them. Death is a weight that presses the soul
out of the body. A leg or an arm of death, if I may so speak, would be a
terrible load. One lively lust will sometimes lie so heavy on a child of God,
that he can no more remove it than a child could throw a giant from off
him. How, then, are they supported under a whole body of death? Their
support is from that root which bears them, from the everlasting arm that
is underneath them. "His grace is sufficient for them," 2 Cor. 12:9. The
great stay of the believer is not the grace of God within him—that is a well

whose streams sometimes run dry: but it is the grace of God without him
—the grace that is in Jesus Christ; which is an ever-flowing fountain, to
which the believer can never come amiss.
For the apostle tells us in the same verse, it is "the power of Christ."
"Most gladly therefore," says he, "will I rather glory in my infirmities, that
the power of Christ may rest upon me," or "tabernacle above me," as the
cloud of glory did on the Israelites, which God spread for a covering, or
shelter, to them in the wilderness, Psalm 105: 39; compare Isaiah 4:5, 6.
So that the believer in this combat, like the eagle, first flies aloft by faith,
and then comes down on the prey, Psalm 34:5, "They looked to him—and
were lightened."
Finally, they have a weight of weakness and wants upon them—but
they "cast over that burden on the Lord," their strength, "and he sustains
them," Psalm 55:22. With all their wants and weakness they are cast upon
him; as the poor, weak, and naked babe coming out of the womb, is cast
into the lap of its tender and affectionate mother, Psalm 22:10. Though
they be destitute, as a shrub in the wilderness, which the foot of every
beast may tread down, the Lord will regard and support them, Psalm
102:17. It is not surprising that the weakest plant should be safe in a
garden: but our Lord Jesus Christ is a hedge for protection to his weak
and destitute ones, even in a wilderness.
OBJECTION. "But if the saints be so supported, how is it that
they fall so often under temptation and discouragements?
ANSWER. (1.) However low they fall at any time—they never fall off;
and that is a great matter. They "are kept by the power of God through
faith unto salvation," 1 Pet. 1:5. Hypocrites may fall, so as to fall off, and
fall into the pit, as a bucket falls into a well when the chain breaks. But,
though the child of God may fall, and that so low that the waters go over
his head—yet there is still a bond of union between Christ and him; the
chain is not broken: he will not go to the ground; he will be drawn up
again, Luke 22:31, 32, "And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Satan has
desired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for
you, that your faith fail not."

(2.) The falls of the saints flow from their not improving their union with
Christ, their not making use of him by faith, for support or bearing them
up, Psalm 27:13, "I had fainted, unless I had believed." While the nurse
holds the child in her arms, it cannot fall to the ground; yet if the unwary
child is not held by her, it may fall backwards in her arms, to its great
hurt. Thus David's fall broke his bones, Psalm 51:8; but it did not break
the bond of union between Christ and him: the Holy Spirit, the bond of
that union, was not taken from him, ver. 11.
10. The last benefit I shall name, is, the special care of the Farmer,
John 15:1, 2, "I am the true vine, and my Father is the farmer. Every
branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit."
Believers, by virtue of their union with Christ, are the objects
of God's special care and providence. Mystical Christ is God's vine;
other societies in the world are but wild olive trees. The men of the world
are but God's out-field; the saints are his vineyard, which he has a special
propriety in, and a special concern for, Cant. 8:12, "My vineyard, which is
mine, is before me." He who slumbers not nor sleeps, is the keeper of it;
he does keep it: lest any hurt it, he will keep it night and day; he, in whose
hand is the dew of heaven, will water it every moment, Isaiah 27:3. He
dresses and weeds it, in order to further its fruitfulness, John 15:2. He
cuts off the unfruitful twigs, that mar the fruitfulness of the branch. This
is done especially by the word, and by crosses or afflictions; the saints
need the ministry of the word, as much as the vineyard needs one to dress
and prune the vines, 1 Cor. 3:9, "We are laborers together with God; you
are God's husbandry, you are God's building." And they need the cross
too, 1 Pet. 1:6.
Therefore, if we were to reckon the cross among the benefits flowing to
believers from their union with Christ, I judge that we should not reckon
amiss. Sure I am, in their sufferings they "suffer with him," Romans 8:17.
The assurances which they have of the cross, have rather the nature of a
promise, than of a threatening, Psalm 89:30-33, "If his children forsake
my law – then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving-kindness will I not utterly
take from him, nor allow my faithfulness to fail." This looks like a tutor's
engaging to a dying father, to take care of the children left with him; and

to give them both nurture and admonition for their good. The covenant of
grace truly beats the spears of affliction into pruning-hooks, to them that
are in Christ, Isaiah 28:9, "By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin."
Why, then, should we be angry with our cross? why should we be
frightened at it? The believer must take up his cross, and follow his
leader, the Lord Jesus Christ. He must take up his every-day's cross, Luke
9:23, "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily." Yes, he must take up holy day's cross too, Lam. 2:22,
"You have called, as in a solemn day, my terrors round about." The
church of the Jews had of a long time many a pleasant meeting at the
temple, on solemn days, for the worship of God; but they got a solemnity
of another nature, when God called together, about the temple and city,
the Chaldean army, that burnt the temple, and laid Jerusalem in heaps.
And as the church of God is yet militant in this lower region, how can it
be but the clouds will return after the rain? But the cross of Christ, by
which appellation the saint's troubles are named, is a kindly name to the
believer.
It is a cross indeed; not to the believer's graces—but to his corruptions.
The hypocrite's seeming grace may indeed breathe out their last on a
cross, as those of the stony-ground hearers did, Matt. 13:6, "When the
sun" of persecution, ver. 21, "was up, they were scorched; and because
they had no root, they withered away;" but never did one of the real
graces in a believer die upon the cross yet. Nay, as the candle shines
brightest in the night, and the fire burns fiercest in intense frost; so the
believers graces are commonly most vigorous in a time of
trouble.
There is a certain pleasure and sweetness in the cross, to those who have
their senses exercised to discern, and to find it out. There is a certain
sweetness in a man's seeing himself upon his trial for heaven, and
standing candidate for glory. There is a pleasure in traveling over those
mountains, where the Christian can see the prints of Christ's own feet,
and the footsteps of the flock, who have been there before him. How
pleasant is it to a saint, in the exercise of grace, to see how a good God
crosses his corrupt inclinations, and prevents his folly! How sweet is it to

behold these thieves upon the cross! How refined a pleasure is there in
observing how God draws away provision from unruly lusts, and so
pinches them, that the Christian may get them governed! Truly, there is a
paradise within this thorn-hedge.
Many a time the people of God are in bonds of sin; which are never
loosed, until they are bound with cords of affliction. God takes them, and
throws them into a fiery furnace—which burns off their bonds; and then,
like the three children, Dan. 3:25, they are "free, walking in the midst of
the fire." God gives his children a medicinal potion, with one bitter
ingredient: if that will not work upon them, he will put in a second bitter
ingredient, a third, and so on, as there is need, that they may work
together for their good, Romans 8:28. With cross winds he hastens them
to their labor. They are often found in such ways, as that the cross is the
happiest thing that they can meet with: and well may they salute it as
David did Abigail, saying, "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who sent
you this day to meet me," 1 Sam. 25:32.
Worldly things are often such a load to the Christian, that he moves but
very slowly heavenward. God sends a wind of trouble, which blows the
burden off the man's back; he then walks more speedily on his way, after
God has removed some gilded earth from him, which was drawing his
heart away from God, Zeph. 3:12, "I will also leave in the midst of you an
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord."
It was an observation of a heathen moralist, that "no history makes
mention of any man, who has been made better by riches." I doubt
whether our modern histories can supply the defect of ancient histories in
this point. But sure I am, many have been the worse for riches: thousands
have been hugged to death in the embraces of a smiling world; and many
good men have got wounds from outward prosperity, that must be cured
by the cross. I remember to have read of one, who having an internal
abscess, had in vain used the help of physicians: but being wounded with
a sword, the infection drained out; and his life was saved by that accident,
which threatened immediate death. Often have spiritual abscesses
gathered in the bosoms of God's people, in time of outward prosperity,
and been thus broken and drained by the cross. It is beneficial for
believers to be healed by stripes; although they are usually so weak as to

cry out for fear, at the sight of the pruning-knife, as if it were the
destroying axe; and to think that the Lord is coming to kill them, when
he is indeed coming to cure them.
I shall now CONCLUDE, addressing myself in a few words, first, to
saints, and next to sinners.
To you that are SAINTS, I say,
First, Strive to obtain and keep up sincere communion and
fellowship with Jesus Christ; that is, to be still deriving fresh
supplies of grace from the fountain which is in him, by faith:
and making suitable returns of them, in the exercise of grace and holy
obedience. Beware of estrangement between Christ and your souls. If it
has gotten in already, which seems to be the case of many this day,
endeavor to get it removed. There are multitudes in the world who slight
Christ, though you should not slight him: many that looked fair for
heaven, have turned their backs upon him. The warm sun of outward
peace and prosperity has caused some to cast their cloak of
religion from them, who held it fast when the wind of trouble
was blowing upon them: and "Will you also go away?" John 6:67. The
basest ingratitude is stamped on your slighting communion with Christ,
Jer. 2:31, "Have I been a wilderness unto Israel, a land of darkness? Why
do my people say—We are lords, we will come no more unto you?" Oh!
beloved, "Is this your kindness to your friend?" It is unfitting for any wife
to slight converse with her husband—but her especially if she was taken
from a prison or a ash-heap, as you were, by your Lord. It is not a time for
you to be out of your prayer chambers, Isaiah 26:20.
Those who now are walking most closely with God, may have enough to
do to stand when the trial comes: how hard will it be for others then, who
are likely to be surprised with troubles, when guilt is lying on their
consciences unremoved! To be awakened out of a sound sleep, and cast
into a raging sea, as Jonah was, will be a fearful trial. To feel trouble
before we see it coming; to be past hope before we have any fear—is a
very sad case. Therefore break down your idols of jealousy, mortify those
lusts, those irregular appetites and desires, that have stolen away your
hearts, and left you like Samson without his hair, and say, "I will go and

return to my first husband; for then was it better with me than now,"
Hos. 2:7.
Secondly, Walk as befits those who are united to Christ. Prove your union
with him by "walking as he also walked," 1 John 2:6. If you are brought
from under the power of darkness, let your light shine before men. "Shine
as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life;" as the lantern holds
the candle, which being in it, shines through it, Phil. 2:15, 16. Now you
who profess Christ to be in you, let his image shine forth in your life, and
remember that the business of your lives is to prove, by practical
arguments, what you profess.
1. You know the character of a wife: "She who is married, cares how
she may please her husband." Go—and do likewise; "walk worthy of the
Lord unto all pleasing," Col. 1:10. This is the great business of life; you
must please him, though it should displease all the world. What he hates
must be hateful to you, because he hates it. Whatever lusts come to gain
your hearts, deny them, seeing the grace of God has appeared, teaching
us so to do, and you are joined to the Lord. Let him be a covering to your
eyes; for you have not your choice to make, it is made already; and you
must not dishonor your head.
A man takes care of his feet, because, if he catches cold there, it flies up to
his head. "Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the
members of a harlot? God forbid," says the apostle, 1 Cor. 6:14. Will you
take that heart of yours, which is Christ's dwelling-place, and lodge his
enemies there? Will you take that body, which is his temple, and defile it,
by using the members thereof as instruments of sin?
2. Be careful to bring forth fruit, and much fruit. The branch well
laden with fruit—is the glory of the vine, and of the farmer too, John 15:8,
"Herein is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit; so shall you be
my disciples." A barren tree stands safer in a forest, than in an orchard;
and branches in Christ, which do not bring forth fruit, will be taken away,
and cast into the fire.
3. Be heavenly-minded, and maintain a holy contempt of the
world. You are united to Christ; he is your head and husband, and is in

heaven: therefore your hearts should be there also; Col. 3:1, "If you then
are risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sits
on the right hand of God." Let the serpent's seed go on their belly, and eat
the dust of this earth: but let the members of Christ be ashamed to bow
down, and feed with them.
4. Live and act dependently, depending by faith on Jesus
Christ. That which grows on its own root, is a tree, not a branch. It is of
the nature of a branch, to depend on the stock for all, and to derive all its
sap from thence. Depend on Jesus for life, light, strength, and all spiritual
benefits, Gal. 2:20, "I live—yet not I—but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I live now in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God." For this
cause, in the mystical union, strength is united to weakness, that death
and earth may mount up on borrowed wings. Depend on him for
temporal benefits also; Matt. 6:11, "Give us this day our daily bread." If
we have trusted him with our eternal concerns, let us be ashamed to
distrust him in the matter of our provision in the world.
5. Be of a humble disposition, as being united to the meek Jesus. There is
a prophecy to this purpose concerning the kingdom of Christ, Isa. 11:6,
"The wolf shall dwell with the lamb; and the leopard shall lie down with
the lamb." It is an allusion to the beasts in Noah's ark. The beasts of prey
that were accustomed to kill and devour others, when once they came
into the ark, lay down in peace with them: the lamb was in no hazard
from the wolf there, nor the lamb from the leopard. There was a beautiful
accomplishment of it in the primitive church, Acts 4:32, "And the
multitude of those who believed, were of one heart and of one soul." And
this prevails in all the members of Christ, according to the measure of the
grace of God in them.
Man is born naked: he comes naked into this world, as if God designed
him for the picture of peace; and surely, when he is born again, he comes
not into the new world of grace with claws to tear, a sword to wound, and
a fire in his hand to burn up his fellow-members in Christ, because they
cannot see with his light. Oh! it is sad to see Christ's lilies—as
thorns in one another's sides; Christ's lambs devouring one
another like lions, and God's diamonds cutting one another: yet
it must be remembered, that sin is no proper cement for the members of

Christ, though Herod and Pontius Pilate may be made friends that way.
The apostle's rule is plain, Heb. 12:14, "Follow peace with all men, and
holiness." To follow peace no farther than our inclinations, credit, and
such like things will allow us, is too short: to pursue it farther than
holiness allows us, that is, conformity to the Divine will, is too far.
Peace is precious—yet it may be bought too dearly: therefore we must
rather lack it—than purchase it at any expense of truth or holiness. But
otherwise it cannot be bought too dearly; and it will always be precious in
the eyes of the sons of peace.
And now, SINNERS, what shall I say to you? I have given you some view
of the privileges of those in the state of grace. You have seen them afar
off; but alas! they are not yours, because you are not Christ's. The
sinfulness of an unregenerate state is yours; and the misery of it is
yours also: you have neither part nor lot in this matter. The guilt of all
your sins lies upon you; you have no part in the righteousness of Christ.
There is no peace to you, no peace with God, no true peace of conscience;
for you have no saving interest in the great peace-maker. You are none of
God's family; the adoption we spoke of, belongs not to you. You have no
part in the Spirit of sanctification; and, in one word, you have no
inheritance among those who are sanctified. All I can say to you in this
matter, is, that the case is not desperate; these choice blessings may yet
be yours, Rev. 3:20, "Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man
hears my voice, and opens the door, I will come into him, and will sup
with him, and he with me." Heaven is proposing a union with earth still!
The potter is making suit to his own clay! The gates of the city of refuge
are not yet closed! O, that we could compel you to come in!
Thus far of the state of grace.

The Eternal State
Death
Section I. Man's Life is Vanity
"For I know that you will bring me to death, and to the house appointed
for all living." Job 30:23.
I come now to discourse of man's eternal state, into which he enters by
death. Of this entrance, Job takes a solemn serious view, in the words of
the text, which contain a general truth, and a particular application of it.
The general truth is supposed; namely, that all men must, by death,
remove out of this world; they must die. But where must they go? They
must go to the house appointed for all living; to the grave, that darksome,
gloomy, solitary house, in the land of forgetfulness. Wherever the body is
laid up until the resurrection, there, as to a dwelling-house, death brings
us home. While we are in the body, we are but in a lodging-house, in an
inn, on our way homeward. When we come to our grave, we come to our
home, our long home, Eccl. 12:5.
All living must be inhabitants of this house, good and bad, old and young.
Man's life is a stream, running into death's devouring deeps. Those who
now live in palaces, must leave them, and go home to this house; and
those who have not where to lay their heads, shall thus have a house at
length. It is appointed for all, by Him whose counsel shall stand. This
appointment cannot be shifted; it is a law which mortals cannot
transgress. Job's application of this general truth to himself, is expressed
in these words: "For I know that you will bring me to death, and to the
house appointed for all living." He knew, that he must meet with death;
that his soul and body must part; that God, who had set the time, would
certainly see it kept. Sometimes Job was inviting death to come to him,
and carry him home to its house; yes, he was in the hazard of running to
it before the time– Job 7:15, "My soul chooses strangling, and death

rather than my life." But here he considers God would bring him to it;
yes, bring him back to it, as the word imports. Whereby he seems to
intimate, that we have no life in this world, but as runaways from death,
which stretches out its cold arms, to receive us from the womb– but
though we do then narrowly escape its clutches, we cannot escape long;
we shall be brought back again to it. Job knew this, he had laid it down as
a certainly, and was looking for it.
I. ALL MUST DIE. Although this doctrine is confirmed by the
experience of all former generations, ever since Abel entered into the
house appointed for all living, and though the living know that they shall
die, yet it is needful to discourse of the certainty of death, that it may be
impressed on the mind, and duly considered.
Therefore consider,
1. There is an unalterable statute of death, under which all men are
concluded. "It is appointed unto men once to die," Heb. 9:27. It is laid up
for them, as parents lay up for their children– they may look for it, and
cannot miss it; seeing God has designed and reserved it for them. There is
no peradventure in it; "we must die," II Sam. 14:14. Though some men
will not hear of death, yet every man must see death, Psalm 89:48. Death
is a champion all must grapple with– we must enter the lists with it, and
it will have the mastery, Eccl. 8:8, "There is no man that has power over
the spirit, to retain the spirit; neither has he power in the day of death."
Those indeed who are found alive at Christ's coming, shall all be changed,
I Cor. 15:51. But that change will be equivalent to death, will answer the
purposes of it. All other people must go the common road, the way of all
flesh.
2. Let us consult daily observation. Every man "sees that wise men
die, likewise the fool and brutish person," Psalm 49:10. There is room
enough on this earth for us, notwithstanding the multitudes that were
upon it before us. They are gone, to make room for us; as we must depart,
to make room for others. It is long since death began to transport men
into another world, and vast multitudes are gone there already– yet the
work is going on still; death is carrying off new inhabitants daily, to the
house appointed for all living. Who has ever heard the grave say, It is

enough! Long has it been getting, but still it asks. This world is like a
great fair or market, where some are coming in, others going out; while
the assembly that is in it is confusion, and the most part know not why
they are come together; or, like a town situated on the road to a great city,
through which some travelers have passed, some are passing, while
others are only coming in, Eccl. 1:4, "One generation passes away, and
another generation comes– but the earth abides forever."
Death is an inexorable, irresistible messenger, who cannot be diverted
from executing his orders by the force of the mighty, the bribes of the
rich, or the entreaties of the poor. It does not reverence the hoary head,
nor pity the harmless babe. The bold and daring cannot outbrave it; nor
can the faint-hearted obtain a discharge in this war.
3. The human body consists of perishing materials, Gen. 3:19,
"Dust you are, and unto dust you shall return." The strongest are but
brittle earthen vessels, easily broken in shivers. The soul is but basely
housed, while in this mortal body, which is not a house of stone, but a
house of clay, the mud walls cannot but molder away; especially seeing
the foundation is not on a rock, but in the dust; they are crushed before
the moth, though this insect be so tender that the gentle touch of a finger
will destroy it, Job 4:19.
These materials are like gunpowder; a very small spark lighting on them
will set them on fire, and blow up the house– the seed of a raison, or a
hair in milk, having choked men, and laid the house of clay in the dust. If
we consider the frame and structure of our bodies, how fearfully and
wonderfully we are made; and on how regular and exact a motion of the
fluids, and balance of humors, our life depends; and that death has as
many doors to enter in by, as the body has pores; and if we compare the
soul and body together, we may justly reckon, that there is somewhat
more astonishing in our life, than in our death; and that it is more
strange to see dust walking up and down on the dust, than lying down
in it.
Though the lamp of our life may not be violently blown out, yet the flame
must go out at length for lack of oil. What are those distempers and
diseases which we are liable to, but death's harbingers, that come to

prepare his way? They meet us, as soon as we set our foot on earth, to tell
us at our entry, that we do but come into the world to go out again.
Nevertheless, some are snatched away in a moment, without being
warned by sickness or disease.
4. We have sinful souls, and therefore have dying bodies– death
follows sin, as the shadow follows the body. The wicked must die, by
virtue of the threatening of the covenant of works, Gen. 2:17, "In the day
that you eat thereof, you shall surely die." And the godly must die too,
that as death entered by sin, sin may go out by death. Christ has taken
away the sting of death, as to them; though he has not as yet removed
death itself. Therefore, though it fastens on them, as the viper did on
Paul's hand, it shall do them no harm– but because the leprosy of sin is in
the walls of the house, it must be broken down, and all the materials
thereof carried forth.
5. Man's life in this world, according to the Scripture account of it, is
but a few degrees removed from death. The Scripture represents it
as a vain and empty thing, short in its continuance, and swift in its
passing away.
First, Man's life is a vain and empty thing– while it is, it vanishes away;
and lo! it is not. Job 7:6, "My days are vanity." If we suspect afflicted Job
of partiality in this matter, hear the wise and prosperous Solomon's
character of the days of his life, Eccl. 7:15, "All things have I seen in the
days of my vanity," that is, my vain days. Moses, who was a very active
man, compares our days to a sleep, Psalm 90:5, "They are as a sleep,"
which is not noticed until it is ended. The resemblance is just– few men
have right apprehensions of life, until death awaken them; then we begin
to know that we were living. "We spend our years as a tale that is told,"
ver. 9. When an idle tale is telling it may affect a little; but when it is
ended, it is remembered no more– and so is a man forgotten, when the
fable of his life is ended. It is as a dream, or vision of the night, in which
there is nothing solid; when one awakes, all vanishes; Job 20:8, "He shall
fly away as a dream, and shall not be found; yes, he shall be chased away
as a vision of the night." It is but a vain show or image; Psalm 39:6,
"Surely every man walks in a vain show." Man, in this world, is but as it
were a walking statue– his life is but an image of life, there is so much of

death in it.
If we look on our life, in the several periods of it, we shall find it a heap of
vanities. "Childhood and youth are vanity," Eccl. 11:10. We come into
the world the most helpless of all animals– young birds and beasts can do
something for themselves, but infant man is altogether unable to help
himself. Our childhood is spent in pitiful trifling pleasures, which become
the scorn of our after thoughts. Youth is a flower that soon withers, a
blossom that quickly falls off; it is a space of time in which we are rash,
foolish, and inconsiderate, pleasing ourselves with a variety of vanities,
and swimming as it were through a flood of them.
But before we are aware it is past; and we are, in middle age,
encompassed with a thick cloud of cares, through which we must grope;
and finding ourselves beset with prickling thorns of difficulties, through
them we must force our way, to accomplish the projects and contrivances
of our riper thoughts. The more we solace ourselves in any earthly
enjoyment we attain to, the more bitterness do we find in parting with it.
Then comes old age, attended with its own train of infirmities, labor,
and sorrow, Psalm 90:10, and sets us down next door to the grave. In a
word, "All flesh is like grass," Isa. 40:6. Every stage or period in life, is
vanity. "Man at his best state," his middle age, when the heat of youth is
spent, and the sorrows of old age have not yet overtaken him, "is
altogether vanity," Psalm 39:5. Death carries off some in the bud of
childhood, others in the blossom of youth, and others when they are
come to their fruit; few are left standing, until, like ripe corn, they forsake
the ground– all die one time or other.
II. Man's life is a SHORT thing. It is not only a vanity, but a shortlived vanity. Consider,
1. How the life of man is reckoned in the Scriptures. It was
indeed sometimes reckoned by hundreds of years– but no man ever
arrived at a thousand, which yet bears no proportion to eternity. Now
hundreds are brought down to scores; threescore and ten, or fourscore, is
its utmost length, Psalm 90:10. But few men arrive at that length of life.
Death does but rarely wait, until men be bowing down, by reason of age,

to meet the grave. Yet, as if years were too big a word for such a small
thing as the life of man on earth, we find it counted by months, Job 14:5.
"The number of his months are with you." Our course, like that of the
moon, is run in a little time– we are always waxing or waning, until we
disappear.
But frequently it is reckoned by days; and these but few, Job 14:1, "Man,
that is born of a woman, is of few days." No, it is but one day, in Scripture
account; and that a hireling's day, who will precisely observe when his
day ends, and give over his work, ver. 6, "Until he shall accomplish as an
hireling his day."
Yes, the Scripture brings it down to the shortest space of time, and calls it
a moment, II Cor. 4:17, "Our light affliction," though it last all our life
long, "is but for a moment." Elsewhere it is brought down yet to a lower
pitch, farther than which one cannot carry it, Psalm 39:5, "My age is as
nothing before you." Agreeably to this, Solomon tells us, Eccl. 3:2,
"There is a time to be born, and a time to die"; but makes no mention of a
time to live, as if our life were but a skip from the womb to the grave.
2. Consider the various SIMILITUDES by which the Scripture
represents the shortness of man's life. Hear Hezekiah, Isa. 38:12,
"My age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent; I am
cut off like a weaver's shuttle." The shepherd's tent is soon removed; for
the flocks must not feed long in one place; such is a man's life on this
earth, quickly gone. It is a web which he is incessantly working; he is not
idle so much as for one moment– in a short time it is wrought, and then it
is cut off. Every breathing is a thread in this web; when the last breath is
drawn, the web is woven out; he expires, and then it is cut off, he breathes
no more.
Man is like grass, and like a flower, Isa. 40:6. "All flesh," even the
strongest and most healthy flesh, "is grass, and all the goodness thereof
is as the flower of the field." The grass is flourishing in the morning; but,
being cut down by the mowers, in the evening it is withered– so man
sometimes is walking up and down at ease in the morning, and in the
evening is lying a corpse, being struck down by a sudden blow, with one
or other of death's weapons.

The flower, at best, is but a weak and tender thing, of short continuance
wherever it grows– but observe, man is not compared to the flower of the
garden; but to the flower of the field, which the foot of every beast may
tread down at any time. Thus is our life liable to a thousand accidents
every day, any of which may cut us off. But though we should escape all
these, yet at length this grass withers, this flower fades by itself. It is
carried off "as the cloud is consumed, and vanishes away," Job 7:9. It
looks big as the morning cloud, which promises great things, and raises
the expectation of the husbandman; but the sun rises, and the cloud is
scattered; death comes, and man vanishes!
The apostle James proposes the question, "What is your life?" chapter
4:14. Hear his answer, "It is even a vapor, that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away." It is frail, uncertain, and does not last. It is as
smoke, which goes out of the chimney, as if it would darken the face of
the heavens; but quickly it is scattered, and appears no more– thus goes
man's life, and "where is he?" It is wind, Job 7:7, "O remember that my
life is wind." It is but a passing blast, a short puff, "a wind that passes
away, and comes not again," Psalm 78:39. Our breath is in our nostrils,
as if it were always upon the wing to depart; ever passing and repassing,
like a traveler, until it goes away, not to return until the heavens be no
more.
III. Man's life is a SWIFT thing; not only a passing, but a flying
vanity. Have you not observed how swiftly a shadow runs along the
ground, in a cloudy and a windy day, suddenly darkening the places
beautified before with the beams of the sun, but is suddenly
disappearing? Such is the life of man on the earth, for "he flees as a
shadow, and continues not," Job 14:2. A weaver's shuttle is very swift in
its motion; in a moment it is thrown from one side of the web to the
other; yet "our days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle," chap. 7:6. How
quickly is man tossed through time, into eternity! See how Job describes
the swiftness of the time of life, chap. 9:25-26. "Now my days are swifter
than a runner; they flee away, they see no good. They are passed away as
the swift ships; as the eagle that hastens to the prey." He compares his
days with a runner, who runs speedily to carry tidings, and will make no
stop. But though the runner were like Ahimaaz, who overrun Cushi, our

days would be swifter than he; for they flee away, like a man fleeing for
his life before the pursuing enemy; he runs with his utmost vigor, yet our
days run as fast as he.
But this is not all; even he who is fleeing for his life, cannot run always–
he must needs sometimes stand still, lie down, or turn in somewhere, as
Sisera did into Jael's tent, to refresh himself– but our time never halts!
Therefore it is compared to ships, that can sail night and day without
intermission, until they reach their port; and to swift ships, ships of
desire, in which men quickly arrive at their desired haven; or ships of
pleasure, that sail more swiftly than ships of burden. Yet the wind failing,
the ship's course is checked– but our time always runs with a rapid
course! Therefore it is compared to the eagle flying; not with his ordinary
flight, for that is not sufficient to represent the swiftness of our days; but
when he flies upon his prey, which is with an extraordinary swiftness.
And thus, even thus, our days flee away.
Having thus discoursed of death, let us APPLY the subject in discerning
the vanity of the world; in bearing up, with Christian contentment and
patience under all troubles and difficulties in it; in mortifying our lusts; in
cleaving unto the Lord with full purpose of heart, at all hazards, and in
preparing for death's approach.
I. Let us hence, as in a looking-glass, Behold the vanity of the world,
and of all those things in it, which men so much value and esteem; and
therefore set their hearts upon. The rich and the poor are equally intent
upon gaining this world; they bow the knee to it; yet it is but a clay god–
they court the bulky vanity, and run eagerly to catch this shadow. The
rich man is hugged to death in its embraces; and the poor man wearies
himself in the fruitless pursuit. What wonder if the world's smiles
overcome us, when we pursue it so eagerly, even while it frowns upon us!
But look into the grave! O man! consider and be wise; listen to the
doctrine of death; and learn,
1. that, "hold as hard as you can, you shall be forced to let go your hold of
the world at length." Though you load yourself with the fruits of this
earth; yet all shall fall off when you come to creep into your hole, the

house, under ground, appointed for all living. When death comes, you
must bid an eternal farewell to your enjoyments in this world– you must
leave your goods to another; Luke 12:20, "And whose shall those things
be which you have provided?"
2. Your portion of these things shall be very little before long. If you lie
down on the grass, and stretch yourself at full length, and observe the
print of your body when you rise, you may see how much of this earth will
fall to your share at last. It may be you shall get a coffin, and a windingsheet; but you are not sure of that; many who have had abundance of
wealth, yet have not had so much when they took up their new house in
the land of silence. But however that be, more you cannot expect.
It was a sobering lesson, which Saladin, when dying, gave to his soldiers.
He called for his standard bearer, and ordered him to take his shroud
upon a pole, and go out to the camp with it, and declare that of all his
conquests, victories, and triumphs, he had nothing now left him, but that
piece of linen to wrap his body in for burial.
3. "This world is a false friend," who leaves a man in time of greatest
need, and flees from him when he has most to do. When you are lying on
a deathbed, all your friends and relatives cannot rescue you; all your
substance cannot ransom you, nor procure you a reprieve for one day; no,
not for one hour! Yes, the more you possess of this world's goods, your
sorrow at death is likely to be the greater; for though one may live more
commodiously in a palace than in a cottage, yet he may die more easily in
the cottage, where he has very little to make him fond of life.
II. It may serve as a storehouse for Christian contentment and
patience under worldly losses and crosses. A close application of
the doctrine of death is an excellent remedy against fretting, and gives
some ease to a troubled heart. When Job had sustained very great losses,
he sat down contented, with this meditation, Job 1:21, "Naked I came out
of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return there; the Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." When
Providence brings a mortality or disease among your cattle, how ready
are you to fret and complain! but the serious consideration of your own
death, to which you have a notable help from such providential

occurrences, may be of use to silence your complaints, and quiet your
spirits. Look to "the house appointed for all living," and learn,
1. That you must suffer a more severe tragedy than the loss of
worldly goods. Do not cry out because of an illness in the leg or arm–
for before long there will be a long home thrust at the heart. You may lose
your dearest relations– the wife may lose her husband, and the husband
his wife; the parents may lose their dear children and the children their
parents; but if any of these trials happen to you, remember you must lose
your own life at last; and "Why does a living man complain?" Lam. 3:39.
It is always profitable to consider, under affliction, that our case might
have been worse than it is. Whatever is consumed, or taken from us, "It is
of the Lord's mercies that we ourselves are not consumed," ver. 22.
2. It is but for a short space of time that we are in this world. It
is but a little that our necessities require in so short a space of time; when
death comes, we shall stand in need of none of these things. Why should
men rack their heads with cares how to provide for tomorrow; while they
know not if they shall then need anything? Though a man's provision for
his journey be nearly spent, he is not disquieted, if he thinks he is near
home. Are you working by candle light, and is there little of your candle
left? It may be there is as little sand in your glass; and if so, you have little
use for it.
3. You have matters of great weight that challenge your care.
Death is at the door, beware that you lose not your souls. If blood breaks
out at one part of the body, they often open a vein in another part of it, to
turn the stream of the blood, and to stop it. Thus the Spirit of God
sometimes cures men of sorrow for earthly things, by opening the heartvein to bleed for sin. Did we pursue heavenly things more vigorously
when our affairs in this life prosper not, we should thereby gain a double
advantage– our worldly sorrow would be diverted, and our best treasure
increased.
4. Crosses of this nature will not last long. The world's smiles and
frowns will quickly be buried together in everlasting forgetfulness. Its
smiles go away like foam on the water; and its frowns are as a passing
ache in a man's side. Time flies away with swift wings, and carries our

earthly comforts, and crosses too, along with it– neither of them will
accompany us into "the house appointed for all living." "For in death the
wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest. Even prisoners
are at ease in death, with no guards to curse them. Rich and poor are
there alike, and the slave is free from his master." Job 3:17-19.
Cast a look into eternity, and you will see affliction here in this world, is
but for a moment. The truth is, our time is so very short, that it will not
allow either our joys or griefs to come to perfection. Therefore, let them
"that weep be as though they wept not; and those who rejoice as though
they rejoiced not," etc., I Cor. 7:29-31.
5. Death will put all men on the same level. The king and the
beggar must dwell in one house, when they come to their journey's end;
though their entertainment by the way may be very different. "The small
and the great are there," Job 3:19. We are all in this world as on a stage; it
is no great matter, whether a man acts the part of a prince or a peasant,
for when they have acted their parts, they must both get behind the
curtain, and appear no more.
6. If you are not in Christ, whatever your afflictions now be, "troubles
a thousand times worse, are abiding you in another world." Death will
turn your crosses into pure unmixed curses! and then, how gladly would
you return to your former afflicted state, and purchase it at any rate, were
there any possibility of such a return.
7. If you are in Christ, you may well bear your cross. Death will put an
end to all your troubles. If a man on a journey is not well
accommodated, where he lodges only for a night, he will not trouble
himself much about the matter; because he is not to stay there, it is not
his home. You are on the road to eternity! let it not distress you that you
meet with some hardships in the 'inn of this world'. Fret not, because it is
not so well with you as with some others. One man travels with a cane in
his hand; his fellow traveler, perhaps, has but a common staff or stick–
either of them will serve the turn. It is no great matter which of them be
yours; both will be laid aside when you come to your journey's end.
III. It may serve for a bridle, to curb all manner of lusts,

particularly those conversant about the body. A serious visit made to cold
death, and that solitary mansion, the grave, might be of good use to
repress them.
(1.) It may be of use to cause men to cease from their INORDINATE
CARE FOR THE BODY; which is to many the bane of their souls. Often
do these questions, "What shall we eat? what shall we drink? and with
what shall we be clothed?" leave no room for another of more
importance, namely, "With what shall I come before the Lord?" The soul
is put on the shelf, to answer these base questions in favor of the body;
while its own eternal interests are neglected. But ah! why are men so busy
to repair the ruinous cottage; leaving the inhabitant to bleed to death of
his wounds, unheeded, unregarded? Why so much care for the body, to
the neglect of the concerns of the immortal soul? O do not be so anxious
for what can only serve your bodies; since, before long, the clods of cold
earth will serve for back and belly too!
(2.) It may abate your pride on account of BODILY ENDOWMENTS,
which vain man is apt to glory in. Value not yourselves on the blossom of
youth; for while you are in your blooming years, you are but ripening for
a grave; death gives the fatal stroke, without asking any body's age. Do
not boast in your strength, it will quickly be gone– the time will soon be,
when you shall not be able to turn yourselves on a bed; and you must be
carried by your grieving friends to your long home. And what signifies
your healthful constitution? Death does not always enter in soonest
where it begins soonest to knock at the door; but makes as great dispatch
with some in a few hours, as with others in many years.
Do not value yourselves on your beauty, which "shall consume in the
grave," Psalm 49:14. Remember the change which death makes on the
fairest face, Job 14:20– "You always overpower them, and then they pass
from the scene. You disfigure them in death and send them away." Death
makes the greatest beauty so loathsome, that it must be buried out of
sight. Could a mirror be used in "the house appointed for all living," it
would be a terror to those who now look oftener into their mirrors than
into their Bibles. And what though the body be gorgeously arrayed? The
finest clothes are but badges of our sin and shame; and in a little time will
be exchanged for a shroud, when the body will become a feast to the

worms!
(3.) It may be A CHECK UPON SENSUALITY AND FLESHLY LUSTS. 1
Peter 2:11, "I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the soul." It is hard to cause wet wood to take
fire; and when the fire does take hold of it, it is soon extinguished.
Sensuality makes men most unfit for divine communications, and is an
effectual means to quench the Spirit. Intemperance in eating and
drinking carries on the ruin of soul and body at once; and hastens death,
while it makes the man most unfit for it. Therefore, "Be careful, or your
hearts will be weighed down with dissipation, drunkenness and the
anxieties of life, and that day will close on you unexpectedly like a trap."
Luke 21:34
But O how often is the soul struck through with a dart, in gratifying the
senses! At these doors destruction enters in. Therefore Job "made a
covenant with his eyes," chap. 31:1. "The mouth of a strange woman is a
deep pit– he that is abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein," Prov. 22:14.
"Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall," I Cor. 10:12. Beware of lustful
pleasure; study modesty in your apparel, words, and actions. The ravens
of the valley of death will at length pick out the lustful eye– the obscene
filthy tongue will at length be quiet, in the land of silence; and grim
death, embracing the body in its cold arms, will effectually allay the heat
of all fleshly lusts!
(4.) In a word, it may CHECK OUR EARTHLY-MINDEDNESS; and at
once knock down "the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life." Ah! if we must die why are we so fond of temporal things; so
anxious to get them, so eager in the embraces of them, so mightily
bothered with the loss of them?
Let me, upon a view of "the house appointed for all living," address the
worldling in the words of Solomon. Prov. 23:5, "Will you set your eyes
upon that which is not?" For riches certainly make themselves wings,
"they flee away as an eagle towards heaven." Riches, and all worldly
things are but 'a lovely nothing'; they are that which is not. They are not
what they seem to be– they are but gilded vanities, that deceive the eye.

Comparatively, they are not; there is infinitely more of nothingness and
non-being, than of being, or reality, in the best of them. What is the
world and all that is in it, but a fashion, or fair show, such as men make
on the stage– a passing show? I Cor. 7:31. Royal pomp is but gaudy show,
or appearance, in God's account, Acts 25:23. The best name they get, is
good things– but observe it, they are only the wicked man's good things,
Luke 16:25, "You in your lifetime received your good things," says
Abraham, in the parable, to the rich man in hell. Well may the men of the
world call these things their goods; for there is no other good in them,
about them, nor attending them.
Now, will you set your eyes upon empty shadows and fancies? Will you
cause your eyes to fly on them, as the word is? Shall men's hearts fly out
at their eyes upon them, as a ravenous bird on its prey? If they do, let
them know, that at length these shall flee as fast away from them, as their
eyes flew upon them– like a flock of fair-feathered birds, that settle on a
fool's ground; which, when he runs to catch them as his own, do
immediately take wing, fly away, and sitting down on his neighbor's
ground, elude his expectation, Luke 12:20, "You fool, this night your soul
shall be required of you; then whose shall these things be?"
Though you do not make wings to them, as many do; they themselves
make wings, and fly away; not as a tame house-bird, which may be caught
again; but as an eagle, which quickly flies out of sight, and cannot be
recalled. Forbear then to seek these things. O mortal! there is no good
reason to be given why you should set your eyes upon them. This world is
a great inn, on the road to eternity, to which you are traveling. You are
attended by those things, as servants belonging to the inn where you
lodge– they wait upon you while you are there; and when you go away,
they will convoy you to the door. But they are not yours, they will not go
away with you; but return to wait on other strangers, as they did on you.
4. It may serve as a spring of CHRISTIAN RESOLUTION, to cleave to
Christ, adhere to his truths, and continue in his ways; whatever we may
suffer for so doing. It would much allay 'the fear of man, that brings a
snare'. "Who are you, that you should be afraid of a man that shall die?"
Isa. 51:12. Look on persecutors as pieces of brittle clay, that shall be
dashed in pieces, for then shall you despise them as foes, that are mortal;

whose terror to others in the land of the living, shall quickly die with
themselves.
The serious consideration of the shortness of our time, and the certainty
of death, will teach us, that all the advantage which we can make by our
seeking the world, is not worth the while; it is not worth going out of our
way to get it– and what we refuse to forgo for Christ's sake, may be
quickly taken from us by death. But we can never lose it so honorably, as
for the cause of Christ, and his gospel; for what glory is it, that you give
up what you have in the world, when God takes it away from you by
death, whether you will or not?
This consideration may teach us to undervalue life itself, and choose to
forgo it, rather than to sin. The worst that men can do, is to take away
that life, which we cannot long keep, though all the world should conspire
to help us to retain the spirit. If we refuse to offer it up to God when he
calls for it in defense of his honor, he can take it from us another way; as
it fared with him, who could not burn as a martyr for Christ, but was
afterwards burned by an accidental fire in his house.
5. It may serve for a spur to INCITE US TO PREPARE FOR DEATH.
Consider,
(1.) YOUR ETERNAL STATE WILL BE ACCORDING TO THE STATE IN
WHICH YOU DIE– death will open the doors of heaven or hell to you. As
the tree falls, so it shall lie through eternity. If the infant be dead born,
the whole world cannot raise it to life again– and if one die out of Christ,
in an unregenerate state, there is no more hope for him, forever.
(2.) SERIOUSLY CONSIDER WHAT IT IS TO GO INTO THE ETERNAL
WORLD; a world of spirits, with which we are very little acquainted. How
frightful is converse with spirits to poor mortals in this life! and how
dreadful is the case, when men are hurried away into another world, not
knowing but that devils may be their companions forever! Let us then
give all diligence to make and advance our acquaintance with the Lord of
that world.
(3.) IT IS BUT A SHORT TIME YOU HAVE TO PREPARE FOR DEATH–

therefore now or never, seeing the time assigned for preparation will soon
be over. Eccl. 9:10, "Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with your
might– for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in
the grave, where you go." How can we be idle, having so great a work to
do, and so little time to do it in? But if the time is short, the work of
preparation for death, though hard work, will not last long. The shadows
of the evening make the laborer work cheerfully; knowing the time to be
at hand, when he will be called in from his labor.
(4.) MUCH OF OUR SHORT TIME IS OVER ALREADY; and the
youngest of us all cannot assure himself, that there is as much of his time
to come, as is past. Our life in the world is but a short preface to long
eternity; and much of the tale is told. Oh! shall we not double our
diligence, when so much of our time is spent, and so little of our great
work is done?
(5.) THE PRESENT TIME IS FLYING AWAY– and we cannot bring
back time past, it has taken an eternal farewell of us– there is no
kindling the fire again that is burned to ashes. The time to come is not
ours– and we have no assurance of a share in it when it comes.We have
nothing we can call ours, but the present moment; and that is flying
away. How soon our time may be at an end, we know not. Die we must–
but who can tell us when? If death kept one set time for all, we were in no
hazard of a surprise– but daily observation shows us, that there is no
such thing. The flying shadow of our life allows no time for loitering. The
rivers run speedily into the sea, from where they came; but not so
speedily as man to dust, from where he came. The stream of time is the
swiftest current, and quickly runs out to eternity!
(6.) If once death carries us off, THERE IS NO COMING BACK to mend
our matters, Job 14:14, "If a man dies, shall he live again?" Dying is a
thing we cannot get a trial of; it is what we can only do once, Heb. 9:27,
"It is appointed unto men once to die." And that which can be but once
done, and yet is of so much importance that our all depends on our doing
it right, we have need to use the utmost diligence that we may do it well.
Therefore prepare for death.
If you who are unregenerate ask me, what you shall do to prepare for

death, that you may die safely; I answer, I have told you already what
must be done. Your nature and state must be changed– you must be
united to Jesus Christ by faith. Until this is done, you are not capable of
other directions, which belongs to a person's dying comfortably.

The Difference Between the Righteous and
the Wicked in their Death
"The wicked is driven away in his wickedness; but the righteous has
hope in his death." Proverbs 14:32.
This text looks like the cloud between the Israelites and Egyptians;
having a dark side towards the latter, and a bright side towards the
former. It represents death like Pharaoh's jailor, bringing the chief butler
and the chief baker out of prison; the one to be restored to his office, and
the other to be led to execution. It shows the difference between the godly
and ungodly in their death; who, as they act a very different part in life,
so, in death, have a very different exit.
As to the death of a WICKED man, here is,
1. The MANNER of his passing out of the world. He is "driven
away;" namely, in his death, as is clear from the opposite clause. He is
forcibly thrust out of his place in this world; driven away as chaff before
the wind.
2. The STATE he passes away in. He dies also in a sinful and
hopeless state.
A. In a sinful state– He is driven away in his wickedness. He lived in it,
and he dies in it. His filthy garments of sin in which he wrapped up
himself in his life are his prison garments, in which he shall lie wrapped
up forever.
B. In a hopeless state– "but the righteous has hope in his death;" which
plainly imports the hopelessness of the wicked in their death. Whereby is
not meant, that no wicked man shall have any hope at all when he is
dying, but shall die in despair. No– sometimes it is so indeed; but
frequently it is otherwise; foolish virgins may, and often do, hope to the
last breath. But the wicked man has no solid hope– as for the delusive
hopes he entertains himself with, death will root them up, and he shall be

forever irretrievably miserable.
As to the death of a righteous man, he has hope in his death. This is
ushered in with a "but," importing the removal of these dreadful
circumstances, with which the wicked man is attended, who is driven
away in his wickedness; but the godly are not so.
1. Not so, in the manner of their passing out of the world. The righteous
are not driven away as chaff before the wind; but led away as a bride to
the marriage chamber, carried away by the angels into Abraham's bosom,
Luke 16:22.
2. Not so as to their state, when passing out of this life. The righteous
man dies, not in a sinful, but in a holy state. He does not go away in his
sin, but out of it. In his life he was putting off the old man, changing his
prison garments; and now the remaining rags of them are removed, and
he is adorned with robes of glory. Not in a hopeless, but a hopeful state.
He has hope in his death; he has the grace of hope, and the well-founded
expectation of better things than he ever had in this world– and though,
the stream of his hope at death may run shallow, yet he has still so much
of it as makes him venture his eternal interests upon the Lord Jesus
Christ.
DOCTRINE 1. The WICKED dying, are driven away in their
wickedness, and in a HOPELESS state. In speaking to this doctrine,
I. I shall show how, and in what sense, the wicked are "driven away in
their wickedness" at death.
II. I shall prove the hopelessness of their state at death.
III. And then apply the whole.
I. How, and in what sense, the wicked are "driven away in their
wickedness." In discoursing of this matter, I shall briefly inquire,
1. What is meant by their being "driven away."
2. Why they shall be driven, and where.

3. In what respects they may be said to be driven away "in their
wickedness."
But before I proceed, let me remark, that you are mistaken if you think
that no people are to be called wicked, but those who are avowedly
vicious and profane; as if the devil could dwell in none but those whose
name is Legion. In Scripture account, all who are not righteous, in the
manner hereafter explained, are reckoned wicked. Therefore the the text
divides the whole world into two sorts– "the righteous and the wicked,"
and you will see the same thing in Malachi 3:18, "Then shall you return,
and discern between the righteous and the wicked." Therefore if you are
not righteous, you are wicked. If you have not an imputed righteousness,
and also an implanted righteousness, or united to Christ by faith,
however moral and blameless in the eyes of men your conversation may
be, you are the wicked who shall be driven away in their wickedness– if
death finds you in that state. Now,
1. As to the MEANING of this phrase, "driven away," there are
three things in it; the wicked shall be taken away suddenly, violently, and
irresistibly.
(1.) Unrenewed men shall be taken away SUDDENLY at death. Not that
all wicked men die suddenly; nor that they are all wicked that die so; God
forbid. But,
1. Death commonly comes upon them unexpectedly, and so surprises
them, as the deluge surprised the old world, though they were forewarned
of it long before it came; and as travail comes on a woman with child,
with surprising suddenness, although looked for and expected, 1 Thess.
5:3. Death seizes them, as a creditor does his debtor, to drag him to
prison, Psalm 55:15, and that when they are not aware. Death comes in,
as a thief, at the window, and finds them full of busy thoughts about this
life which that very day perish.
2. Death always seizes them unprepared for it; the old house falls down
about their ears, before they have another provided. When death casts
them to the door, they have not where to lay their heads; unless it be on a
bed of fire and brimstone. The soul and body are as it were hugging one

another in mutual embraces; when death comes like a whirlwind, and
separates them.
3. Death hurries them away in a moment to destruction, and makes a
most dismal change– the man for the most part never knows where he is,
until "in hell he lift up his eyes," Luke 16:23. The floods of wrath suddenly
overwhelm his soul; and before he is aware, he is plunged into the
bottomless pit!
(2.) The unrenewed man is taken away out of the world VIOLENTLY.
Driving is a violent action; he is "chased out of the world," Job 18:18.
Gladly would he stay, if he could; but death drags him away, like a
malefactor to the execution. He sought no other portion than the profits
and pleasures of this world– he has no other; he really desires no other–
how can he then go away out of it, if he were not driven?
Question. "But may not a wicked man be willing to die?" Answer. He
may indeed be willing to die; but observe it is only in one of three cases.
1. In a fit of passion, by reason of some trouble that he is impatient to be
rid of. Thus, many people, when their passion has got the better of their
reason, and when, on that account they are most unfit to die, will be
ready to cry, "O to be gone!" But should their desire be granted, and
death came at their call, they would quickly show they were not in
earnest; and that, if they go, they must be driven away against their wills.
2. When they are brim-full of despair may they be willing to die. Thus
Saul murdered himself; and Spira wished to be in hell, that he might
know the uttermost of what he believed he was to suffer. In this manner
men may seek after death, while it flees from them. But fearful is the
violence these undergo, whom the terrors of God do thus drive.
3. When they are dreaming of happiness after death. Foolish
virgins, under the power of delusion, as to their state, may be willing to
die, having no fear of lying down in sorrow. How many are there, who can
give no scriptural ground for their hope, who yet have no bands in their
death! Many are driven to darkness 'sleeping'– they go off like lambs,
who would roar like lions, did they but know what place they are going to;

though the chariot in which they are, drives furiously to the depths of
hell, yet they fear not, because they are fast asleep!
(3.) The unregenerate man is taken away IRRESISTIBLY. He must go,
though sore against his will. Death will lake no refusal, nor admit of any
delay; though the man has not lived half his days, according to his own
computation. If he will not bow, it will break him. If he will not come
forth, it will pull the house down about his ears; for there he must not
stay. Although the physicians help, friends groan, the wife and children
cry, and he himself use his utmost efforts to retain the spirit, his soul is
required of him; yield he must, and go where he shall never more see
light.
2. Let us consider, WHY they are driven, and WHERE.
When the wicked die,
(1.) They are driven out of this world, where they sinned, into the
other world, where they must be judged, and receive their particular
sentences, Heb. 9:27, "It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this
the judgment." They shall no more return to their beloved earth. Though
their hearts are wedded to their earthly enjoyments, they must leave
them, they can carry nothing hence. How sorrowful must their departure
be, when they have nothing in view so good as that which they leave
behind them!
(2.) They are driven out of the society of the saints on earth, into the
society of the damned in hell, Luke 16:22-23, "The rich man also
died, and was buried. And in hell he lift up his eyes." What a multitude of
the devil's goats do now take place among Christ's sheep! but at death
they shall be "led forth with the workers of iniquity," Psalm 125:5. There
is a mixed multitude in this world, but no mixture in the other; each party
is there set by themselves. Though hypocrites grow here as tares among
the wheat, death will root them up, and they shall be bound in bundles
for the fire.
(3.) They are driven out of time into eternity! While time lasts with
them, there is hope; but when time goes, all hope goes with it. Precious

time is now lavishly spent– it lies so heavy on the hands of many, that
they think themselves obliged to take several ways to drive away time.
But beware of being at a loss what to do in life– improve time for eternity,
while you have it; for before long, death will drive it from you, and you
from it, so as you shall never meet again.
(4.) They are driven out of their specious 'pretenses to piety'.
Death strips them of the splendid robes of a fair profession, with which
some of them are adorned; and turns them off the stage, in the rags of a
wicked heart and life. The word "hypocrite" properly signifies a stageplayer, who appears to be what indeed he is not. This world is the stage
on which these children of the devil impersonate the children of God.
Their 'show of religion' is the player's coat, under which one must look,
who will judge of them aright. Death turns them out of their coat, and
they appear in their native dress– it unveils them, and takes off their
mask! There are none in the other world, who pretend to be better than
they really are. Depraved nature acts in the regions of horror,
undisguised!
(5.) They are driven away from all means of grace; and are set beyond the
line, quite out of all prospect of mercy. There is no more an
opportunity to buy oil for the lamp; it is gone out at death, and can never
be lighted again. There may be offers of mercy and peace made, after they
are gone; but they are to others, not to them– there are no such offers in
the place to which they are driven; these offers are only made in that
place from which they are driven away.
3. In what respects may they be said to be driven away in their
wickedness?
Answer 1. In respect of their being driven away in
their sinful unconverted state. Having lived enemies to God, they die
in a state of enmity to him– for none are brought into the eternal state of
consummate happiness, but by the way of the state of grace in this life.
The child that is dead in the womb, is born dead, and is cast out of the
womb into the grave– so, "he who is dead while he lives", or is spiritually
dead, is cast forth of the womb of time, in the same state of death, into

the pit of utter misery. O miserable death, to die in the gall of bitterness,
and bond of iniquity! It had been incomparably better for such as die
thus, that they had never been born!
Answer 2. In regard that they die sinning, acting wickedly against God,
in contradiction to the divine law; for they can do nothing but sin while
they live– so death takes them in the very act of sinning; violently draws
them from the embraces of their lusts, and drives them away to the
tribunal, to receive their sentence! It is a remarkable expression, Job
36:14, "They die in youth," the marginal reading is, "their soul dies in
youth"– their lusts being lively, their desires vigorous, and expectations
big, as is common in youth. "And their life is among the unclean;" or,
"And the company" or herd "of them" dies "among the Sodomites,"
namely, is taken awny in the act of their sin and wickedness, as the men
of Sodom were, Genesis 19; Luke 17:28, 29.
Answer 3. As they are driven away, loaded with the guilt of all their
sins; this is the winding-sheet that shall lie down with them in the dust,
Job 20:11. Their works follow them into the other world; they go away
with the yoke of their transgressions wreathed about their necks. Guilt is
a bad companion in life, but how terrible will it be in death! It lies now,
perhaps, like cold brimstone on their benumbed consciences– but when
death opens the way for sparks of divine vengeance, like fire, to fall upon
it, it will make dreadful flames in the conscience, in which the soul will
be, as it were, wrapped up forever!
Answer 4. The wicked are driven away in their wickedness, in so far as
they die under the absolute power of their wickedness. While
there is hope, there is some restraint on the worst of men; those moral
endowments, which God gives to a number of men, for the benefit of
mankind in this life, are so many restraints upon the impetuous
wickedness of human nature. But all hope being cut off, and these gifts
withdrawn, the wickedness of the wicked will then arrive at its perfection.
As the seeds of grace, sown in the hearts of the elect, come to their full
maturity at death; so wicked and hellish dispositions in the reprobate,
come then to their highest pitch! Their prayers to God will then be turned
to horrible curses, and their praises to hideous blasphemies, Matthew

25:13, "There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth." This gives a
dismal, but correct view of the state of the wicked in another world.
II. I shall discover the HOPELESSNESS of the state of
unrenenewed men at death. It appears to be very hopeless, if we
consider these four things.
1. Death cuts off their hopes and prospects of peace and
pleasure in this life. Luke 12:19, 20, "Soul, you have much goods laid
up for many years; take your ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said
unto him, You fool, this night your soul shall be required of you– then
who shall have those things which you have provided?" They look for
great matters in this world, they hope to increase their wealth, to see their
families prosper, and to live at ease; but death comes like a stormy wind,
and shakes off all their fond hopes, like green fruit from off a tree. "When
he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him,"
Job 20:23. He may begin a web of contrivances for advancing his worldly
interest; but before he gets it wrought out, death comes and cuts it off.
"His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth; in that very day his
thoughts perish." Psalm 146:4.
2. When death comes, they have no solid ground to hope for
eternal happiness. "For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he
has gained, when God takes away his soul?" Job 27:8. Whatever hopes
they fondly entertain, they are not founded on God's word, which is the
only sure ground of hope; if they knew their own case, they would see
themselves only happy in a 'dream'. And indeed what hope can they
have? The law is plain against them, and condemns them. The curses of
it, those cords of death, are about them already. The Savior whom they
slighted, is now their Judge; and their Judge is their enemy! How then
can they hope? They have bolted the door of mercy against themselves, by
their unbelief. They have despised the remedy, and therefore must die
without mercy. They have no saving interest in Jesus Christ, the only
channel of conveyance through which mercy flows– and therefore they
can never taste it.
The 'sword of justice' guards the door of mercy, so as none can enter in,
but the members of the mystical body of Christ, over whose head is a

covert of atoning blood, the Mediator's blood. These indeed may pass
without a harm, for justice has nothing to require of them. But others
cannot pass, since they are not in Christ– death comes to them with the
sting in it– the sting of unpardoned guilt. It is armed against them with
all the force which the sanction of a holy law can give it. 1 Cor. 15:56, "The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law." When that law
was given on Sinai, "the whole mount quaked greatly," Exodus 19:18.
When the Redeemer was making satisfaction for the elect's breaking it,
"the earth did quake, and the rocks rent," Matt, 27:51.
What possible ground of hope, then, is there to the wicked man, when
death comes upon him armed with the force of this law? How can he
escape that fire, which "burnt unto the midst of heaven?" Deut. 4:11. How
shall he be able to stand in that smoke, that "ascended up as the smoke of
a furnace?" Exod. 19:18. How will he endure the terrible "thunders and
lightnings," verse 16, and dwell in "the darkness, clouds, and thick
darkness?" Deut. 4:11. All these comparisons heaped together do but
faintly represent the fearful tempest of wrath and indignation, which
shall pursue the wicked to the lowest hell; and forever abide on those who
are driven to darkness at death.
3. Death roots up their delusive hopes of eternal happiness;
then it is that their covenant with death and agreement with hell, is
broken. They are awakened out of their golden dreams, and at length lift
up their eyes; Job 8:14, "Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust
shall be a spider's web." They trust that all shall be well with them after
death– but their trust is as a web woven out of their own bowels, with a
great deal of art and industry. They wrap themselves up in their hope, as
the spider wraps herself in her web. But it is a weak and slender defense;
for however it may withstand the threatenings of the word of God; death,
that broom of destruction, will sweep them and it both away, so as there
shall not be the least shred of it left; and he, who this moment will not let
his hope go, shall next moment be utterly hopeless. Death overturns the
house built on the sand; it leaves no man under the power of delusion.
4. Death makes their state absolutely and forever hopeless.
Matters cannot be retrieved and amended after death. For,

1. Time once gone can never be recalled. If cries or tears, price or pains,
could bring time back again, the wicked man might have hope in his
death. But tears of blood will not prevail! Nor will his roaring for millions
of ages cause it to return! The sun will not stand still for the sluggard to
awake and enter on his journey; and when once it is gone down, he needs
not expect the night to be turned into day for his sake– he must lodge
through the long night of eternity, where his time left him.
2. There is no returning to this life, to amend what is amiss; it is a state of
probation and trial, which terminates at death; therefore we cannot
return to it again; it is but once we thus live, and once we die. Death
carries the wicked man to "his own place," Acts 1:25. This life is our
working day. Death closes our day and our work together. We may readily
admit the wicked might have some hope in their death, if, after death has
opened their eyes, they could return to life, and have but the trial of one
Sabbath, one offer of Christ, one day, or but one hour more, to make up
their peace with God– but "man lies down, and rises not until the
heavens be no more; they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their
sleep," Job 14:12.
3. In the other world, men have no access to get their ruined state and
condition retrieved, though they be ever so desirous of it. "For there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, where you
go," Eccl. 9:10. Now a man may flee from the wrath to come; he may get
into a refuge. But when once death has done its work, "the door is shut!"
there are no more offers of mercy, no more pardons– where the tree is
fallen, there it must lie.
Let what has been said be carefully pondered; and that it may be of use,
let me exhort you,
First, To take heed that you entertain no hopes of heaven, but what are
built on a solid foundation– tremble to think what fair hopes of
happiness death sweeps away, like cobwebs; how the hopes of many are
cut off, when they seem to themselves to be at the very threshold of
heaven; how, in the moment they expected to be carried by angels into
Abraham's bosom, into the regions of bliss and peace; they are carried by
devils into the society of the damned in hell, into the place of torment,

and regions of horror!
I beseech you to BEWARE–
1. Of a hope built upon ground that was never cleared. The wise builder
dug deep, Luke 6:48. Were your hopes of heaven never shaken; but have
you had good hopes all your days? Alas for it! you may see the mystery of
your case explained, Luke 11:21, When a strong man armed keeps his
palace, his goods are at peace. But if they have been shaken, take heed
lest some breaches only have been made in the old building, which you
have got repaired again, by ways and means of your own. I assure you,
that your hope, however fair a building it is, is not fit to trust to, unless
your old hopes have been razed, and you have built on a foundation quite
new.
2. Beware of that hope which looks bright in the dark, but loses all its
luster when it is set in the light of God's word, when it is examined and
tried by the touchstone of divine revelation, John 3:20, 21, "for every one
that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds
should be reproved. But he that does the truth, comes to the light, that his
deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God." That hope,
which cannot abide scripture trial, but sinks when searched into by
sacred truth, is a delusion, and not a true hope– for God's word is always
a friend to the graces of God's Spirit, and an enemy to delusion.
3. Beware of that hope, which stands without being supported by
scriptural evidences. Alas! many are big with hopes, who cannot give,
because they really have not, any scripture grounds for them. You hope
that all will be well with you after death– but what word of God is it, on
which you have been caused to hope? Psalm 119:49. What scriptural
evidence have you to prove that yours is not the hope of the hypocrite?
What have you, after impartial self-examination, as in the sight of God,
found in yourself, which the word of God determines to be a sure
evidence of his right to eternal life, who is possessed of it? Numbers are
ruined with such hopes as stand unsupported by scriptural evidence. Men
are fond and tenacious of these hopes; but death will throw them down,
and leave the self-deceiver hopeless.

4. Beware of that hope of heaven, which does not prepare and dispose you
for heaven, which never makes your soul more holy, 1 John 3:3, "Every
man that has this hope in him, purifies himself, even as he is pure." The
hope of the most part of men, is rather a hope to be free from pain and
torment in another life; than a hope of true happiness, the nature whereof
is not understood and discerned. Therefore it rests in sloth and
indolence, and does not excite to mortification and a heavenly life. So far
are they from hoping aright for heaven, that they must own, if they speak
their genuine sentiments, removing out of this world into any other place
whatever, is rather their fear than their hope.
The glory of the heavenly city does not at all draw their hearts upwards to
it, nor do they lift up their heads with joy, in the prospect of arriving at it.
If they had the true hope of the marriage day, they would, as the bride,
the "Lamb's wife," be "making themselves ready for it," Rev. 19:7. But
their hopes are produced by their sloth, and their sloth is nourished by
their hopes. Oh, Sirs, as you would not be driven away helpless in your
death, beware of these hopes! Raze them now, and build on a new
foundation, lest death leave not one stone of them upon another, and you
never be able to hope any more.
Secondly, Hasten, O sinners, out of your wickedness, out of your sinful
state, and out of your wicked life, if you would not at death be driven
away in your wickedness! Remember the fatal end of the wicked as the
text represents it. I know there is a great difference in the death of the
wicked, as to some circumstances– but ALL of them, in their death, agree
in this, that they are driven away in their wickedness. Some of them die
resolutely, as if they scorned to be afraid; some in raging despair, so
filled with horror that they cry out as if they were already in hell; others
in sullen despondency, oppressed with fears, so that their hearts sink
within them, at the remembrance of misspent time, and the view which
they have of eternity, having neither head nor heart to do anything for
their own relief. And others die stupidly; they live like beasts, and they
die like beasts, without any concern on their spirits, about their eternal
state. They groan under their bodily distress but have no sense of the
danger of their soul! One may, with almost as much prospect of success,
speak to a stone, as speak to them; vain is the attempt to teach them;

nothing that can be said moves them. To discourse to them, either of the
joys of heaven on the torments of hell, is to plough on a rock, or beat the
air. Some die like the foolish virgins, dreaming of heaven; their
foreheads are steeled against the fears of hell, with presumptuous hopes
of heaven. The business of those who would be useful to them, is not to
answer doubts about the case of their souls, but to discover to them their
own false hopes. But which way soever the unconverted man dies, he is
"driven away in his wickedness."
O dreadful case! Oh, let the consideration of so horrid a departure out of
this world, move you to flee to Jesus Christ, as the all-sufficient Savior, an
almighty Redeemer. Let it prevail to drive you out of your wickedness, to
holiness of heart and life. Though you reckon it pleasant to live in
wickedness, yet you cannot but own, it is bitter to die in it. And if you
leave it not in time, you must go on in your wickedness to hell, the proper
place of it, that it may be set there on its own base. For when you are
passing out of this world, all your sins, from the first to the last of them,
will swarm about you, hang upon you, accompany you to the other world,
and, as so many furies, surround you there forever.
Thirdly, O be concerned for others, especially for your relations, that they
may not continue in their sinful natural state, but be brought into a state
of salvation; lest they be driven away in their wickedness at death. What
would you not do to prevent any of your friends dying an untimely and
violent death? But, alas! do you not see them in hazard of being driven
away in their wickedness! Is not death approaching them, even the
youngest of them? And are they not strangers to true Christianity,
remaining in that state which they came into the world? Oh! make haste
to pluck the brand out of the fire, lest it be burned to ashes! The death of
relations often leaves a sting in the hearts of those they leave behind
them, because they did not do for their souls as they had opportunity;
and because the opportunity is forever taken out of their hands.

The state of the GODLY in death is a HOPEFUL state
We have seen the dark side of the cloud looking towards ungodly men,

passing out of the world; let us now take a view of the bright side of it,
shining on the godly, as they enter on their eternal state. In discoursing
on this subject, I shall confirm this doctrine, answer an objection
against it, and then make some practical improvement of the whole.
I. For CONFIRMATION, let it be observed, that although the passage
out of this world by death has a frightful aspect to poor mortals, and to
miscarry in it must needs be of fatal consequence; yet the following
circumstances make the state of the godly in their death, happy and
hopeful.
1. They hare a trusty good Friend before them in the other
world. Jesus Christ, their best Friend, is Lord of the land to which death
carries them. When Joseph sent for his father to come down to him to
Egypt, telling him, "God had made him lord over all Egypt," Gen. 45:9,
"And Jacob "saw the wagons Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of
Jacob revived," verse 27. He resolves to undertake the journey.
I think, when the Lord calls a godly man out of the world, he sends him
such glad tidings, and such a kind invitation into the other world, that, he
has faith to believe it, his spirit must revive, when he sees the 'wagon of
death' which comes to carry him there. It is true, indeed, he has a weighty
trial to undergo– after death the judgment. But the case of the godly is
altogether hopeful; for the Lord of the land is their husband, and their
husband is the judge. "The Father has committed all judgment unto the
Son," John 5:22. Surely the case of the wife is hopeful, when her own
husband is her judge, even such a husband as hates divorce. No husband
is so loving and so tender of his spouse, as the Lord Christ is of his. One
would think it would be a very bad land, which a wife would not willingly
go to, where her husband is the ruler and judge.
Moreover, their judge is the advocate, 1 John 2:1, "We have an advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous." Therefore they need not fear
their being put back, and falling into condemnation. What can be more
favorable? Can they think, that he who pleads their cause, will himself
pass sentence against them?
Yet further, their advocate is their Redeemer; they are "redeemed with

the precious blood of Christ," 1 Pet. 1:18, 19. So when he pleads for them,
he is pleading his own cause. Though an advocate may be careless of the
interest of one who employs him, yet surely he will do his utmost to
defend his own right, which he has purchased with his money– and shall
not their advocate defend the purchase of his own blood?
But more than all that, their Redeemer is their head, and they are his
members, Eph. 5:23, 30. Though one were so silly as to let his own
purchase go, without standing up to defend his right, yet surely he will
not part with a limb of his own body. Is not their case then hopeful in
death, who are so closely linked and allied to the Lord of the other world,
who are "the keys of hell and of death?"
2. They shall have a safe passage to another world. They must
indeed go through "the valley of the shadow of death;" but though it be in
itself a 'dark and shady valley', it shall be a 'valley of hope' to them– they
shall not be driven through it, but be as men in perfect safety, who fear no
evil, Psalm 23:4.
Why should they thus fear? They have the Lord of the land's safe conduct,
his pass sealed with his own blood; namely, the blessed covenant, which
is the saint's death-bed comfort, 2 Sam. 23:5, "Although my house be not
so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in
all things and sure– for this is all my salvation, and all my desire,
although he make it not to grow." Who then can harm them? It is safe
riding in Christ's chariot, Cant. 3:9, both through life and death. They
have good and honorable attendants– a guard, even a guard of angels.
These encamp about them in the time of their life; and surely will not
leave them in the day of their death. These happy ministering spirits are
attendants on their Lord's bride, and will doubtless convey her safe home
to his house.
When friends in mournful mood stand by the saint's bedside, waiting to
see him draw his last breath, his soul is waited for by angels, to be carried
into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16:22. The captain of the saint's salvation is
the captain of this holy guard– he was their guide even unto death, and
he will be their guide through it too, Psalm 23:4, "Yes, though I walk

through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for you are
with me." They may, without fear, pass that 'river', being confident it shall
not overflow them; and they may walk through that 'fire', being sure they
shall not be burnt by it.
Death can do them no harm! It cannot even hurt their bodies– for
though it separate the soul from the body, it cannot separate the body
from the Lord Jesus Christ. Even death is to them but 'sleep in Jesus', 1
Thess. 4:14. They continue members of Christ, though in a grave. Their
dust is precious dust; laid up in the grave as in their Lord's cabinet. They
lie in a grave 'mellowing', as precious fruit laid up to be brought forth to
him at the resurrection. The husbandman has corn in his barn, and corn
lying in the ground– the latter is more precious to him than the former,
because he looks to get it returned with increase. Even so the dead bodies
of the saints are valued by their Savior– they are "sown in corruption," to
be "raised in incorruption"; "sown in dishonor," to be "raised in glory," 1
Cor. 15:42, 43. It cannot hurt their souls. It is with the souls of the saints
at death, as with Paul and his company in their voyage, whereof we have
the history, Acts, chapter 27. The ship was broken to pieces, but the
passengers got all safe to land.
When the dying saint's speech is stopped, his eyes set, and his last breath
drawn, the soul gets safe away into the heavenly paradise, leaving the
body to return to its earth, but in the joyful hope of a reunion at its
glorious resurrection. But how can death hurt the godly? It is a foiled
enemy– if it casts them down, it is only that they may rise more glorious.
"Our Savior Jesus Christ has abolished death," 2 Tim. 1:10. The soul and
life of it is gone– it is but a 'walking shadow' that may fright, but cannot
hurt saints– it is only the 'shadow of death' to them– it is not the thing
itself; their dying is 'but as dying', or 'somewhat like dying'.
The apostle tells us, "It is Christ that died," Rom. 8:34. Stephen, the first
Christian martyr, though stoned to death, yet only 'fell asleep', Acts 7:60.
Certainly the nature of death is quite changed, with respect to the saints.
It is not to them, what it was to Jesus Christ their head– it is not the
venomed ruining thing, wrapped up in the sanction of the first covenant,
Gen. 2:17, "In the day you eat thereof, you shall surely die." It comes to
the godly without a sting– they may meet it with that salutation, "O

death, where is your sting?" Is this Mara? Is this 'bitter' death? It went
out full into the world, when the first Adam opened the door to it, but the
second Adam has brought it again empty to his own people.
I feel a sting, may the dying saint say– yet it is but a bee sting, slinging
only through the skin– but, O death, where is your sting, your old sting,
the serpent's sting, that stings to the heart and soul? The sting of death is
sin– but that is taken away. If death arrests the saint, and carries him
before the Judge, to answer for the debt he contracted, the debt will be
found paid by the glorious Surety; and he has the discharge to show. The
thorn of guilt is pulled out of the man's conscience; and his name is
blotted out of the black roll, and written among the living in Jerusalem.
It is true, it is a great journey through the valley of the shadow of death–
but the saint's burden is taken away from his back, his iniquity is
pardoned, he may walk at ease– "No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous
beast," the redeemed may walk at leisure there, free from all
apprehensions of danger.
3. They shall have a joyful entrance into the other world. Their
arrival in the regions of bliss, will be celebrated with rapturous hymns of
praise to their glorious Redeemer. A dying day is a good day to a godly
man. Yes, it is his best day; it is better to him than his birth-day, or than
the most joyous day which he ever had on earth. "A good name," says the
wise man, is "better than precious ointment– and the day of death, than
the day of one's birth," Eccl. 7:1.
The notion of the immortality of the soul, and of future happiness, which
obtained among some pagan nations, had wonderful effects on them.
Some of them, when they mourned for the dead, did it in women's
apparel; that, being moved with the indecency of the garb, they might the
sooner lay aside their mourning. Others buried them without any
lamentation or mourning; but had a sacrifice, and a feast for friends,
upon that occasion. Some were used to mourn at births, and rejoice at
burials. But the practice of some Indian nations is yet more strange,
where, upon the husband's decease, his wife, or wives, with a cheerful
countenance, enter the flames prepared for the husband's corpse.

But however false notions of a future state, assisted by pride, affectation
of applause, apprehensions of difficulties in this life, and such like
principles proper to depraved human nature, may influence crude
uncultivated minds, when strengthened by the arts of hell; O what solid
joy and consolation may they have, who are true Christians, being in
Christ, who "has brought life and immortality to light through the
gospel!" 2 Tim. 1:10. Death is one of those "all things," that "work
together for good to those who love God," Rom. 8:28. When the body
dies, the soul is perfected– the 'body of death' goes off at the 'death of the
body'.
What harm did the jailer to Pharaoh's butler, when he opened the prison
door to him, and let him out? Is the bird in worse case, when at liberty,
than when confined in a cage? Thus, and no worse, are the souls of the
saints treated by death. It comes to the godly man, as Haman came to
Mordecai, with the royal apparel and the horse, Esther 6:11, with
commission to do them honor, however awkwardly it be performed. I
question not but Haman performed the ceremony with a very ill mien, a
pale face, a downcast look, and a cloudy countenance, and like one who
came to hang him, rather than to honor him. But he whom the king
delighted to honor, must be honored; and Haman, Mordecai's grand
enemy, must be the man employed to put this honor upon him. Glory,
glory, glory, blessing and praise to our Redeemer, our Savior, our
Mediator, by whose death, 'grim devouring death' is made to do such a
good office to those whom it might otherwise have hurried away in their
wickedness, to utter and eternal destruction!
A dying day is, in itself, a joyful day to the godly; it is their redemption
day, when the captives are delivered, when the prisoners are set free. It is
the day of the pilgrims coming home from their pilgrimage; the day in
which the heirs of glory return from their travels, to their own country,
and their Father's house; and enter into actual possession of the glorious
inheritance. It is their marriage day– now is the time of espousals; but
then the marriage is consummated, and a marriage feast begun, which
has no end. If so, is not the state of the godly in death, a hopeful state?
II. Objection– "But if the state of the godly in their death be so hopeful,
how comes it to pass that many of them, when dying, are full of fears, and

have little hope?"
Answer– It must be owned, that saints do not all die in one and the
same manner; there is a diversity among them, as well as among the
wicked; yet the worst case of a dying saint is indeed a hopeful one. Some
die triumphantly, in a fnli assurance of faith. 2 Timothy 4:6-8, "The time
of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness." They get a taste of the joys of heaven, while here on earth;
and begin the songs of Zion, while yet in a strange land.
Others die in a solid dependence of faith on their Lord and Savior–
though they cannot sing triumphantly, yet they can, and will say
confidently, "The Lord is their God." Though they cannot triumph over
death, with old Simeon, having Christ in his arms, and saying, "Lord now
let your servant depart in peace, according to your word– for my eyes
have seen your salvation," Luke 2:29, 30; yet they can say with dying
Jacob, "I have waited for your salvation, Lord," Gen. 49:18. His left hand
is under their head, to support them, though his right hand does not
embrace them– they firmly believe, though they are not filled with joy in
believing. They can plead the covenant, and hang by the promise,
although their house is not so with God as they could wish.
But the dying day of some saints may be like that day mentioned in
Zechariah 14:7, "Not day, nor night." They may die under great doubts
and fears; setting as it were in a cloud, and going to heaven in a mist.
They may go mourning without the sun, and never put off their spirit of
heaviness, until death strips them of it. They may be carried to heaven
through the confines of hell; and may be pursued by the devouring lion,
even to the very gates of the new Jerusalem; and may be compared to a
ship almost wrecked in sight of the harbor, which yet gets safe into her
port, 1 Cor. 3:15, "If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss–
but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire." There is safety amid their
fears, but danger in the wicked's strongest confidence; and there is a
blessed seed of gladness in their greatest sorrows– "Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart," Psalm 97:11.
Now, saints are liable to such perplexity in their death, because, though

they are Christians indeed, yet they are men of like passions with others;
and death is a frightful object in itself, whatever dress it appears in– the
stern countenance with which it looks at mortals, can hardly fail of
causing them to shrink. Moreover, the saints are of all men the most
jealous of themselves. They think of eternity, and of a tribunal, more
deeply than others do; with them it is a more serious thing to die, than
the rest of mankind are aware of. They know the deceits of the heart, the
subtleties of depraved human nature, better than others do. Therefore
they may have much to do to keep up hope on a death-bed; while others
pass off quietly, like sheep to the slaughter; and the rather, that Satan,
who uses all his art to support the hopes of the hypocrite, will do his
utmost to mar the peace, and increase the fears, of the saint.
And finally, the bad frame of spirit, and ill condition, in which death
sometimes seizes a true Christian, may cause this perplexity. By his being
in the state of grace, he is indeed always habitually prepared for death,
and his dying safely is ensured– but yet there is more necessary to his
actual preparation and dying comfortably, his spirit must be in good
condition too.
Therefore there are three cases, in which death cannot but be very
uncomfortable to a child of God–
1. If it seizes him at a time when the guilt of some particular sin,
unrepented of, is lying on his conscience– and death comes on that very
account, to take him out of the land of the living; as was the case of many
of the Corinthian believers, 1 Cor. 11:30, "For this cause," namely, of
unworthy communicating, "many are weak and sickly among you, and
many sleep." If a person is surprised with the approach of death, while
lying under the guilt of some unpardoned sin, it cannot but cause a
mighty consternation.
2. When death catches him napping. The midnight cry must be frightful
to sleeping virgins. The man who lies in a ruinous house, and awakes not
until the timbers begin to crack, and the stones to drop down about his
ears, may indeed get out of it safely, but not without fears of being
crushed by its fall. When a Christian has been going on in a course of
security and backsliding, and awakens not until death comes to his

bedside, it is no wonder that he gets a fearful awakening.
3. When he has lost sight of his saving interest in Christ, and cannot
produce evidences of his title to heaven. It is hard to meet death without
some evidences of a title to eternal life at hand; hard to go through the
dark valley without the candle of the Lord shining upon the head. It is a
terrible adventure to launch out into eternity, when a man can make no
better of it than a leap in the dark, not knowing where he shall land,
whether in heaven or hell.
Nevertheless the state of the saints, in their death, is always in itself
hopeful. The presumptuous hopes of the ungodly, in their death, cannot
make their state hopeful; neither can the fears of a saint make his state
hopeless– for God judges according to the truth of the thing, not
according to men's opinions about it. Therefore the saints can be no more
altogether without hope, than they can be altogether without faith. Their
faith may be very weak, but it fails not; and their hope very low, yet they
will, and do hope to the end. Even while the godly seem to be carried
away with the stream of doubts and fears, there remains still as much
hope as determines them to lay hold on the tree of life that grows on the
banks of the river. Jonah 2:4, "Then I said, I am cast out of your sight–
yet I will look again toward your temple."
USE–
This speaks comfort to the godly against the fear of death. A godly
man may be called a happy man before his death, because, whatever
befalls him in life, he shall certainly be happy at death. You who are in
Christ, who are true Christians, have hope in your end; and such a hope
as may comfort you against all those fears which arise from the
consideration of a dying hour. This I shall branch out, in answering some
cases briefly–
Case 1– "The prospect of death," will some of the saints say, "is uneasy to
me, not knowing what shall become of my family when I am gone."
Answer. The righteous has hope in his death, as to his family, as well as
himself. Although you have little, for the present, to live upon; which has
been the condition of many of God's chosen ones, 1 Cor. 4:11, "We,"

namely, the apostles, "both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling-place;" and though you have
nothing to leave them, as was the case of that son of the prophets, who
feared the Lord, and yet died in debt which he was unable to pay, as his
poor widow represents, 2 Kings 4:2; yet you have a good Friend to leave
them to; a covenant God, to whom you may confidently commit them.
"Leave your fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and let your
widows trust in me." Jer. 49:11.
The world can bear witness of signal settlements made upon the children
of providence; such as by their pious parents have been cast upon God's
providential care. It has been often remarked, that they lacked neither
provision nor education. Moses is an eminent instance of this. He, though
he was an outcast infant, Exod. 2:3, yet became learned in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians, Acts 7:22, and became king in Jeshurun, Deut. 33:5. O!
may we not be ashamed, that we do not confidently trust him with the
concerns of our families, to whom, as our Savior and Redeemer, we have
committed our eternal interests?
Case 2– "Death will take us away from our dear friends; yes, we shall not
see the Lord in the land of the living, in the blessed ordinances."
Answer– It will take you to your best Friend, the Lord Christ. The friends
you leave behind you, if they be indeed people of worth, you will meet
again, when they come to heaven, and you will never be separated any
more. If death takes you away from the temple below, it will carry you to
the temple above. It will indeed take you from the streams, but it will set
you down by the fountain. If it puts out your candle, it will carry you
where there is no night, where there is an eternal day.
Case 3– "I have so much to do, in time of health, to satisfy myself as to
my interest in Christ, about my being a real Christian, a regenerate man,
that I judge it is almost impossible I should die comfortably."
Answer– If it is thus with you, then double your diligence to make your
calling and election sure. Endeavor to grow in knowledge, and walk
closely with God– be diligent in self-examination; and pray earnestly for
the Holy Spirit, whereby you may know the things freely given you of

God. If you are enabled, by the power and Spirit of Christ, thus diligently
to prosecute your spiritual concerns, though the time of your life be
neither day nor night, yet at evening time it may be light.
Many weak Christians indulge doubts and fears about their spiritual
state, as if they placed at least some part of religion in their imprudent
practice; but towards the end of life, they think and act in another
manner. The traveler, who reckons that he has time to spare, may stand
still debating with himself, whether this or the other be the right way–
but when the sun begins to set, he is forced to lay aside his scruples, and
resolutely to go forward in the road which he judges to be the right one,
lest he lie all night in the open fields. Thus some Christians, who perplex
themselves much, throughout the course of their lives, with jealous
doubts and fears, content themselves when they come to die, with such
evidences of the safety of their state, as they could not be satisfied with
before; and by disputing less against themselves, and believing more,
court the peace they formerly rejected, and gain it too.
Case 4– "I am under a sad decay, in respect of my spiritual condition."
Answer– Bodily consumptions may make death easy– but it is not so in
spiritual decays. I will not say, that a godly man cannot be easy in such a
case, when he dies, but I believe it is rarely so. Ordinarily, I suppose a cry
comes to awaken sleeping virgins, before death comes. Samson is set to
grind in the prison, until his locks grow again. David and Solomon fell
under great spiritual decays; but before they died, they recovered their
spiritual strength and vigor. However, bestir yourselves without delay, to
strengthen the things that remain– your fright will be the less, for being
awakened from spiritual sleep before death comes to your bedside– and
you ought to lose no time, seeing you know not how soon death may seize
you.
Case 5– "It is terrible to think of the other world, that world of spirits,
which I have so little acquaintance with."
Answer– Your best friend is Lord of that other world. Abraham's bosom
is kindly even to those who never saw his face. After death, your soul
becomes capable of converse with the blessed inhabitants of that other

world. The spirits of just men made perfect, were once such as your spirit
now is. And as for the angels, however superior their nature in the rank of
beings, yet our nature is dignified above theirs, in the man Christ, and
they are all of them your Lord's servants, and so your fellow-servants.
Case 6– "The pangs of death are terrible."
Answer– Yet not so terrible as pangs of conscience, caused by a piercing
sense of guilt, and apprehensions of divine wrath, with which I suppose
them to be not altogether unacquainted. But who would not endure
bodily sickness, that the soul may become sound, and every whit whole?
Each pang of death will set sin a step nearer the door; and with the last
breath, the body of sin will breathe out its last. The pains of death will not
last long; and the Lord your God will not leave, but support you under
them.
Case 7– "But I am likely to be cut off in the midst of my days."
Answer– Do not complain, you will be the sooner at home– you thereby
have the advantage of your fellow-laborers, who were at work before you
in the vineyard. God, in the course of his providence, hides some of his
saints early in the grave, that they may be taken away from the evil to
come. An early removal out of this world, prevents much sin and misery.
They have no ground of complaint, who get the residue of their years in
Immanuel's land. Surely you shall live as long as you have work cut out
for you by the great Master, to be done for him in this world– and when
that is at an end, it is high time to be gone.
Case 8– "I am afraid of sudden death."
Answer– You may indeed die so. Good Eli died suddenly, 1 Sam. 4:18. Yet
death found him watching, ver. 13. "Watch, therefore, for you know not
what hour the Lord does come," Matt. 24:42. But be not afraid, it is an
inexpressible comfort, that death, come when it will, can never catch you
out of Christ; and therefore can never seize you, as a jailor, to hurry you
into the prison of hell. Sudden death may hasten and facilitate your
passage to heaven, but can do you no prejudice.

Case 9– "I am afraid it will be my lot to die lacking the exercise of
reason."
Answer– I make no question but a child of God, a true Christian, may die
in this case. But what harm? There is no hazard in it, as to his eternal
state– a disease at death may divest him of his reason, but not of his
religion. When a man, going on a long voyage, has put his affairs in order,
and put all his goods aboard, he himself may he carried on board the ship
sleeping– all is safe with him, although he knows not where he is, until he
awake in the ship. Even so the godly man, who dies in this case, may die
uncomfortably, but not unsafely.
Case 10– "I am naturally timorous, and the very thoughts of death are
terrible to me."
Answer– The less you think on death, the thoughts of it will be the more
frightful– make it familiar to you by frequent meditations upon it, and
you may thereby quiet your fears. Look at the white and bright side of the
cloud– take faith's view of the city that has foundations; so shall you see
hope in your death. Be duly affected with the body of sin and death, the
frequent interruptions of your communion with God, and with the glory
which dwells on the other side of death– this will contribute much to
remove slavish fear.
It is a pity that saints should be so fond of life as they often are– they
ought to be always on good terms with death. When matters are duly
considered, it might be well expected that every child of God, every
regenerate man, should generously profess concerning this life, what Job
did, chap. 7:16, "I loath it, I would not live always." In order to gain their
hearts to this desirable temper, I offer the following additional
considerations.
I. Consider the SINFULNESS that attends life in this world.
While you live here, you sin, and see others sinning. You breathe
infectious air. You live in pest-house. Is it at all strange to loathe such a
life?
1. Your own plague sores are running on you. Does not the sin of your

nature make you groan daily? Are you not sensible, that though the cure
is begun, it is far from being perfected? Has not the leprosy got into the
walls of the house, which cannot be removed without pulling it down? Is
not your nature so vitiated, that no less than the separation of the soul
from the body can root out the disease? Have you not your sores without,
as well as your sickness within? Do you not leave marks of your pollution
on whatever passes through your hands? Are not all your actions tainted
and blemished with defects and imperfections? Who, then, should be
much in love with life, but such whose sickness is their health, and who
glory in their shame?
2. The loathsome sores of others are always before your eyes, go where
you will. The follies and wickedness of men are everywhere conspicuous,
and make but an unpleasant scene. This sinful world is but an unsightly
company, a disagreeable crowd, in which the most loathsome are the
most numerous.
3. Are not your own sores often breaking out again after healing?
Frequent relapses may well cause us remit of our fondness for this life.
To be ever struggling, and anon falling into the mire again, makes weary
work. Do you never wish for cold death, thereby effectually to cool the
heat of these lusts, which so often take fire again, even after a flood of
godly sorrow has gone over them?
4. Do not you sometimes infect others, and others infect you? There is
no society in the world, in which every member of it does not sometimes
lay a stumbling-block before the rest. The best carry about with them the
tinder of a corrupt nature, which they cannot be rid of while they live, and
which is liable to be kindled at all times, and in all places– yes, they are
apt to inflame others, and become the occasions of sinning. Certainly
these things are apt to embitter this life to the saints.
II. Consider the MISERY and TROUBLES that attend it. Rest is
desirable, but it is not to be found on this side of the grave. Worldly
troubles attend all men in this life. This world is a sea of trouble, where
one wave rolls upon another. They who fancy themselves beyond the
reach of trouble, are mistaken– no state, no stage of life, is exempted
from it. The crowned head is surrounded by thorny cares. Honor many

times paves the way to deep disgrace. Riches, for the most part, are kept
to the hurt of the owners. The fairest rose lacks not prickles; and the
heaviest cross is sometimes wrapped up in the greatest earthly comfort.
Spiritual troubles attend the saints in this life. They are like travelers
journeying in a cloudy night, in which the moon sometimes breaks out
from under one cloud, but quickly hides her head again under another–
no wonder they long to be at their journey's end. The sudden alterations
which the best frame of spirit is liable to, the perplexing doubts,
confounding fears, short-lived joys, and long-running sorrows, which
have a certain affinity with the present life, must needs create in the
saints a desire to be with Christ, which is best of all.
III. Consider the great IMPERFECTIONS attending this life.
While the soul is lodged in this cottage of clay, the necessities of the body
are many– it is always craving. The mud walls must be repaired and
patched up daily, until the clay cottage falls down for good and all.
Eating, drinking, sleeping, and the like, are, in themselves, but base
employments for a rational creature; and will be reputed such by the
heaven-born soul. They are 'badges of imperfection', and, as such,
unpleasant to the mind aspiring unto that life and immortality which is
brought to light through the gospel; and would be very grievous, if this
state of things were of long continuance.
Does not the gracious soul often find itself yoked with the body, as with a
companion in travel, unable to keep pace with it? When the spirit is
willing, the flesh is weak. When the soul would mount upward, the body
is a clog upon it, and a stone tied to the foot of a bird attempting to fly.
The truth is, O believer, your soul in this body is, at best, but like a
diamond in a ring, where much of it is obscured; it is far sunk in the vile
clay, until relieved by death.
I conclude this subject with a few DIRECTIONS how to prepare for
death, so that we may die comfortably. I speak not here of habitual
preparation for death, which a true Christian, in virtue of his gracious
state, never lacks, from the time he is born again, and united to Christ;
but of actual preparation, or readiness in respect of his particular case,

frame, and disposition of mind and spirit; the lack of which makes even a
saint very unfit to die.
First, Let it be your constant care to keep a clean conscience, "A
conscience void of offence toward God, and toward man," Acts 24:16.
Beware of a standing controversy between God and you, on the account of
some iniquity regarded in the heart. When an honest man is about to
leave his country, and not to return, he settles accounts with those he had
dealings with, and lays down methods for paying his debts in due time,
lest he be reckoned a bankrupt, and arrested by an officer when he is
going off. Guilt lying on the conscience, is a fountain of fears, and will
readily sting severely, when death stares the criminal in the face. Hence it
is, that many, even of God's children, when dying, wish passionately, and
desire eagerly, that they may live to do what they ought to have done
before that time.
Therefore, walk closely with God; be diligent, strict, and exact in your
course– beware of loose, careless, and irregular conversation; as you
would not lay up for yourselves anguish and bitterness of spirit, in a dying
hour. And because, through the infirmity cleaving to us, in our present
state of imperfection, in many things we offend all, renew your
repentance daily, and be ever washing in the Redeemer's blood. As long
as you are in the world, you will need to wash your feet, John 13:10, that
is, to make application of the blood of Christ anew, for purging your
consciences from the guilt of daily miscarriages. Let death find you at the
'fountain'; and, if so, it will find you ready to answer at its call.
Secondly, Be always watchful, waiting for your change, "like unto
men that wait for their Lord– that when he comes and knocks, they may
open unto him immediately," Luke 12:36. Beware of "slumbering and
sleeping, while the bridegroom tarries." To be awakened out of spiritual
slumber, by a surprising call to pass into another world, is a very frightful
thing– but he who is daily waiting for the coming of his Lord, will
comfortably receive the 'grim messenger', while he beholds him ushering
in him, of whom he may confidently say, "This is my God, and I nave
waited for him." The way to die comfortably, is, to die daily! Be often
essaying, as it were, to die. Bring yourselves familiarly acquainted with
death, by making many visits to the grave, in serious meditations upon it.

This was Job's practice, chapter 27:13, 14, "I have made my bed in the
darkness." Go and do likewise; and when death comes, you shall have
nothing to do but to lie down. "I have said to corruption, You are my
father– to the worm, You are my mother and my sister." You say so too;
and you will be the fitter to go home to their house.
Be frequently reflecting upon your conduct, and considering what course
of life you wish to be found in, when death arrests you; and act
accordingly. When you do the duties of your station in life, or are
employed in acts of worship, think with yourselves, that, it may be, this is
the last opportunity; and therefore do it as if you were never to do more
of that kind. When you lie down at night, compose your spirits, as if you
were not to awake until the heavens be no more. And when you awake in
the morning, consider that new day as your last; and live accordingly.
Surely that night comes, of which you will never see the morning; or that
morning, of which you will never see the night. But which of your
mornings or nights will be such, you know not.
Thirdly, Employ yourselves much in weaning your hearts from
the world. The man who is making ready to go abroad, busies himself in
taking leave of his friends. Let the mantle of earthly enjoyments hang
loose about you; that it may be easily dropped, when death comes to carry
you away into another world. Moderate your affections towards your
lawful comforts of life– let not your hearts be too much taken with them.
The traveler acts unwisely, who allows himself to be so allured with the
'conveniences of the inn' where he lodges, as to make his necessary
departure from it grievous. Feed with fear, and walk through the world as
pilgrims and strangers. Just as, when the corn is forsaking the ground, it
is ready for the sickle; when the fruit is ripe, it falls off the tree easily; so,
when a Christian's heart is truly weaned from the world, he is prepared
for death, and it will be the more easy to him. A heart disengaged from
the world is a heavenly one– we are ready for heaven when our heart is
there before us, Matt. 6:21.
Fourthly, Be diligent in gathering and laying up evidences of
your title to heaven, for your support and comfort at the hour of death.
The neglect thereof mars the joy and consolation which some Christians
might otherwise have at their death. Therefore, examine yourselves

frequently as to your spiritual state; that evidences which lie hid and
unobserved, may be brought to light and taken notice of. And if you
would manage this work successfully, make solemn, serious work of it.
Set apart some time for it. And, after earnest prayer to God, through
Jesus Christ, for the enlightening influences of his Holy Spirit, whereby
you are enabled to understand his own word, and to discern his own work
in your souls; examine yourselves before the tribunal of your own
consciences, that you may judge yourselves, in this weighty matter.
And, in the first place, let the marks of a regenerate state be fixed from
the Lord's Word– have recourse to some particular text for that purpose;
such as Prov. 8:17, "I love those who love me." Compare Luke 14:26, "If
any man comes to me, and hates not his father, and mother, and wife,
and children, and brethren, and sisters, yes, and his own life also, he
cannot be my disciple." Psalm 119:6, "Then shall I not be ashamed, when
I have respect unto all your commandments." Psalm 18:23, "I was also
upright before him; and I kept myself from my iniquity." Compare
Romans 7:22, 23, "For I delight in the law of God, after the inward man–
but I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my
mind." 1 John 3:3, "Every man that has this hope in him, purifies himself,
even as he is pure." Matt. 5:3, "Blessed are the poor in spirit– for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven." Phil. 3:3, "For we are the circumcision, which
worship," or serve "God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh."
The sum of the evidence arising from these texts, lies here– a real
Christian is one who loves God for himself, as well as for his benefits; and
that with a supreme love, above all persons, and all things; he has an
weighty and impartial regard to God's commands; he opposes and
wrestles against that sin, which of all others most easily besets him; he
approves and loves the holy law, even in that very point wherein it strikes
against his own beloved lust; his hope of heaven engages him to the study
of universal holiness; in which he aims at perfection, though he cannot
reach it in this life; he serves the Lord, not only in acts of worship, but in
the whole of his conversation; and as to both, is spiritual in the principle,
motives, aims, and ends of his service; yet he sees nothing in himself to
trust to, before the Lord; Christ and his fullness are the stay of his soul;

his confidence is cut off from all that is not Christ, or in Christ, in point of
justification or acceptance with God, and in point of sanctification too.
Everyone, in whom these characters are found, has a title to heaven,
according to the word. It is convenient and profitable to mark such texts,
for this special use, as they occur, while you read the Scriptures, or hear
sermons.
The marks of a regenerate state thus fixed, in the next place impartially
search and test your own hearts thereby, as in the sight of God, with
dependence on him for spiritual discernment, that you may know
whether they be in you or not. When you find them, form the conclusion
deliberately and distinctly; namely, that therefore you are regenerated,
and have a title to heaven. Thus you may gather evidences. But be sure to
have recourse to God in Christ, by earnest prayer, for the testimony of the
Spirit, whose office it is to "bear witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God," Rom. 8:16.
Moreover, carefully observe the course and method of providence
towards you; and likewise, how your soul is affected under the same, in
the various steps thereof– compare both with Scripture doctrines,
promises, threatenings, and examples– so shall you perceive if the Lord
deals with you as he always does unto those who love his name, and if you
are going forth by the footsteps of the flock. This may afford you
comfortable evidence. Walk tenderly and circumspectly, and the Lord will
manifest himself to you, according to his promise, John 14:21, "He who
has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he
that loves me, shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and will
manifest myself to him." But it is in vain to think of successful selfexamination, if you are loose and irregular in your walk.
Lastly, Dispatch the work of your day and generation with speed and
diligence. David, "after he had served his own generation by the will of
God, fell asleep" Acts 13:36. God has allotted us certain pieces of work of
this kind, which ought to be dispatched before the time of working be
over, Eccl. 9:10, "Whatever your hand finds to do, do it with your might–
for there is no work, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, where you
are going." Gal. 6:10, "As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good
unto all men, especially unto those who are of the household of faith." If a

passenger, after he has gotten on ship, and the ship is getting under sail,
remembers that he has omitted to dispatch a piece of necessary business
when be was ashore, it must needs be uneasy to him. Even so, reflection
in a dying hour upon neglected seasons, and lost opportunities, cannot
fail to disquiet a Christian. Therefore, whatever is incumbent upon you to
do for God's honor, and the good of others, either as the duty of your
station, or by special opportunity put into your hand, perform it
seasonably, if you would die comfortably.