PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 13
Of The Resurrection — Of The Day Of Judgment


OF THE RESURRECTION
JOHN 5:28, 29. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth; they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and
they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of the damnation.
QUEST. XXXVIII. WHAT benefits shall believers receive from Christ
at the resurrection?
ANS. 1. Their bodies shall be raised up to glory.
A. 2. They shall be openly acquitted at the day of judgment; and shall
be made perfectly blessed in the full enjoyment of God for ever.
I. The bodies of believers shall be raised up to glory. The doctrine of
the resurrection is a fundamental article of our faith; the apostle puts
it among the principles of the doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6:2. The body
shall rise again; we are not so sure to rise out of our beds as we are to
rise out of our graves. The ransomed body shall rise again. Some
hold that the soul shall be clothed with a new body; but then it were
improper to call it a resurrection, it would be rather a creation, Job
19:26., "Though worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh, shall I see

God." Not in another flesh, but my flesh, 1 Cor. 15:53., "This
corruptible must put on incorruption."
QUEST. By what arguments may the resurrection he proved?
Argument 1. By scripture, John 6:44., "I will raise him up at the last
day." Isa. 25:8., "He will swallow up death in victory." That is by
delivering our bodies from the captivity of the grave wherein death
for a time had power over them, 1 Thess. 4:14., "Them which sleep in
Jesus, will God bring with him."
Arg. 2. Christ is risen: therefore the bodies of the saints must rise.
Christ did not rise from the dead as a private person, but as the
public head of the church; and the head being raised, the rest of the
body shall not always lie in the grave. Christ's rising is a pledge of our
resurrection, 2 Cor. 4:14., "Knowing that he which raised up the Lord
Jesus, shall raise us up also by Jesus." Christ is called the first-fruits
of them that sleep, 1 Cor. 15:20. As the first-fruits is a sure evidence
that the harvest is coming on, so the resurrection of Christ is a sure
evidence of the rising of our bodies out of the grave. Christ cannot be
perfect as he is Christ mystical, unless his members be raised with
him.
Arg. 3. In respect of God's justice. If God be a just God, then he will
reward the bodies of the saints as well their souls. It cannot be
imagined that the souls of believers should be glorified, and not their
bodies; they have served God with their bodies.—their bodies have
been members of holiness,—their eyes have dropped tears for sin,—
their hands have relieved the poor,—their tongues have set forth
God's praise: therefore justice and equity require that their bodies
should be crowned as well as their souls: and how can that be, unless
they are raised from the dead?

Arg. 4. If the body did not rise again, then a believer should not be
completely happy: for though the soul can subsist without the body,
yet it hath appetium unionis,—a desire of re-union with the body,
and it is not fully happy till it be clothed with the body: therefore
undoubtedly the body shall rise again. If the soul should go to
heaven, and not the body, then a believer should be only half-saved.
Obj. 1. But some say, as the Virgin Mary to the angel, "How can this
be?" so, how can it be, that the body which is consumed to ashes
should rise again?
Ans. It doth not oppose reason, but transcend it; there are some
resemblances of the resurrection in nature. The corn, which is sown
in the ground, dies before it springs up, 1 Cor. 15:36., "That which
thou sowest is not quickened, except it die." In winter the fruits of
the earth die, in spring there is a resurrection of them: Noah's olive
tree springing after the flood was a lively emblem of the resurrection.
After the passion of our Lord, "many bodies of the saints which slept
in the grave arose," Mat. 27:52. God can more easily raise the body
out of the grave, than we can awake a man out of sleep.
Obj. 2. But when the dust of many are mingled together; how is it
possible that a separation should be made and the same numerical
body arise.
Ans. If we believe God can create, then he can distinguish the dust of
one body from another; do not we see the chymist can, out of several
metals mingled together, as gold, silver, alchymy, extract the one
from the other,—the silver from the gold,—the alchymy from silver,—
and can reduce every metal to its own kind? And shall we not much
more believe, that when our bodies are mingled and confounded
with other substances, the wise God is able to make an extraction,
and re-invest every soul with its own body?

QUEST. 3. Shall none but the bodies of the righteous he raised?
Ans. Yes, all that are in the graves shall hear Christ's voice, and shall
come forth, Acts 24:15. There shall be a resurrection of the dead both
of the just and unjust: Rev. 20:12., "I saw the dead, both small and
great, stand before God." But though all shall be raised out of their
graves, yet all shall not be raised alike.
1. The bodies of the wicked shall be raised with ignominy: those
bodies which on the earth did tempt and allure others with their
beauty, shall be at the resurrection loathsome to behold; they shall
be ghastly spectacles, as the phrase is, Isa. 66:24., "They shall be an
abhorring unto all flesh." But the bodies of the saints shall be raised
with honour, 1 Cor. 15:43., "It is sown in dishonour, it is raised in
glory." The saints' bodies then shall shine as sparkling diamonds,
Mat. 13:43., "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun."
2. The bodies of the saints shall arise out of their graves with
triumph; the bodies of the wicked shall come out of the grave with
trembling, as being to receive their fatal doom, but the godly, when
they awake out of the dust shall sing for joy, Isa. 26:19., "Awake and
sing, ye that dwell in the dust." When the archangel's trumpet
sounds, then the saints shall sing; the bodies of believers shall come
out of the grave to be made happy, as the chief butler came out of the
prison, and was restored to all his dignity at the court; but the bodies
of the wicked shall come out of the grave, as the chief baker out of
prison, to be executed, Gen. 40:22.
Use 1st. Believe this doctrine of the resurrection; and that the same
body that dies shall rise again, and with the soul be crowned.
Without the belief of this, tota corruit religio, 'all religion falls to the
ground,' 1 Cor. 15:14., If the dead rise not, then Christ is not risen,
and then our faith is vain.

Use 2d. Comfort. The body shall rise again? this was Job's comfort,
Job 19:26., "Though worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God." The body is sensible of joy as well as the soul; and indeed
we shall not be in all our glory, till our bodies are re-united to our
souls. O consider what joy there will be at the reuniting of the body
and the soul at the resurrection! Look what sweet embraces of joy
were between old Jacob and Joseph, when they first saw one
another, Gen. 46:29., such, and infinitely more, will there be, when
the body and soul of a saint shall meet together at the resurrection!
How will the body and soul greet one another! What a welcome will
the soul give to the body! O blessed body! when I prayed, thou didst
attend my prayers with hands lifted up, and knees bowed down; thou
wert willing to suffer with me, and now thou shalt reign with me;
thou wert sown in dishonour, but now art raised in glory. O my dear
body! I will enter into thee again and be eternally married to thee.
Use 3d. The resurrection of the body is a cordial when a Christian lies
a-dying. Thy body, though it drop into the sepulchre, it shall revive
and flourish as an herb in the resurrection: the grave is a bed of dust
where the bodies of saints sleep; but they shall be awakened by the
trump of the archangel. The grave is your long home, but not your
last home: though death strip you of your beauty, yet at the
resurrection you shall have it restored again. As David, when he
found Saul asleep, took away his spear and cruse of water, but when
he awoke, he restored them again, 1 Sam. 26:22., so, though at death
all our strength and beauty be taken away, yet at the resurrection
God will restore all again in a more glorious manner.
QUEST. 4. But how shall we know that our bodies shall be raised to a
glorious resurrection?

Ans. If we have a part in the first resurrection, Rev. 20:6., "Blessed
and holy is he that hath a part in the first resurrection." Q. What is
meant by this? A. It is a rising by repentance out of the grave of sin;
he who lies buried in sin, can have little hope of a joyful resurrection;
his body shall be raised but not in glory. O then! ask conscience, have
you a part in the first resurrection? hath the Spirit entered into you,
and lifted you up? Hath he raised you out of your unbelief? Hath he
raised your hearts above the earth? This is the first resurrection; and
if your souls are thus spiritually raised, then your bodies shall be
gloriously raised, and shall shine as stars in the kingdom of heaven.
Regeneration makes way for a glorious resurrection.
Use. Seeing you expect your bodies should arise to glory, keep your
bodies unspotted from sin. Shall a drunken body rise to glory? Shall
an unclean body rise to glory? Shall a thievish body steal into
heaven? O keep your bodies pure,—keep your eyes from unchaste
glances,—your hands from bribes,—your tongues from slander; defile
not your bodies, which you hope shall rise one day to glory. Your
bodies are the members of Christ: and hear what the apostle saith, 1
Cor. 6:15., "Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of an harlot? God forbid." O keep your bodies
unspotted, let them be instruments of righteousness, 1 Cor. 6:20.,
"Glorify God in your body!" If your bodies glorify God, God will
glorify your bodies.
QUEST. 5. But seeing our bodies must be laid in the grave, and they
may lie many years rotting there before the resurrection; what may
support and comfort us is this case?
Ans. 1. That God will not leave his people in the grave. Our friends
bring us to the grave and leave us there, but God will not; God will go
to the grave with us, and watch over our dead bodies, and take care

of our ashes. Rizpah watched over the dead bodies of the sons of
Saul, and guarded them against the ravenous fowls of the air, 2 Sam.
21:10. Thus the Lord watcheth over the dead bodies of the saints, and
looks to it, that none of their dust be missing. Christian, thou hast a
God to watch over thy body when thou art dead!
A. 2. The bodies of the saints in the grave, though separated from
their souls, are united to Christ. The dust of a believer is part of
Christ's mystical body.
A. 3. When the bodies of the saints are in the sepulchre, their souls
are in paradise; the soul doth not sleep in the body, "but the spirit
shall return to God that gave it," Eccl. 12:7. The soul immediately
partakes of those joys the blessed angels do; when the body returns
to dust, the soul returns to rest; when the body is sleeping, the soul is
triumphing; when the body is buried, the soul is crowned; as the
spies were sent before to taste of the fruits of the land, Numb. 13, so
at death the soul is sent before into heaven, to taste of the fruit of the
holy land.
A. 4. When God's time is come, the 'graves shall deliver up their
dead,' Rev. 20:13., when the judge sends, the jailor must deliver up
his prisoners; as God said to Jacob, Gen. 46:4., "I will go down with
thee into Egypt, and I will surely bring thee up again," so the Lord
will go down with us into the grave, and will surely bring us again.
A. 5. Though the bodies of the saints shall rot and be loathsome in
the grave, yet afterwards they shall be made illustrious and glorious.
Concerning this, consider,
1. The bodies of the saints, when they arise, shall be comely and
beautiful. The body of a saint in this life may be deformed: those
whose minds are adorned with virtue, yet may have mis-shapen

bodies; as the finest cloth may have the coarsest list: but this
deformed body shall be amiable and beautiful. This beauty consists
in two things: 1. Perfection of parts. There shall be a full proportion
of all the members; in this life there is oft a defect of members; the
eye is lost, the arm is cut off, but in the resurrection all parts of the
body shall be restored again; therefore the resurrection is called the
time of restoring all things, Acts 3:19. Malchus' ear cut, restituit.—2.
Clarity and splendour. The bodies of the saints shall have a graceful
majesty in them; they shall belike Stephen whose face shone as if it
had been the face of an angel, Acts 6:15. Nay, they shall be made like
Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3:21.
2. The bodies of the saints, when they arise, shall be free from the
necessities of nature, as hunger and thirst, Rev. 7:16., "They shall
hunger no more." Moses on the mount was so filled with the glory of
God, that he needed not the recruits of nature. Much more in heaven
shall the bodies of the saints, so filled with God's glory, be upheld
without food.
3. The bodies of the saints, when they arise, shall be swift and
nimble. Our bodies on earth are dull and heavy in their motion; then
they shall be swift, and made fit to ascend, as the body of Elias in the
air. Now the body is a clog; in heaven it shall be a wing. We shall be
as the angels, Mat. 22:30. And how nimble are they? The angel
Gabriel in a short time came from heaven to the earth, Dan. 9:21. As
the helm turns the ship instantly whither the steersman will; so the
body in an instant will move which way the soul will.
4. The bodies of the saints, at the resurrection, shall be very firm and
strong, 1 Cor. 15:43., "It is raised in power." Through frequent labour
and sickness, the strongest body begins to languish: but at the
resurrection we shall be of a strong constitution; then there will be

no weariness in the body, nor faintness in the spirits. This may
comfort you who now conflict with many bodily weaknesses. This
weak body shall be raised in power; the body, which is now a weak
reed, shall be like a rock.
5. The bodies of the saints at the resurrection shall be immortal, 1
Cor. 15:53., "This mortal must put on immortality; our bodies shall
run parallel with eternity, Luke 20:36., "Neither can they die any
more." Heaven is an healthful climate,—there is no bill of mortality
there. If a physician could give you a receipt to keep you from dying,
what sums of money would you give? At the resurrection Christ shall
give the saints such a receipt, Rev. 21:4., "There shall be no more
death."
II. The second privilege believers shall have at the resurrection, is,
They shall be openly acquitted at the day of judgment.

OF THE DAY OF JUDGMENT
QUEST. XXXVIII. WHAT benefits do believers receive from Christ at
the resurrection?
ANS. Their bodies shall be raised up to glory, and shall be openly
acquitted at the day of judgment, and crowned with the full and
perfect enjoyment of God to all eternity.
II. They shall be openly acquitted at the day of judgment. This is to
be laid down for a position, that there shall be a day of judgment,
Rom. 14:10., "For we shall all stand before the judgment-seat of
Christ." This is the grand assizes,—the greatest appearance that ever

was, Now Adam shall see all his posterity at once. We must all
appear; the greatness of men's persons doth not exempt them from
Christ's tribunal; kings and captains are brought in trembling before
the Lamb's throne, Rev. 6:15. We must all appear, and appear in our
own persons, not by a proxy.
QUEST. 1. How doth it appear that there shall be a day of judgment?
Ans. Two ways. 1. By the suffrage of scripture, Eccl. 12:9, 12, 14., "For
God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing."
Ps. 96:13., "For he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth." The
reduplication denotes the certainty, Dan. 7:9, 10., "I beheld till the
thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose
garment was white as snow." "The judgment was set, and the books
were opened."—2. It appears from the petty sessions kept in a man's
own conscience; when a man doth virtuously, conscience doth excuse
him, when evil, conscience doth arraign and condemn him. Now,
what is this private session kept in the court of conscience, but a
certain fore-runner of that general day of judgment when all the
world shall be summoned to God's tribunal?
QUEST. 2. Why must there be a day of judgment?
Ans. That there may be a day of retribution, when God may render to
every one according to his work. Things seem to be carried very
unequally in the world; the wicked do so prosper as if they were
rewarded for doing evil; and the godly do so suffer as if they were
punished for being good. Therefore for the vindicating of God's
justice, there must be a day, wherein there shall be a righteous
distribution of punishments and rewards to men, according to their
actions.
QUEST. 3. Who shall be judge?

Ans. The Lord Jesus Christ, John 5:22., "The Father hath committed
all judgment to the Son." It is an article of our creed, that, Christ
"shall come to judge the quick and the dead." It is a great honour put
upon Christ; he who was himself judged, shall now be judge; he who
once hung upon the cross, shall sit upon the bench. Christ is fit to be
judge, as he partakes both of the manhood and Godhead.
1. Of the manhood: being clothed with the human nature, he may be
visibly seen of all. It is requisite the judge should be seen, Rev. 1:7.,
"Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him."
2. As he partakes of the Godhead: he is of infinite prudence to
understand all causes brought before him, and of infinite power to
execute offenders. He is described with seven eyes, Zech. 3:9., to
denote his prudence; and a rod of iron, Ps. 2, to denote his power. He
is so wise that he cannot be deluded; and so strong, that he cannot be
resisted.
QUEST. 4. When will the court sit, when will the time of judgment
be?
Ans. For the quando, or the time of the general judgment, it is a
secret kept from the angels, Mat. 24:36., "Of that day and hour
knoweth no man, no not the angels of heaven." But this is sure, it
cannot be far off; one great sign of the approach of the day of
judgment, is, 'That iniquity shall abound,' Mat. 24, sure then this day
is near at hand, for iniquity did never more abound than in this age,
and lust grows hot, and love grows cold. This is certain, when the
elect are all converted, then Christ will come to judgment; as he that
rows a ferry-boat, stays till all the passengers are taken into his boat,
and then he rows away, so Christ stays till all the elect are gathered
in, and then he will hasten away to judgment.

QUEST. 5. What shall be the modus or manner of trial?
Ans. 1. The citing of men to the court. The dead are cited as well as
the living. Men, when they die, avoid the censure of our law-courts;
but at the last day, the dead are cited to God's tribunal, Rev. 20:12.,
"I saw the dead small and great stand before God." This citing of men
will be by the sound of a trumpet, 1 Thess. 4:16., and this trumpet
will sound so loud, that it will raise men out of their graves, Mat.
24:31. Such as will not hear the trumpet of the gospel sound in their
ears repent and believe, shall hear the trumpet of the archangel
sounding, arise and be judged.
A. 2. The approach of the judge to the bench.
First, This will be terrible to the wicked. How can a guilty prisoner
endure the sight of the judge? If Felix trembled when Paul preached
of judgment, Acts 24:25., how will sinners tremble when they shall
see Christ come to judgment? Christ is described (sitting in
judgment) with a fiery stream issuing from him, Dan. 7:10. Now the
Lamb of God will be turned into a lion; the sight of Christ will strike
terror into sinners. As when Joseph said to his brethren, "I am
Joseph whom ye sold into Egypt, they were troubled at his presence,"
Gen. 45:4.: now, how did their hearts smite them for their sin? so,
when Christ shall come to judgment, and say, "I am Jesus whom ye
sinned against,—I am Jesus whose laws ye have broken, whose blood
ye despised,—I am now come to judge you," O what horror and
amazement will take hold of sinners! They will be troubled at the
presence of their judge.
Secondly, The approach of Christ to the bench of judicature will be
comfortable to the righteous. 1. Christ will come in splendour and
great glory. His first coming in the flesh was obscure, Isa. 53:2. He
was like a prince in disguise; but his second coming will be

illustrious, "he shall come in the glory of his Father, with the holy
angels," Mat. 16:27. O what a bright day will that be, when such a
number of angels, those morning-stars, shall appear in the air, and
Christ the Sun of Righteousness shall shine in splendour above the
brightest cherub! 2. Christ will come as a friend. Indeed, if the the
saints' judge were their enemy, they might fear condemning; but he
who loves them, and prayed for them, is their judge; he who is their
husband is their judge, therefore they need not fear but all things
shall go well on their side.
Thirdly, The trial itself, which hath a dark and a light side. 1. A dark
side. It will fall heavy on the wicked: the judge being set, the books
are opened, Rev. 20:12.,—the book of conscience,—and the book of
God's remembrance. And now the sinner's charge being read, and all
their sins laid open,—their murder, drunkenness, uncleanness,—
Christ will say, "Sinners, what can you plead for yourselves that the
sentence of death should not pass?" The wicked being convicted will
be speechless. Then follows that dismal sentence, Mat. 25:41., Ite
maledicti,—"Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels!" He that said to God, "depart
from me;" Job 21:14., and to religion, "depart from me;" must now
hear that word pronounced from his judge, "depart from me;"—a
dreadful sentence, but righteous! Ps. 51:4. The sinner himself shall
cry, Guilty! Though the wicked have a sea of wrath, yet not one drop
of injustice. And when once the sentence is past, it is irreversible,
there is no appealing to an higher court. 2. The trial hath a light side:
it will be for increasing the joy and happiness of the righteous. The
day of judgment will be a day of jubilee to them.
1st. At that day Christ their judge will own them by name. Those
whom the world scorned, and looked upon as precisians and fools,
Christ will take by the hand, and openly acknowledge them to be his

favourites. What is Christ's confessing of men, Luke 12:8., but his
openly acknowledging them to be precious in his eyes?
2d. Christ as judge will plead for them. It is not usual to be both
judge and advocate, to sit on the bench and plead: but it shall be so at
the day of judgment.
1. Christ will plead his own blood for the saints. "These persons I
have paid a price for, they are the travail of my soul; they have
sinned, but my soul was made an offering for their sin."
2. Christ will vindicate them from all unjust censures. Here they were
strangely misrepresented to the world, as proud, hypocritical,
factious; Paul was called a seditious man, the head of a faction, Acts
24:5.; but at the day of judgment Christ will clear the saints'
innocency, then he will "bring forth their righteousness as the light,"
Ps. 37:6. As he will wipe off tears from their eyes, so dust from their
name. Moses, when he was charged with ambition that he took too
much upon him, comforted himself with this, "To-morrow will the
Lord shew who are his," Numb. 16:5. So may the saints, when
reproached, comfort themselves with the day of judgment; then will
Christ say who are his; then shall the saints come forth as the wings
of a dove covered with silver.
3. Christ as judge will absolve them before men and angels; as Pilate
said of Christ, "I find no fault in this man," Luke 23:4., so will Christ
say of the elect, "I find no fault in them, I pronounce them
righteous." Then follows, "come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom," Mat. 25:34. As if Christ should say, "O ye happy ones, the
delight of my soul, the fruit of my sufferings, stand no longer at the
bar! Ye are heirs-apparent of the crown of heaven, enter and take
possession." At the hearing of this sentence, with what ravishing joy

will the saints be filled? This word, "Come, ye blessed," will be music
to their car, and a cordial to their heart.
4. Christ will mention before men and angels all the good deeds the
saints have done, Mat. 25:35., "I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink." You that have wept in
secret for sin,—that have shewn any love for Christ's name,—that
have been rich in good works,—Christ will take notice of it at the last
day, and say, "well done, good and faithful servants." He himself will
be the herald to proclaim your praises; thus it shall be done to the
man whom Christ delights to honour.
5. Christ will call his saints from the bar, to sit upon the bench with
him to judge the world, Jude 14., "Behold the Lord cometh with ten
thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all;" 1 Cor. 6:2.,
"Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?" The saints
shall sit with Christ in judicature, as justices of peace with the judge,
—they shall applaud Christ's righteous sentence on the wicked, and,
as it were, vote with Christ. This, as it is a great honour to the saints,
so it must needs add to the sorrows of the wicked, to see those whom
they once hated and derided, sit as judges upon them.
6. The saints shall be fully crowned with, the enjoyment of God for
ever. They shall be in his sweet presence, "in whose presence is
fulness of joy," Ps. 16:11.; and this shall be for ever. The banner of
God's love shall be eternally displayed; the joys of heaven are without
intermission and expiration, 1 Thess. 4:17., "And so shall we be ever
with the Lord."
Use. As it is sad news to the wicked.—They shall "not stand in
judgment," Ps. 1:5. They shall come to judgment, but they shall not
stand in judgment, viz. they shall not stand acquitted,—they shall not
stand with boldness, but sneak and hang down their head, and not be

able to look their judge in the face: so it is great consolation to the
godly. When the apostle had said, "The Lord shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the arch-angel, and the trump
of God:" he presently adds, "Wherefore comfort one another with
these words," 1 Thess. 4:16, 18.—1. The day of judgment is comfort,
in respect of weakness of grace. A Christian is ready to be troubled,
to see his grace so minute and imperfect; but, at the last day, if Christ
find but a drachm of true grace, it shall be accepted. If thine be true
gold, though it be many grains too light, Christ will put his merits
into the scales, and make it pass current.—2. It is a comfort to such
of the saints who have met with unrighteous judgment in the world,
—who have been wronged of their estates in law-suits, or had their
lives taken away by an unrighteous sentence,—Christ will judge
things over again, and will give a righteous sentence. If your estates
have been taken away wrongfully, you shall be restored a thousandfold at the day of judgment. If you have lost your lives for Christ, yet
you shall not lose your crown; you shall wear a garland made of the
flowers of paradise, which fade not away.
Branch 1st. Meditate much upon the day of judgment. Feathers swim
upon the water, but gold sinks into it; light feathery Christians float
in vanity, they mind not the day of judgment, but serious spirits sink
deep into the thoughts of it.—1. The meditation of this last day would
make us very sincere. We would then labour to approve our hearts to
God the great judge and umpire of the world. It is easy to carry it fair
before men, but there is no dissembling or prevaricating with God;
he sees what the heart is, and will accordingly pass his verdict.—2.
The meditation of Christ's coming to judge us, would keep us from
judging our brethren. We are apt to judge others as to their final
state; which is for men to step into Christ's place, and take his work
out of his hand, James 4:12., "Who art thou that judgest another?"
Thou that passest a rash sentence upon another, thou must come

thyself shortly to be judged, and then perhaps he may be acquitted,
and thou condemned.
Branch 2d. So demean and carry yourselves, that, at the day of
judgment, you may be sure to be acquitted, and have those glorious
privileges the saints shall be crowned with.
QUEST. How is that?
Ans. 1. If you would stand acquitted at the day of judgment, then, 1st,
Labour to get into Christ. Phil. 3:9., "That I may be found in him."
Faith implants us into Christ,—it engarrisons us in him, and then
"there's no condemnation," Rom. 8:1. There's no standing before
Christ, but by being in Christ. 2dly, Labour for humility. It is a kind
of self-annihilation, 2 Cor. 12:11., "Though I be nothing." Christian,
hast thou parts and abilities, and dost thou cover them with the vail
of humility? as Moses, when his face shone, put a veil over it. If thou
art humble, thou shalt be acquitted at the day of judgment, Job
22:29., "He shall save the humble person." An humble man judgeth
himself for his sins, and Christ will acquit them who judge
themselves.
A. 2. If you would stand acquitted at the last day, then keep a clear
conscience. Do not load yourselves with guilt, and furnish your judge
with matter against you. "The Lord," saith Paul, "hath appointed a
day in which he will judge the world," Acts 17:31. And how would
Paul fit himself for that day? Acts 24:16., "Herein I exercise myself to
have always a conscience void of offence, towards God and towards
man." Be careful of the first and second table; be holy and just. Have
hearts without false aims, and hands without false weights. Keep
conscience as clear as your eye, that no dust of sin fall into it. They
that sin against conscience, will be shy of their judge: such as take in
prohibited goods, cannot endure to see the searchers that are

appointed to open their packs. Christian, thy pack will be opened at
the last day,—I mean, thy conscience; and Christ is the searcher, to
see what sins, what prohibited goods thou hast taken in; and then he
proceeds to judgment. O be sure to keep a good conscience; this is
the best way to stand with boldness at the day of judgment! The voice
of conscience is the voice of God; if conscience doth upon just
grounds, acquit us, God will acquit us, 1 John 3:21., "If our heart
condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God."
A. 3. If you would stand acquitted at the last day, then trade your
talents for God's glory; lay out yourselves for God, honour him with
your substance; relieve Christ's members; this is the way to be
acquitted. He that had five talents traded with them, and made them
five talents more, "his lord said unto him, well done good and faithful
servant," Mat. 25:21.
A. 4. If you would stand acquitted at the day of judgment, get an
entire love to the saints, 1 John 3:14., "We know we are passed from
death to life," &c. Love is the truest touch-stone of sincerity. To love
grace for grace, shows the Spirit of God to be in a man. Doth
conscience witness for you? Are you perfumed with this sweet spice
of love? Do you delight most in those in whom the image of God
shines? Do you reverence their graces? Do you bear with their
infirmities? A blessed evidence that you shall be acquitted in the day
of judgment. "We know that we have passed from death to life,
because we love the brethren."

----MONERGISM BOOKS

A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson, Copyright © 2023
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted
the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text
of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored
in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system,
in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of Monergism Books.
