PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 14 of 14
Recovery of Spiritual Decays Through Christ's Glory

---

The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 14. Recovery of Spiritual Decays Through Christ's Glory.

u s spiritually flourish and be fruitful, – namely, that we be found in the diligent exercise of what we have received. God does
sometimes deal otherwise, in a way of sovereignty, and surpriseth men with healing grace in the midst of their decays and
backsliding; as Isa. 57: 17, 18. So has many a poor soul been delivered from going down into the pit. The good shepherd will go out of
his way to save a wandering sheep; but this is the ordinary method.
(3.) Notwithstanding these blessed promises of growth, flourishing, and fruitfulness, if we are negligent in the due improvement of the
grace which we have received, and the discharge of the duties required of us, we may fall into decays, and be kept in a low, unthrifty
state all our days. And this is the principal ground of the discrepancy between the glory and beauty of the church, as represented in the
promises of the Gospel, and as exemplified in the lives and walking of professors, – they do not live up unto the condition of their
accomplishment in them; howbeit, in God’s way and time they shall be all fulfilled. We have, therefore, innumerable blessed promises
concerning the thriving, growing, and flourishing of the principle of spiritual life in us, even in old age and until death; but the grace
promised unto this end will not befall us whilst we are asleep in spiritual sloth and security. Fervent prayer, the exercise of all grace
received, with watchfulness unto all holy duties, are required hereunto.
3. God has secured the growth of this spiritual life, by the provision of food for it, whereby it may be strengthened and increased; for
life must be preserved by food. And this in our case is the Word of God, with all other ordinances of divine worship which depend
thereon, 1 Pet. 2: 2, 3. Whatever the state of this life be, – whether in its beginning, its progress, its decays, – there is suitable
nourishment provided for it in the good Word of God’s grace. If men will neglect their daily food that is provided for them, it is no
wonder if they be weak and thriftless. And if believers are not earnest in their desires after this food, – if they are not diligent in
providing of it, attending unto it, – much more if, through corruptions and temptations, they count it, in the preaching of it, light and
common food, which they do not value, – it is no wonder if they fall into spiritual decays; but God has herein provided for our growth
even unto old age.
And this is the first thing which was proposed unto confirmation, namely, that the constitution and nature of spiritual life is such as to
be in deficient, so as to thrive and grow even in old age, and unto the end.
II. The second thing proposed is, that notwithstanding all this provision for the growth of spiritual life in us, believers, especially in a
long course of profession, are subject to decays, such as may cast them into great perplexities, and endanger their eternal ruin.
And these spiritual decays are of two sorts. 1. Such as are gradual and universal, in the loss of the vigour and life of grace, both in its
principle and in its excellence. 2. Such as are occasioned by surprisal into sin through the power of temptation; I mean such sins as do
waste the spiritual powers of the soul, and deprive it of all solid peace.
A s for temporary believers, give them but time enough in this world, especially if it be accompanied with outward prosperity or
persecution; and, for the most part, their decays of one sort or another will make a discovery of their hypocrisy. Though they retain a
form of godliness, they deny the power of it, Prov. 1: 31; 2 Tim. 3: 5. And if they do not openly relinquish all duties of religion, yet they
will grow so lifeless and savourless in them, as shall evidence their condition; for so it is with them who are lukewarm, who are
neither hot nor cold, who have a name to live, but are dead.
And herein lieth a signal difference in this matter between sincere believers and those who believe only for a time; for those of the
latter sort do either not perceive their sickness and decays, – their minds being taken up and possessed with other things, – or if they
do find that it is not with them as it has been formerly, they are not much concerned, and on any occasional new conviction they cry,
“Y et a little more slumber, a little more sleep, a little more folding of the hands to sleep;” but when the other do find any thing of this
nature, it makes them restless for a recovery. And although, through the many snares, temptations, and deceits of sin, or through
their ignorance of the right way for their healing, they do not many of them obtain a speedy recovery, yet none of them do approve
themselves in such a condition, or turn unto any undue reliefs.
Now, that believers are subject to decays in both the ways mentioned, we have full testimony in Scripture; for as unto that general,
gradual decay, in the loss of our first faith, love, and works, in the weakening of the internal principle of spiritual life, with the loss
thereon of delight, joy, and consolation, and the abatement of the fruits of obedience, our Lord Jesus Christ does expressly charge it on
five of the seven churches of Asia, Rev. 2, 3. And in some of them, as Sardis and Laodicea, those decays had proceeded unto such a
degree, as that they were in danger of utter rejection. And hereunto answers the experience of all churches and all believers in the
w orld. Those who are otherwise minded are dead in sin, and have got pretences to countenance themselves in their miserable
condition. So is it with the Church of Rome; and I wish others did not in some measure follow them therein.
And as unto those of the second sort, whereinto men are cast by surprisals and temptations, producing great spiritual distress and
anguish of soul, under a sense of God’s displeasure, we have an instance in David, as he gives us an account of himself, Ps. 38: 1-10,
“O Lord, thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger;
neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin. For mine iniquities are gone over mine head; as an heavy burden they are too
heavy for me. My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness,” &c
It is certain that here is a description of a very woeful state and condition; and the Psalmist, knowing that he was called of God to be a
teacher and instructor of the church in all ages, records his own experience unto that end. Hence the title of it is, “A Psalm to bring to
remembrance.” Some judge that David had respect unto some great and sore disease that he was then visited withal. But if it were so,
it was only an occasion of his complaint; the cause of it was sin alone. And four things he does represent. 1. That he had departed from
God, and fallen into provoking sins, which had produced great distresses in his mind, verses 3, 4. 2. That he had foolishly continued in
that state, not making timely application to grace and mercy for healing, whereby it was grown deplorable, verse 5. And this folly is
that alone which makes such a condition dangerous, – namely, when men, on their surprise]s in sin, do not speedily apply themselves
unto healing remedies. 3. That he had herein a continual sense of the displeasure of God by reason of sin, verses 2-4. 4. That he was
altogether restless in this state, mourning, groaning, labouring continually for deliverance.
This is a clearer delineation of the condition of believers, when, either by the greatness of any sin, or by a long continuance in an evil
and a careless frame, they are cast under a sense of divine displeasure. This opens their minds and their hearts, declaring how all
things are within, which they cannot deny. It is not so with many, in the same measures and degrees, as it was with David, whose
falls were very great; but the substance of it is found in them all. And herein the heart knoweth its own bitterness; a stranger

intermeddleth not with it: none knows the groaning and labouring of a soul convinced of such spiritual decays, but he alone in whom
they are. Hereon is it cast down to the earth, going mourning all the day long, though others know nothing of its sorrows: but it is of a
far more sad consideration, to see men manifesting their inward decays by their outward fruits, and yet are little or not at all
concerned therein. The former are in ways of recovery; these in the paths that go down to the chambers of death.
I suppose, therefore, I may take it for granted, that there are few professors of religion, who have had any long continuance in the
ways of it, having withal been exposed unto the temptations of life, and much exercised with the occasions of it, but that they have
been asleep in their days, as the spouse complains of herself, Cant. 5: 2; that is, they have been overtaken with decays of one sort or
another, either with respect unto spiritual or moral duties, – in their relation unto churches or families, in their judgements or their
affections, in their inward frames or outward actions, they have been overtaken with the effects of sloth, negligence, or the want of a
continual watch in the life of faith. I wish it were otherwise.
I principally herein intend those gradual declensions in the life and power of grace which men in a long course of profession are
subject unto. And these for the most part proceed from formality in holy duties, under the constant outward performance of them;
vehement engagements in the affairs of life, an over valuation of sinful enjoyments, growth in carnal wisdom, neglect of daily
mortification of such sins as men are naturally disposed unto, with a secret influence from the prevalent temptation of the days
wherein we live; – which things are not now to be spoken unto.
III. But I come to that which was proposed in the third place, – namely, to show that this at present is the state of many professors of
religion, that they are fallen under those spiritual decays, and do not enjoy the effects of the promises concerning flourishing and
fruitfulness, which we have insisted on. To fasten a conviction on them, or some of them at least, that it is indeed so with them, is my
present design; and this ought to be done with some diligence. The glory of Christ, the honour of the Gospel, and the danger of the
souls of men do call for it. This is the secret root of all our evil, which will not be removed unless it be digged up. Who sees not, who
complains not of the loss of, or decays in, the power of religion in the days wherein we live? But few there are who either know or
apply themselves, or direct others, unto the proper remedy of this evil. Besides, it is almost as difficult to convince men of their
spiritual decays as it is to recover them from them; but without this, healing is impossible. If men know not their sickness, they will
not seek for a cure. Some, when they see their sickness and their wound, will apply themselves unto wrong, useless remedies, like
them in the prophet Hosea, 5: 13. None will make use of any cure who see no disease at all. Wherefore, to fasten a conviction hereof
on the minds of some, we may make use of the ensuing inquiries and observations.
1 . Have you, in the way of your profession, had any experience of these spiritual decays? I doubt not but that there are some who
have been preserved green and flourishing from their first conversion unto God, who never fell under the power of sloth, neglect, or
temptation, at least not for any remarkable season; but they are but few. It was not so with scarce any of those believers under the
Old Testament whose lives and walkings are recorded for our instruction; and they must be such as lived in an exact and diligent
course of mortification. And some there are who have obtained relief and deliverance from under their decays, – whose backsliding
have been healed, and their diseases cured. So it was with David, as he divinely expresseth it, Ps. 103: 1,3-5, “Bless the LORD, O my
soul; and all that is within me, bless his holy name. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who health all thy diseases: who redeemeth thy
life from destruction; who crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies: who satisfieth thy mouth with good things, so that
thy youth is renewed like the eagle’s.” So does he celebrate his deliverance from that state whereof he complains, Ps. 38, – which we
mentioned before. And there is no grace or mercy that does more affect the hearts of believers, that gives them a greater transport of
joy and thankfulness, than this of deliverance from backsliding. It is a bringing of the soul out of prison, which enlargeth it unto
praise, Ps. 142: 7. Of this sort I doubt not but that there are many; for God has given great warnings of the danger of a spirituallydecaying state; and he has made great promises of recovery from it; and multitudes in the church are daily exercised herein. But I
speak in general unto all. Have you any experience of such spiritual decays, either in the frame of your spirits or in the manner of
your walking before God; or, at least, that you are prone unto them, if not mightily preserved by the power of grace in your own
utmost diligence? If you have not so, then I fear it is from one of these two causes: (1.) That, indeed, you have never had any flourishing spiritual state in your souls. He that has been always weak and sickly does not
know what it is to want a state of health and strength, because he never had experience of it; much less does he that is dead know
what it is to want life. But he that from an exquisite temper of health falls into languishing distemper, knows distinctly both how it
was and how it is with him. And the frame of the minds of many professors of religion, with the manner of their walking, is such, as
that, if they are not sensible of spiritual decays, it is evident that they never had any good spiritual health; and it is to no purpose to
treat with such persons about a recovery. There are, amongst those who make an outward profession of true religion, many that live
in all sorts of sins. If you should deal with them about backsliding, decays, and a recovery, you will seem unto them as Lot did to his
sons-in-law, when he told them of the destruction of Sodom, – as one that mocked, or made sport with them, Gen. 19: 14; or you will
be mocked by them for your pains. They have been always such as they are; it was never otherwise with them; and it is a ridiculous
thing to speak to them of a recovery. We must be able in this case to say to men, “Remember whence you are fallen, and repent, and
do the first works,” Rev. 2: 5. They must have had an experience of a better state, or they will not endeavour a recovery from that
wherein they are. Such, therefore, as see neither evil nor danger in their present condition, but suppose all is well enough with them,
because it is as good as ever it was, will not easily be brought under this conviction; but they have that which is of no less importance
for them to inquire into, – namely, whether they have had any thing of the truth of grace or no. Or, (2.) If you have not this experience, it is to be feared that you are asleep in security, – which is hardly distinguishable from death in
sin. The church of Laodicea was sensibly decayed, and gone off from its primitive faith and obedience; yet she was so secure, in her
condition, knew so little of it, that she judged herself, on the contrary, to be in a thriving, flourishing state. She thought herself
increased in all church riches and goods, – that is, gifts and grace, – while “she was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked,” Rev. 3: 17; in such a state as wherein it is questionable whether she had any thing of the life and power of grace to be found in
her or no. And so is it with many churches at this day, especially that which boasts itself to be without error or blame. And it is strange
that a church should suppose that it flourisheth in grace and gifts, when it has nothing but a noise of words in their stead.
So God testified concerning Ephraim, that “grey hairs were sprinkled on him, yet he knew it not,” Hos. 7: 9. He was in a declining,
dying condition, but did not understand it. Hence it is added, “They do not return to the LORD their God, nor seek him for all this,”
verse 10. If men will not learn and own their spiritual decays, there is no hope of prevailing with them to return unto the Lord. “The

whole have no need of a physician, but the sick;” Christ “came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.” Such persons are
under the power of a stupid security, from whence it will be very hard to rouse them up. Hence it is that we have so little success for
the most part in calling persons to look after a revival and recovery of their decays; they acknowledge no such thing in themselves, –
such calls may belong unto others; yea, if any word seem to come near them unto their disquietment, they are apt to think it was
spoken out of spite and ill-will towards them: they approve of themselves in their present condition. Hence is the complaint of Christ
in the ministry of the Word, “I have called, and ye have refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded. Y e have set at
nought all my counsel, and would none of my reproof,” Prov. 1: 24, 25. Hence, let this truth be pressed a thousand times, it is not one
of a thousand who will think himself so concerned as to apply himself unto a relief. A spirit of slumber seems to be poured on many.
2. To improve this conviction, I would ask of some, whether they have been able to maintain spiritual peace and joy in their souls. I
take it for granted that ordinarily they are inseparable adjuncts of the life of faith, in an humble, fruitful walk before God. The
Scripture testifieth that they are so; and no experience lies against it in ordinary cases. And I suppose that those unto whom I speak do
in some measure know what they are, and do not delude themselves with fancies and imaginations: they have substance in them,
however by some derided, and to some unknown. Have this peace and joy been maintained and borne away in your minds? Have
they under all trials and surprisals been quickly composed by them? or are you not rather on all occasions uneasy and perplexed? This
is certain, that a decaying spiritual state and solid spiritual peace are inconsistent; and if ever you had such peace, you may by the loss
of it know into what state you are come.
3. Not to inquire farther into things internal and hidden, wherein men may justify themselves if they please, there are too many open,
visible evidences of these decays among professors of religion; they have not kept them from the eyes of the church, nor yet from the
world. Do not pride, selfishness, worldliness, levity of attire, and vanity of life, with corrupt, unsavoury communication, abound
among many? The world was never in a worse posture for conformity than it is at this day, wherein all flesh has corrupted its way;
and yet, as to things of outward appearance, how little distinction is left between it and those who would be esteemed more strict
professors of religion! Was this the way and manner of the saints of old, – of those that went before us in the same profession? Was it
so with ourselves in the time of our first espousals, when we went after God in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown? as Jer. 2:
2. Some understand what I say: if we have not, some of us, had better days, we never had good days in our lives; if we have had
them, why do we not stir up ourselves to look after a recovery?
4. May not God say of many of us what he said of his people of old, “Thou hast been weary of me, O Israel? “ Isa. 43: 22. Have we
not been weary of God, until we have abundant cause to be weary of ourselves? The most, I presume, will be ready, with them in
Malachi, to say, “How or wherein have we been weary of God?” Do we not abide, yea, abound, in the duties of his service? What can
be more required of us? Wherein are we to blame? This were something indeed, but that it is often so, that men are weary of God
when they even weary God with their duties and services, Isa. 1: 13, 14. God says in his Word, he is weary: they say in their hearts,
they are weary, Mal. 1: 13. But I answer, (1.) Many cannot with any modesty make use of this pretence. Their sloth, indifference, and negligence in the observance of the duties
of divine worship, both in private and public, is notorious. In particular, is not the duty of family prayer neglected by many, at least as
to its constancy and fervency? And although it be grounded in the light of nature, confirmed by the general rules of the Scripture,
requisite unto the dedication of a family unto God, strengthened by the constant example of all the saints of old, and necessary in the
experience of all that walk with God; yet do not many begin to seek out pleas and arguing to justify their omission hereof? Are not all
things filled with the fruits of the negligence of such professors in the instruction of their children and servants? And has not God
given severe rebukes unto many of us, in their fearful miscarriages? And as unto the public worship of God, I wish that sloth and
indifference did not appear upon too many, under various pretences. But, (2.) This is not that which I do intend. Men may be weary of God, whilst they abide in the observance of a multitude of outward
duties.
[1.] They may be so, with respect unto that spirituality and intention of mind unto the exercise of all grace, which are required unto
such duties. These are the life, the soul, the animating principle of them, without which their outward performance is but a dead
carcass. Men may draw nigh to God with their lips, when their hearts are far from him. This is that which becomes God in his
worship, and is useful to our own souls; for “God is a Spirit, and he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth;” which he is not, but in
the exercise of the graces of his Spirit in the worshipers; “for bodily exercise profiteth little, but godliness is profitable unto all things,” 1
Tim. 4: 8.
To keep up the mind unto this frame, to stir up all grace unto a constant vigorous exercise in all holy duties, is a matter whereunto
great spiritual diligence and watchfulness is required. Watch unto prayer. A thousand pretences rise against it; all the arts of sloth,
formality, weariness of the flesh, and the business of life, do contend to frustrate the design of it. And the suitableness of resting in the
work done, unto the principles of a natural conscience, gives efficacy to them all: and when men come to satisfy themselves herein, it
may be it were better that for a time such duties were wholly omitted; for in that case conscience itself will urgently call on men, not
hardened in sin, to a consideration of their condition: wherefore much spiritual labour and diligence is required in this matter. The
outward performance of religious duties, be they never so many, or however strictly enjoined, as the daily and nightly canonical hours
amongst the Popish devotionists, is an easy task, – much inferior unto the constant labour which some men use in their trades and
callings. And in them, in the performance of them, either public or in their families, men may be weary of God: and according as they
are remiss in the constant keeping up of spirituality, and the exercise of grace in sacred duties, so is the degree of their weariness. And
there is almost nothing whereby men may take a safer measure of their decays or growth, than by the usual frame of their minds in
these duties. If they do constantly in them stir up themselves to take hold of God, Isa. 64: 7, it is an evidence of a good temper of
spiritual health in the soul. But this will not be done without the utmost watchfulness and care against impressions from the flesh and
other temptations. But sloth and formality herein is a sign of a thriftless state in the inner man: and all inventions of such formality
are disserviceable unto the interest of grace.
[2.] So is it with them also, who, attending unto the outward duties of religion, do yet indulge themselves in any known sin; for there
is nothing of God in those duties which tend not unto the mortification of all sin: and men may keep up a form of godliness, to
countenance themselves in the neglect of its power. And in particular, where any known sin is indulged unto, where the mortification
o f it is not duly endeavoured, where our religious duties are not used, applied, and directed unto that end, there is a weariness of

o f it is not duly endeavoured, where our religious duties are not used, applied, and directed unto that end, there is a weariness of
whatever is of God in them; nor has the soul any real intercourse or communion with God by them.
5. If we should make a particular inquiry into the state of our souls with respect unto those graces which are most useful, and tend
most to the glory of God, it is to be feared that the decays of many would be made very evident; such are zeal, humility, contriteness
of heart, spiritual-mindedness, vigour of soul, and delight in the ways of God, love, charity, self-denial, and the like. Are we fat and
flourishing in these things, even in old age? Are they in us, and do they abound? as the apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1: 8. Do we bring forth
the fruit of them, so as to show the faithfulness of God in his supply of grace? I shall not make a particular inquiry into them, but only
give two general rules, whereby we may try ourselves with respect unto them all.
(1.) The loss of a spiritual appetite unto the food of our souls is an evidence of a decay in all these graces. Spiritual appetite consists in
earnest desires, and a savoury relish; so it is described by the apostle, 1 Pet. 2: 2, 3, “As new-born babes, desire the sincere milk of the
Word, that ye may grow thereby; if so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious.” There is required unto this spiritual appetite an
earnest desire of the Word, grounded on an experience of the grace of God in it, unto this end, that we may grow and thrive spiritually
thereby. And this appetite will give us as just a measure of the state of grace in us as a natural appetite unto wholesome food, with due
digestion thereon, does give of a good state of health in the body.
This, therefore, we are to inquire into. Does it abide in us as formerly? We hear the Word preached as much as ever; but do we do it
with the same desire and spiritual relish as before? Some hear to satisfy their convictions, some to please their fancies, and some to
judge of the persons by whom it is dispensed. It is but in few that the necessary preparation for the due receiving of it is found.
When men grow in age, they lose much of their natural appetite unto food. They must eat still for the maintenance of life; but they do
it not with that desire after it, and that gust in it, as in the days of youth and health. Hence they are apt to think that the meat which
they had formerly was more savoury than what is now provided for them; though what they now enjoy is much to be preferred
before what they then had. The change is in themselves. So we may find not a few professors, who are ready to think and say that the
preaching which they had in former days, and the religious exercises which they were engaged in, were far to be preferred above what
they now enjoy. But the change is in themselves; they have lost their spiritual appetite, or their hunger and thirst after the food of
their souls.
“The full soul loatheth an honey-comb; but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet,” Prov. 27: 7. Men being grown full of
themselves, and of a good conceit of their own abilities, have lost their spiritual appetite unto the Word of God; and this makes the
Word lose its power and efficacy towards them. That Word, which the Psalmist says is “sweeter than honey, or the honey-comb,” Ps.
19: 10, has little or no taste or relish in it unto them. If they were hungry, they would find a sweetness in the bitterest of its reproofs,
beyond what they can now find in the sweetest of its promises. They come to hear the Word with sick desires, and low expectations, as
if they were invited to eat after a feast, being self-full before. But this loss of a spiritual appetite is an evidence of the decay of all other
graces whatever.
(2.) A neglect of making religion our principal business, is another evidence of the decay of all sorts of grace in us. For where grace is
in its proper exercise, it will subordinate all things unto religion, and the ends of it, as David twenty times declares in the 119th Psalm.
All things, all occasions of life, shall be postponed thereunto. The love and valuation of it will bear sway in our minds, our thoughts,
and affections; and the practice of it shall give rule unto all other concernments. But is it so with many amongst us. It is well if
religion be one thing, – it is far enough from being the one thing; every other thing is preferred before it, and it can hardly crowd in to
possess any place in their minds. To see men continually plodding in the affairs of the world, regulating all their acting by their
concernment in them, diverting on]y at some seasons, as it were out of their way, unto duties of religion, – it is vain to say that they
make religion their business. But there is scarce a more certain evidence of a frame of mind spiritually decaying in all sorts of graces, if
ever any of them were in it in sincerity and power, than this one, that men do not make religion their chiefest business. And a little
self-examination will help men to judge what it is that they make so to be.
(3.) Lastly, I might also instance the uselessness of men in their profession; in want of love unto all saints, barrenness in good works,
unreadiness and unwillingness to comply, in any extraordinary manner, with the calls of God unto repentance and reformation; in
love of the world and pride of life, with passions suited unto such principles, predominant in them: for they are all undeniable
evidences, that those with whom they are found had never any true grace at all, or that they are fallen under woeful decays. But what
has been spoken may be sufficient unto our present purpose.
This is the third thing that was proposed, – namely, an endeavour to leave convictions on the minds of some concerning their spiritual
decays, and the necessity of seeking after a revival by the means that shall be insisted on. And I intend it principally for those of us
who, under a long profession, are now come unto age, and shall not have much time for duty continued to us. And the truth is, I meet
with none who are Christians of any considerable experience, and are spiritually-minded, but they are sensible of the danger of such
decays in this hour of temptation, and how difficult it is, in the use of all means, to keep up a vigorous, active frame of mind, in faith,
love, holiness, and fruitfulness. And for those who are not concerned herein, I confess I know not what to make of them, or their
religion.
I V. I proceed unto that which was proposed in the fourth or last place, – namely, the way and means whereby believers may be
delivered from these decays, and come to thrive and flourish in the inward principle and outward fruits of spiritual life; which will
bring us back unto consideration of that truth which we may seem to have diverted from. And to this end, the things ensuing are
proposed unto consideration: 1. The state of spiritual decays is recoverable. No man that is fallen under it has any reason to say, There is no hope, provided he take
the right way for his recovery. If every step that is lost in the way to heaven should be irrecoverable, woe would be unto us; – we
should all assuredly perish. If there were no reparation of our breaches, no healing of our decays, no salvation but for them who are
always progressive in grace; if God should mark all that is done amiss, as the Psalmist speaks, “O Lord, who should stand?” nay, if we
had not recoveries every day, we should go off with a perpetual backsliding. But then, as was said, it is required that the right means
of it be used, and not that which is destructive of what is designed; whereof I shall give an instance. When trees grow old, or are
decaying, it is useful to dig about them, and manure them; which may cause them to flourish again, and abound in fruit. But instead
hereof, if you remove them out of their soil, to plant them in another, which may promise much advantage, they will assuredly wither

and die. So it is with professors, and has been with many. Finding themselves under manifold decays, and little or nothing of the life
and power of religion left in them, they have grown weary of their station and have changed their soil, or turning from one way in
religion unto another, as some have turned Papists, some Quakers, and the like, apprehending that fault to be in the religion which
they professed, which was indeed only in themselves. Y ou cannot give an instance of any one who did not visibly wither and die
therein; but, had they used the proper means for their healing and recovery, they might have lived and brought forth fruit.
2. A strict attendance unto the severities of mortification, with all the duties that lead thereunto, is required unto this end; so also is the
utmost diligence in all duties of obedience. These things naturally offer themselves as the first relief in this case, and they ought not to
be omitted. But if I should insist upon them, they would branch themselves into such a multitude of particular directions, as it is
inconsistent with my design here to handle. Besides, the way which I intend to propose is of another nature, though consistent with all
the duties included in this proposal; yea, such as without which not one of them can be performed in a due manner. Wherefore, as
unto these things, I shall only assert their necessity, with a double limitation.
(1.) That no duties of mortification be prescribed unto this end, as a means of recovery from spiritual decays, but what for matter and
manner are of divine institution and command. All others are laid under a severe interdict, under what pretence soever they may be
used. “Who hath required these things at your hands?” Want hereof is that whereby a pretended design to advance religion in the
Papacy has ruined it. They have, under the name and pretence of the means of mortification, or the duties of it, invented and
enjoined, like the Pharisees, a number of works, ways, duties, so called, which God never appointed, nor approved, nor will accept; nor
shall they ever do good unto the souls of men. Such are their confessions, disciplines, pilgrimages, fastings, abstinence, framed prayers,
to be repeated in stated canonical hours, in such a length and number. In the bodily labour of these things they exercise themselves to
no spiritual advantage.
B u t it is natural to all men to divert to such reliefs in this case. Those who are thoroughly convinced of spiritual decays, are
therewithal pressed with a sense of the guilt of sin; for it is sin which has brought them into that condition. Hereon, in the first place,
they set their contrivance at work, how they may atone divine displeasure and obtain acceptance with God; and if they are not under
the actual conduct of evangelical light, two things immediately offer themselves unto them. First, Some extraordinary course in
duties, which God has not commanded. This is the way which they retake themselves unto in the Papacy, and which guilt, in the
darkness of corrupted nature, vehemently calls for. Secondly, An extraordinary multiplication of such duties as, for the substance of
them, are required of us. An instance in both kinds we have, Micah 6: 6, 7, “Wherewith shall I come before the LORD, and bow
myself before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old? will the LORD be pleased with
thousands of rams, or with ten thousands of rivers of oil? shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the
sin of my soul?” And by this means they hope for a restitution into their former condition. And whereas spiritual decays are of two
sorts; first, from the power and effect of convictions only, which are multiplied among temporary believers; and, secondly, from
degrees in the power and effects of saving grace; – those whose decays are of the first sort are never to be diverted from attempting
their relief by such means; and when they find them fail, for the most part they cease contending, and abandon themselves to the
power of their lusts; for they have no evangelical light to guide them in another course.
Unto them who are of the second sort is this direction given, in an endeavour for a recovery from backsliding, and thriving in grace,
by a redoubled attendance unto the duties of mortification and new obedience: Let care be taken that, as unto the matter of them,
they be of divine appointment; and as to the manner of their performance, that it be regulated by the rules of the Scripture. Such are
constant reading and hearing of the Word, prayer with fervency therein, a diligent watch against all temptations and occasions of sin;
especially an endeavour, by a holy earnestness, and vehement rebukes of the entrance of any other frame, to keep the mind spiritual
and heavenly in its thoughts and affections.
(2.) Let them take heed that they attempt not these things in their own strength. When men have strong convictions that such and
such things are their own duty, they are apt to act as if they were to be done in their own strength. They must do them, they will do
them, – that is, as unto the outward work, – and, therefore, they think they can do them; that is, in a due manner. The Holy Ghost
has for ever rejected this confidence, – none shall prosper in it, 2 Cor. 3: 5; 9: 8. But hereby many deceive themselves, labouring in the
fire, while all they do does immediately perish; they have been negligent and careless, whereby things are come to an ill posture with
them, and that peace which they had is impaired; but now they will pray, and read, and fast, and be liberal to the poor, and now strive
after an abstinence from sin. All these things they suppose they can do of themselves, because they can and ought to perform the
outward works, wherein the duties intended do consist. Hereby Christ is left out of the whole design, who, when all is done, is the Lord
that health us, Exod. 15: 26. And there is another evil herein; for whatever men do in their own natural abilities, there is a secret
reserve of some kind of merit in it. Those who plead for these things, do aver there can be no merit in any thing but what proceeds
from our own free-will; and what is so done has some kind of merit inseparably accompanying of it; and this is enough to render all
endeavours of this kind not only useless and fruitless, but utterly rejected. Faith must engage the assistance of Christ and his grace in
and unto these duties; or, however they may be multiplied, they will not be effectual unto our healing and recovery. These things are
to be used, according as we receive supplies of grace from above, in subordination unto that work of faith that shall be declared.
Wherefore, 3. The work of recovering backsliders or believers from under their spiritual decays is an act of sovereign grace, wrought in us by
virtue of divine promises. Out of this eater comes meat. Because believers are liable to such declensions, backsliding, and decays, God
has provided and given unto us great and precious promises of a recovery, if we duly apply ourselves unto the means of it. One of the
places only wherein they are recorded I shall here call over and explain, Hos. 14: 1-8, “O Israel, return unto the LORD thy God; for
thou hast fallen by thine iniquity. Take with you words, and turn unto the LORD: say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips,” &c. “I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely: for mine anger is
turned away from him. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon. His branches
shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive-tree, and his smell as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow shall return; they
shall revive as the corn, and grow as the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do
any more with idols? I have heard him, and observed him. I am like a green fir-tree: from me is thy fruit found.”
The whole matter treated of in general, both as unto the disease and remedy, is fully stated in this passage of Scripture; and that in the
experience of the church, and God’s dealing with them; we may therefore receive many plain directions from it, and a safe guidance

in our progress; which we shall endeavour to take in the ensuing observations: (1.) This application of God unto Israel, “O Israel, return,” was made when the generality of the people were wicked, and devoted unto
utter destruction. So it is declared in the last words of the foregoing chapter; and their desolation fell out not long after accordingly.
Wherefore no season nor circumstances of things shall obstruct sovereign grace when God will exercise it towards his church: it shall
work in the midst of desolating judgements.
(2.) In such a time the true Israel of God, the elect themselves, are apt to be overtaken with the sins of the whole, and so to backslide
from God, and so to fall into spiritual decays. So Israel had now done, though she had not absolutely broken covenant with God. He
was yet unto her “The LORD thy God;” yet she had fallen by her iniquity. Times of public apostasy are often accompanied with partial
defects in the best: “Because iniquity aboundeth, the love of many shall wax cold,” Matt. 24: 12.
(3.) When God designs to heal the backsliding of his people by sovereign grace, he gives them effectual calls unto repentance, and the
use of means for their healing: so he does here by his prophet, “O Israel, return; take with you words.” And if I could see that God did
stir up his faithful ministers to apply themselves in a peculiar manner unto this work of pressing vehemently all their congregations
with their duty herein, and let them know that there is no other way to prevent their ruin but by returning unto the Lord, according to
the ways of it here prescribed, I should not doubt but that the time of healing were at hand.
4 . The means prescribed unto this end, that our backsliding may be healed in a way suited unto the glory of God, is renewed
repentance: and this acts itself, (1.) In fervent prayer. “Take with you words, and say.” Consider the greatness and importance of the work before you, and weigh well
what you do in your dealing with God. The matter of this prayer is twofold. [1.] The pardon of all iniquity; that is, the taking of it
away; and no sin is omitted, all being now become equally burdensome: “Take away all iniquity.” When the souls of sinners are in
good earnest in their return unto God, they will leave out the consideration of no one sin whatever. Nor are we meet for healing, nor
shall we apply ourselves unto it in a due manner, without some previous sense of the love of God in the pardon of our sin. [2.]
Gracious acceptation: “Receive us graciously.” The words in the original are only “wekach tov”. And receive good;” but both the words
being used variously, the sense eminently included in them is well expressed by – “Receive us graciously.” After we have cast ourselves
under tokens of thy displeasure, now let us know that we are freely accepted with thee. And this also lies in the desires of them who
design to obtain a healing of their backsliding; for under them they are sensible that they are obnoxious unto God’s displeasure.
(2.) Affectionate confessions of the sin wherein their backsliding did consist, or which were the occasions of them. “Asshur shall not
save us;” – “We will say no more to the work of our hands, Y e are our gods.” Fleshly confidence and false worship were the two great
sins that had now ruined the body of the people. These believers themselves had an accession unto them more or less, as now they
have unto the prevailing sins of the days wherein we live, by conformity unto the world. Of these sins God expecteth a full and free
confession, in order unto our healing.
(3.) A renewed covenant engagement to renounce all other hopes and expectation, and to retake themselves with their whole trust
and confidence unto him; whereof they express, first, the cause, which was his mere grace and mercy, “For in thee the fatherless
findeth mercy;” and, secondly, the effect of it, which is praise and thanksgiving, “So will we render the calves of our lips.” And some
things we may hence farther observe as unto the case under consideration. As, [1.] Although God will repair our spiritual decays and heal our backsliding freely, yet he will do it so, or in such a way, as wherein he
may communicate grace unto us, to the praise of his own glory. Therefore are these duties prescribed unto us in order thereunto; for
although they are not the procuring cause of the love and grace from whence alone we are healed, yet are they required, in the
method of the dispensation of grace, to precede the effect of them. Nor have we anywhere a more illustrious instance and testimony of
the consistency and harmony which is between sovereign grace and the diligent discharge of our duty than we have in this place; for
as God promiseth that he would heal their backsliding out of his free love, verse 4, and would do it by the communication of effectual
grace, verse 5, so he enjoins them all these duties in order thereunto.
[2.] That unless we find these things wrought in us in a way of preparation for the receiving of the mercy desired, we have no firm
ground of expectation that we shall be made partakers of it; for this is the method of God’s dealing with the church. Then, and then
only, we may expect a gracious reviving from all our decays, when serious repentance, working in the ways declared, is found in us.
This grace will not surprise us in our sloth, negligence, and security, but will make way for itself by stirring us up unto sincere
endeavours after it in the perseverance of these duties. And until we see better evidences of this repentance among us than as yet
appears, we can have but small hopes of a general recovery from our present decays.
5. The work itself is declared, – (1.) By its nature; (2.) In its causes; (3.) From its effects.
(1.) In the nature of it, it is the healing of backsliding: “I will heal their backsliding,” the sin whereby they are fallen off from God,
unto whom they are now exhorted to return. These bring the souls of men into a diseased state and danger of death: the cure hereof is
the work of God alone. Hence he gives himself that title, “I am the LORD that health thee,” Exod. 15: 26. And because of the
poisonous nature of sin, and the danger it brings of eternal death unto the souls of men, the removal of it, or a recovery from it, is
often called by the name of healing, Ps 6: 2; Isa. 57: 18, 19; Hos. 6: 1. Here it includeth two things: first, the pardon of sin past; and
then, a supply of grace to make us fruitful in obedience: “I will be as the dew to Israel;” as we shall see. This is God’s healing of
backslidings.
(2.) In the causes of it, which are, – 1. The principal moving cause; and that is, free, undeserved love: “I will love them freely.” From
hence alone is our recovery to be expected. 2. The efficient cause; which, as unto sins past, is pardoning mercy: “Mine anger is turned
away from him;” – and as unto renewed obedience, in which too our recovery consists, it is in a plentiful supply of effectual grace: “I
will be as the dew unto Israel.” Fresh supplies of the Spirit of grace from above are so expressed; this is necessary unto our healing and
recovery.
(3.) It is described by its effect, which is a much more abundant fruitfulness in holiness and obedience, in peace and love, than ever
they had before attained. This the prophet sets out in multiplied similitudes and metaphors, to denote the greatness and efficacy of

grace so communicated.
I have a little insisted on the opening of the context, for sundry reasons.
1. The case which I would consider is in all the parts of it stated distinctly, and represented clearly unto us. There is nothing remains,
but only the especial way whereby, in the exercise of faith, this grace may be obtained; which is that which I shall speak unto in the
last place, as that which is principally intended in this Discourse.
2 . That I might show how great a thing it is to have our spiritual decays made up, our backsliding healed, and so to attain the
vigorous acting of grace and spiritual life, with a flourishing profession and fruitful obedience, in old age. It is so set forth here by the
Holy Ghost, as that every one must needs have a sense of the beauty and glory of the work: it is that which divine love, mercy, and
grace, are eminently effectual in unto the glory of God, – that which so many duties are required to prepare us for. Let no man think
that it is a light or common work; every thing in it is peculiar: it is, unto them who are made partakers of it, a life from the dead.
3. That none may utterly despond under their decays. When persons are awakened by new convictions, and begin to feel the weight of
them, and how implicately they are entangled with them, they are ready to faint, and even to despair of deliverance. But we see that
here is a promise of deliverance from them by pardoning mercy, and also of such fresh springs of grace as shall cause us to abound in
holiness and fruitfulness. Who is it that is entangled with corruptions and temptations, that groans under a sense of a cold, lifeless,
barren frame of heart? He may take in spiritual refreshment, if by faith he can make application of this promise unto himself.
4. That which remains, is to declare the particular way whereby, in the exercise of faith, we may obtain the fruit of this and all other
promises of the like nature, unto the end so often proposed, – namely, of being flourishing and fruitful even in old age. Now,
supposing a due attendance unto the duties mentioned, I shall give some directions with respect unto that which gives life, power, and
efficacy unto them all, and which will infallibly bring us unto the full enjoyment of this signal mercy; and they are these that follow: 1 . All our supplies of grace are from Jesus Christ. Grace is declared in the promises of the Old Testament; but the way of its
communication, and our receiving of it, is revealed unto us in the New. This belongs to the mystery of it, that all grace is from Christ,
and shall be in vain expected any other way. He has assured us, that “without him we can do nothing;” we can no more bring forth
fruit, than a branch can that is separated from the vine, John 15: 3-5. He is our head, and all our spiritual influences – that is, divine
communication of grace – are from him alone. He is our life efficiently, and liveth in us effectively, so as that our ability for vital acts
is from him, Gal 2: 20; Col. 3:. 1-4. Are we, then, any of us under convictions of spiritual decays? or do we long for such renovations
of spiritual strength as may make us flourish in faith, love, and holiness? We must know assuredly, that nothing of all this can be
attained, but it must come from Jesus Christ alone. We see what promises are made, what duties are prescribed unto us; but however
we should endeavour to apply ourselves unto the one or the other, they would yield us no relief, unless we know how to receive it from
Christ himself.
2. The only way of receiving supplies of spiritual strength and grace from Jesus Christ, on our part, is by faith. Hereby we come unto
him, are implanted in him, abide with him, so as to bring forth fruit. He dwells in our hearts by faith, and he acts in us by faith, and
we live by faith in or on the Son of God. This, I suppose, will be granted, that if we receive any thing from Christ, it must be by faith, it
must be in the exercise of it, or in a way of believing; nor is there any one word in the Scripture that gives the least encouragement to
expect either grace or mercy from him in any other way, or by any other means.
3. This faith respects the person of Christ, his grace, his whole mediation, with all the effects of it, and his glory in them all. This is that
which has been so much insisted on in the foregoing Discourses as that it ought not to be again insisted upon. This, therefore, is the
issue of the whole: – a steady view of the glory of Christ, in his person, grace, and office, through faith, – or a constant, lively exercise
of faith on him, according as he is revealed unto us in the Scripture, – is the only effectual way to obtain a revival from under our
spiritual decays, and such supplies of grace as shall make us flourishing and fruitful even in old age. He that thus lives by faith in him
shall, by his spiritual thriving and growth, “show that the Lord is upright, that he is our rock, and that there is no unrighteousness in
him.”
We may consider briefly, – first, how this is testified unto in the Scripture; and then, what are the ways whereby this grace or duty
will produce this effect; and so put a close unto this part of the application of the sacred truth before declared.
1. This direction is given us, Ps. 34: 5, “They looked unto him, and were lightened; and their faces were not ashamed.” That it is Christ,
or the glory of God in him, that is thus looked unto, I need not prove, – it will not be denied. And it is their faith which is expressed by
their looking unto him; which is nothing but that beholding of his glory which we have described: for it is an act of trust arising from
an apprehension of who and what he is. The issue or effect hereof is, that they were lightened; that is, received fresh communication
of spiritual, saving, refreshing light from him, and, consequently, of all other graces, whence their faces were not ashamed: nor shall
we fail in our expectation of new spiritual communication in the exercise of the same faith.
This is that which we are called unto, Is 45: 22, “Look unto me, and be saved, all ye ends of the earth.” On this look to Christ, on this
view of his glory, depends our whole salvation; and therefore all things that are needful thereunto do so also: this is the way whereby
we receive grace and glory. This is the direction given us by the Holy Ghost for the attaining of them.
So is the same duty described, Micah 7: 7, “Therefore I will look unto the LORD; I will wait for the God of my salvation: my God will
hear me.” The church knew not any other way of relief, whatever her distresses were.
A look unto Christ as crucified (and how glorious he was therein, has been declared) is made the cause and fountain of that godly
sorrow which is a spring unto all other graces, especially in those who have fallen under decays, Zech. 12: 10; and it is so also of
desiring strength from him, to enable us to endure all our trials, troubles, and afflictions, with patience unto the end, Heb. 12: 2.
2. The only inquiry remaining, is, how a constant view of the glory of Christ will produce this blessed effect in us: and it will do so
several ways.
1 . It will be effected by that transforming power and efficacy which this exercise of faith is always accompanied withal. This is that

which changeth us every day more and more into the likeness of Christ, as has been at large before declared. Herein all revivals and
all flourishing are contained. To have a good measure of conformity unto Christ is all whereof in this life we are capable: the
perfection of it is eternal blessedness. According as are our attainments therein, so is the thriving and flourishing of the life of grace in
us; which is that which is aimed at. Other ways and means, it may be, have failed us, let us put this to the trial. Let us live in the
constant contemplation of the glory of Christ, and virtue will proceed from him to repair all our decays, to renew a right spirit within
us, and to cause us to abound in all duties of obedience. This way of producing these effects flesh and blood will not reveal, – it looks
like washing in Jordan to cure a leprosy; but the life of faith is a mystery known only unto them in whom it is.
2. It will fix the soul unto that object which is suited to give it delight, complacency, and satisfaction. This in perfection is blessedness,
for it is caused by the eternal vision of the glory of God in Christ; and the nearer approaches we make unto this state, the better, the
more spiritual, the more heavenly, is the state of our souls. And this is to be obtained only by a constant contemplation of the glory of
Christ, as has been declared. And it is several ways effectual unto the end now proposed. For, 1 . The most of our spiritual decays and barrenness arise from an inordinate admission of other things into our minds; for these are
they that weaken grace in all its operations. But when the mind is filled with thoughts of Christ and his glory, when the soul thereon
cleaves unto him with intense affections, they will cast out, or not give admittance unto, those causes of spiritual weakness and
indisposition. See Col. 3: 1-5; Eph. 5: 8.
2 . Where we are engaged in this duty, it will stir up every grace unto its due exercise; which is that wherein the spiritual revival
inquired after does consist. This is all we desire, all we long for, this will make us fat and flourishing, – namely, that every grace of the
Spirit have its due exercise in us. See Rom. 5: 3-5; 2 Pet. 1: 5-8. Whereas, therefore, Christ himself is the first proper, adequate object
of all grace, and all its exercise (for it first respects him, and then other things for him), when the mind is fixed on him and his glory,
every grace will be in a readiness for its due exercise. And without this we shall never attain it by any resolutions or endeavours of our
own, let us make the trial when we please.
3. This will assuredly put us on a vigilant watch and constant conflict against all the deceitful workings of sin, against all the entrances
of temptation, against all the ways and means of surprisals into foolish frames, by vain imaginations which are the causes of our
decays. Our recovery or revival will not be effected, nor a fresh spring of grace be obtained, in a careless, slothful course of profession.
Constant watching, fighting, contending against sin, with our utmost endeavour for an absolute conquest over it, are required
hereunto. And nothing will so much excite and encourage our souls hereunto as a constant view of Christ and his glory; every thing in
him has a constraining power hereunto, as is known to all who have any acquaintance with these things.
End.