PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 14
Preparatory Direction II: Maintain a Clear Sense of Guilt

---

Chapter 10

PREPARATORY DIRECTIONS
Clear Sense of Sin
2. Get a Clear Sense of Your Sin
The second direction for the mortification of sin in believers is this:
Get a clear and abiding sense upon your mind and conscience of the guilt, danger, and evil
of that sin wherewith you are perplexed.

a. Understand the guilt of your sin
1). Enormous guilt
It is one of the deceits of a prevailing lust to lessen its own guilt in our minds. “Is it not a
little one?” (Gen 19:20); “When I bow down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing” (2Ki 5:18)—as if to say, Though this be bad, yet it is not so bad as
such and such an evil; others of the people of God have had such a frame; yea, what dreadful
actual sins have some of them fallen into! Innumerable ways there are whereby sin diverts the
mind from a right and due apprehension of its guilt. Its injurious effects darken the mind, so
that it cannot make a right judgment of things. Perplexing reasonings, extenuating promises,
disorderly desires, insincere purposes to forsake, hopes of mercy—all have their share in disturbing the mind in its consideration of the guilt of a prevailing lust. The prophet tells us that
lust will do thus wholly when it comes to its height: “Whoredom and wine and new wine take
away the heart” (Hos 4:11)—the heart, that is, the understanding, as it is often used in the
Scripture.
And as lusts accomplish this work to the height in unregenerate persons, so in part in regenerate also. Solomon tells you of him who was enticed by the lewd woman, that he was
“among the simple ones”; he was “a young man void of understanding” (Pro 7:7). And wherein
did his folly appear? Why, he says, he “knoweth not that it is for his life” (v. 23); he considered
not the guilt of the evil that he was involved in. And the Lord, rendering a reason why His
dealings with Ephraim took no better effect, gives this account: “Ephraim also is like a silly
dove without heart” (Hos 7:11)—that is, he had no understanding of his own miserable condition. It would have been impossible for David to have lain so long in the guilt of his abominable sin, but that he had innumerable corrupt reasonings hindering him from taking a clear
view of its ugliness and guilt in the glass of the Law. This made the prophet that was sent for
his awaking, in his dealings with him, to shut up all evasions and pretenses by his parable, so
that he might fall fully under a sense of the guilt of it (2Sa 12:7). This is the expected result of
lust in the heart: it darkens the mind that it shall not judge aright of its guilt.

10. Preparatory Direction 2: Clear Sense of Sin

49

And it has many other ways for its own excusing which I shall not now insist on. Let this,
then, be the first care of him that would mortify sin: to fix a right judgment of its guilt in his
mind.
2). How to understand your guilt
In order to a right judgment of your guilt, take these considerations to your assistance.
a). Guilt heightened by grace received
Though the power of sin is weakened by inherent 78 grace in them that have it, so that sin
shall not have dominion over them as it has over others, yet the guilt of sin that still abides
and remains is aggravated and heightened by that grace. “What shall we say then? Shall we
continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid. How shall we, that are dead to sin, live
any longer therein?” (Rom 6:1-2). “How shall we, that are dead?”—the emphasis is on the
word we. How shall we do it, who, as he afterward describes it, have received grace from Christ
to the contrary? That is, we, doubtless, are more evil than any if we do it. I shall not insist on
the special aggravations of the sins of such persons—how they sin against more love, mercy,
grace, assistance, relief, means, and deliverances than others. But let this consideration abide
in your mind: there is inconceivably more evil and guilt in the evil of your heart that remains,
than there would be in so much sin if you had no grace at all.
b). Realize what God sees
Observe that, as God sees abundance of beauty and excellence in the desires of the heart of
His servants—more than in any of the most glorious works of other men; yea, more than in
most of their own outward performances, which have a greater mixture of sin than the desires
and pantings of grace in the heart have—so God sees a great deal of evil in the working of lust
in their hearts. Yes, He sees more evil in their lusts than in the open, notorious acts of wicked
men, or in many outward sins whereinto the saints may fall—seeing that there is more opposition made against them, and more humiliation generally follows them. Thus Christ, dealing
with His decaying children, goes to the root with them, laying aside their profession: “I know
thy works” (Rev 3:15). That is, I know you: you are quite another thing than you profess, and
this makes you abominable.
So, then, let these things, and the like considerations, lead you to a clear sense of the guilt
of your indwelling lust, that there may be no room in your heart for lessening or excusing
those thoughts by which sin insensibly will get strength and prevail.

b. Consider the danger of your sin
Consider the danger of your sin, which has many aspects.
1). Being hardened by sin’s deceitfulness
Sin hardens us by its deceitfulness. This the apostle sorely charges on the Hebrews: “Take
heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily, while it is called To day; lest any of you be hardened
through the deceitfulness of sin” (Heb 3:12-13). “Take heed”—that is, use all means, consider
your temptations, watch diligently. There is a treachery, a deceit, in sin that tends to the hardening of your hearts toward the fear of God.
78

inherent – indwelling.

50

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

The hardening here mentioned is to the utmost: utter impenitence. Sin tends to it, and every corruption and lust will make at least some progress towards it. You that were tender and
used to melt under the Word and under afflictions, will grow—as some have spoken—
“sermon-proof and sickness-proof.” You that trembled at the presence of God, thoughts of
death, and appearance before Him, when you had more assurance of His love than you have
now, shall have a stubbornness upon your spirit so as not to be moved by these things. Your
soul and your sin shall be spoken of and spoken to, and you shall not be at all concerned, but
shall be able to pass over duties (such as praying, hearing, and reading), and your heart be not
in the least affected. Sin will grow a light thing to you. You treat it as if it were nothing. This it
will grow to.
And what will be the end of such a condition? Can a sadder thing befall you? Is it not
enough to make any heart to tremble, to think of being brought into that state in which he
will have slight thoughts of sin? Slight thoughts of grace, of mercy, of the blood of Christ, of
the Law, heaven, and hell come all in at the same season. Take heed, this is that which your
lust is working towards: the hardening of the heart, searing of the conscience, blinding of the
mind, stupifying of the affections, and deceiving of the whole soul.
2). Some great correction
Consider the danger of some great temporal correction, which the Scripture calls “judgment,” or just vengeance and punishment (Psa 89:30-33). Though God should not utterly cast
79
you off for this abomination that lies in your heart, yet He will visit you with the rod. Though
He pardon and forgive, He will take vengeance of your inventions. Oh, remember David and all
his troubles! Look on him flying into the wilderness, and consider the hand of God upon him.
Is it nothing to you that God should kill your child in anger, ruin your estate in anger, break
your bones in anger, suffer you to be a scandal and reproach in anger, kill you, destroy you,
make you to lie down in darkness—all in anger? Is it nothing that He should punish, ruin, and
undo others because of you? Let me not be misunderstood: I do not mean that God sends all
these things always on His people in anger. God forbid! But this I say: that when He does so
deal with you, and your conscience bears witness with Him what your provocations have been,
you will find His dealings full of bitterness to your soul. If you fear not these things, I fear you
are under hardness from your sins.
3). Loss of peace and strength
Consider the loss of peace and strength all a man’s days. To have peace with God, to have
strength to walk before God, is the sum of the great promises of the Covenant of Grace. In
these things is the life of our souls. Without them in some comfortable measure, to live is to
die. What good will our lives do us if we see not the face of God sometimes in peace, and if we
have not some strength to walk with Him? Now, an unmortified lust certainly will deprive
men’s souls of both these. This case is so evident in David as that nothing can be more clear.
How often does he complain that his bones were broken, his soul disquieted, and his wounds
grievous on this account! Take other instances: “For the iniquity of his covetousness was I
wroth…I hid me” (Isa 57:17). What peace, I pray, is there to a soul while God hides Himself; or
what strength while He smites? “I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
79

See The Mute Christian under the Smarting Rod by Thomas Brooks (1608-1680), available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.

10. Preparatory Direction 2: Clear Sense of Sin

51

offence, and seek my face” (Hos 5:15). That is, I will leave them, hide My face; and what will
become of their peace and strength then?
If ever, therefore, you have enjoyed peace with God; if ever His terrors have made you
afraid; if ever you have had strength to walk with Him, or ever have mourned in your prayer
and been troubled because of your weakness—think of this danger that hangs over your head.
It is perhaps but a little while and you shall see the face of God in peace no more. Perhaps by
tomorrow you shall not be able to pray, read, hear, or perform any duties with the least cheerfulness, life, or vigor. Possibly you may never see a quiet hour while you live, so that you may
carry about you broken bones, full of pain and terror, all the days of your life. Yea, perhaps God
will shoot His arrows at you, and fill you with anguish and disquietness, with fears and perplexities; make you a terror and an astonishment to yourself and others; show you hell and
wrath every moment; frighten and scare you with sad apprehensions of His hatred—so that
your sore shall run in the night season and your soul shall refuse comfort (Psa 77:2); so that
you shall wish death rather than life; yea, so that your soul might choose strangling. Consider
this a little: though God should not utterly destroy you, yet He might cast you into this condition, wherein you shall have quick and living apprehensions of your destruction. Accustom
your heart to thoughts hereof; let it know what is likely to be the outcome of this condition.
Leave not this consideration until you have made your soul to tremble within you.
4). Eternal destruction
There is the danger of eternal destruction. For the due management of this consideration,
observe the following.
a). Connection between continuance in sin and destruction
There is such a connection between a continuance in sin and eternal destruction that,
though God does resolve to deliver some from a continuance in sin so they may not be destroyed, yet He will deliver none from destruction that continue in sin—so that while anyone
lies under an abiding power of sin, the threats of destruction and everlasting separation from
God are to be held out to him. This is the rule of God’s proceeding: If any man “depart” from
Him, to “draw back” through unbelief, God’s “soul shall have no pleasure in him” (Heb 3:12;
10:38); that is, His indignation shall pursue him to destruction (Gal 6:8).
b). No confidence in deliverance from destruction
He who is so entangled under the power of any corruption as above described, can have at
present no clear prevailing evidence of his interest in the covenant, by the efficacy whereof he
may be delivered from fear of destruction. The result is that destruction from the Lord may
justly be a terror to him. He may, he ought, to look upon it as that which will be the end of his
course and ways.
“There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus” (Rom 8:1).
True, but who shall have the comfort of this assertion? Who may assume it to himself? They
“who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.” But you will say, “Is not this to persuade
men to unbelief?” I answer: No. There is a twofold judgment that a man may make of himself:
first of his person, and secondly of his ways. It is the judgment of his ways, not his person, that I
speak of. Let a man get the best evidence for his person that he can, yet to judge that the end of
an evil way will be destruction is his duty; not to do it is atheism.

52

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

I do not say that in such a condition a man ought to throw away the evidence of his personal interest in Christ; but I say, he cannot keep those evidences. There is a twofold condemnation of a man’s self. First, in respect of what it deserves, when the soul concludes that it
deserves to be cast out of the presence of God; and this is so far from a business of unbelief
that it is an effect of faith. Secondly, with respect to the result and event, when the soul concludes it shall be damned. I do not say this is the duty of anyone, nor do I call them to it; but
this I say: the end of the sinful way wherein a man is ought by him to be concluded to be death
that he may be provoked to fly from it. And this is another consideration that ought to dwell
upon such a soul, if it desire to be freed from the entanglement of its lusts.

c. Consider the evils of your sin
Consider the evils of your sin. I mean its present evils. Danger concerns what is to come;
evil concerns what is present. Some of the many evils that attend an unmortified lust may be
mentioned.
1). It grieves the holy and blessed Spirit Who is given to believers to dwell in them and
abide with them. So, the apostle, exhorting them against many lusts and sins (Eph 4:25-29),
gives this as the great motive of it: “Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed
unto the day of redemption” (v. 30). That is, grieve not that Spirit of God whereby you receive
so many and great benefits; of which he instances 80 one signal 81 and comprehensive one:
“sealed unto the day of redemption.” The Holy Spirit is grieved by it. As a tender and loving
friend is grieved at the unkindness of his friend, of whom he has deserved only good, so is it
with this tender and loving Spirit, Who has chosen our hearts for a habitation to dwell in, and
there to do for us all that our souls desire. He is grieved by our harboring His enemies and
those whom He is to destroy, in our hearts together with Him. “He doth not afflict willingly
nor grieve” us (Lam 3:33); and shall we daily grieve Him? Thus is He said sometimes to be
“vexed,” sometimes “grieved at his heart,” to express the greatest sense of our provocation (Isa
63:10; Gen 6:6).
Now, if there be anything of gracious honesty left in the soul, if it be not utterly hardened
by the deceitfulness of sin, this consideration will certainly affect it. Consider who and what
you are, Who the Spirit is that is grieved, what He has done for you, what He comes to your
soul about, what He has already done in you—and be ashamed. Among those who walk with
God, there is no greater motive and incentive unto universal holiness, and the preserving of
their hearts and spirits in all purity and cleanness, than this: that the blessed Spirit, Who has
undertaken to dwell in them, is continually considering what they entertain in their hearts,
and rejoices when His temple is kept undefiled. That was a high aggravation of the sin of Zimri, that he brought his adulteress into the congregation in the sight of Moses and the rest, who
were weeping for the sins of the people (Num 25:6, 14). And is it not a high aggravation when
a lust is countenanced in the heart, or suffered to abide there; when it is (as it must be, if we
are believers) entertained under the peculiar eye and view of the Holy Ghost, Who is taking
care to preserve His tabernacle as pure and holy?
2). The Lord Jesus Christ is wounded afresh by it. His new creature in the heart is
wounded, His love is foiled, His adversary gratified. Just as totally forsaking Christ through the
80
81

instances – gives an example of.
signal – remarkable in degree; noteworthy.

10. Preparatory Direction 2: Clear Sense of Sin

53

deceitfulness of sin is to “crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open
shame” (Heb 6:6), so every harboring of sin that He came to destroy wounds and grieves Him.
3). It will take away a man’s usefulness in his generation. His works, his endeavors, his
labors, seldom receive blessing from God. If he be a preacher, God commonly blows upon his
ministry, so that he shall labor in the fire and not be honored with any success or doing any
work for God. The like may be spoken of other conditions. The world is at this day full of poor,
withering professors. How few are there that walk in any beauty or glory; how barren, how
useless, are they for the most part! Among the many reasons that may be assigned for this sad
state, it justly may be feared that this is none of the least effectual: many men harbor spiritdevouring lusts in their bosoms, which lie as worms at the root of their obedience, and corrode and weaken it day by day. All graces, all the ways and means whereby any graces may be
exercised and improved, are prejudiced by this means. As to any success, God blasts such
men’s undertakings.
This, then, is my second direction, and it regards the opposition that is to be made to lust in
respect of its habitual residence in the soul. Keep alive upon your heart these or the like considerations of its guilt, danger, and evil. Be much in the meditation of these things; cause your
heart to dwell and abide upon them. Engage your thoughts in these considerations. Let them
not go off nor wander from them until they begin to have a powerful influence upon your
soul—until they make it to tremble!