PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 13 Of The Scriptures — God Is A Spirit

OF THE SCRIPTURES QUEST. II. WHAT rule hath God given to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him? ANS. The word of God (which is contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament) is the only rule to direct us how we may glorify and enjoy him.

2 Tim. 3:16., "All scripture is given by inspiration of God," &c. By scripture is understood the sacred book of God. It is given by divine inspiration, that is, the scripture is not the contrivance of man's brain, but of a divine original. The image of Diana was had in veneration by the Ephesians, because they did suppose it fell from Jupiter, Acts 19:35. This book then of the holy scripture is to be highly reverenced and esteemed, because we are sure it came from heaven, 2 Pet. 1:21. The two Testaments are the two lips by which God hath spoken to us. Q. How doth it appear that the scriptures have a jus divinum, 'a divine authority' stamped upon them? A. Because the Old and New Testament are the foundation of all religion. If their divinity cannot be proved, the foundation is gone on which we build our faith. I shall therefore endeavour to evince this great truth, that the scriptures are the very word of God. I wonder whence the scripture should come, if not from God!—1. Bad men could not be the authors of scripture. Would their minds be employed in indicting such holy lines? Would they declare so fiercely against sin?—2. Good men could not be the authors of scripture. Could they write in such a strain? or could it stand with their grace to counterfeit God's name, and put, "Thus saith the Lord," to a book of their own devising?—3. Nor could any angel in heaven be the author of scripture: Because, 1. The angels pry and search into the abyss of gospel-mysteries, 1 Pet. 1:12., which implies their nescience of some parts of scripture; and sure they cannot be authors of that book which themselves do not fully understand. Besides, 2. What angel in heaven durst be so arrogant as to personate God, and say, "I create," Isa. 65:17., and "I the Lord have said it," Numb. 14:35.? So that it is evident, the pedigree of scripture is sacred, and it could come from none but God himself.

Not to speak of the harmonious consent of all the parts of scripture, there are seven cogent arguments which may evince it to be the word of God. 1. By its antiquity. It is of ancient standing. The gray hairs of scripture make it venerable. No human histories extant reach farther than since Noah's flood; but the holy scripture relates matters of fact that have been from the beginning of the world; it writes of things before time. Now, that is a sure rule of Tertullian, "That which is of the greatest antiquity,—id verum quod primum,—is to be received as most sacred and authentic." 2. We may know the scripture to be the word of God, by the miraculous preservation of it in all ages. The holy scriptures are the richest jewel that Christ hath left; and the church of God hath kept these public records of heaven that they have not been lost. The word of God hath never wanted enemies to oppose, and, if possible, to extirpate it. They have given out a law, concerning scripture, as Pharaoh did the midwives concerning the Hebrew women's children, to strangle it in the birth; yet God hath preserved this blessed book inviolable to this day. The devil and his agents have been blowing at scripture light, but could never prevail to blow it out,—a clear sign that it was lighted from heaven. Nor hath the church of God, in all revolutions and changes, only kept the scripture that it should not be lost, but that it should not be depraved. The letter of scripture hath been preserved, without any corruption, in the original tongues. The scriptures were not corrupted before Christ's time, for then Christ would never have sent the Jews to the scriptures; but he sends them to the scriptures, John 5:39., "Search the scriptures." Christ knew these sacred springs were not muddied with human fancies.

3. The scripture appears to be the word of God, by the matter contained in it.—1. By its profundity. The mystery of scripture is so abstruse and profound, that no man or angel could have known it had it not been divinely revealed. That eternity should be born; that He who thunders in the heavens should cry in the cradle; that He who rules the stars should suck the breasts; that the Prince of life should die; that the Lord of glory should be put to shame; that sin should be punished to the full, yet pardoned to the full; who could ever have conceived of such a mystery, had not the scripture been the oracle to reveal it to us? So, for the doctrine of the resurrection: that the same body which is crumbled into a thousand pieces, should rise idem numero, the same individual body, (for else it were a creation not a resurrection,)—how could such a sacred riddle, above all human disquisition, be known, had not the scripture made a discovery of it?—2. By its purity. It is, for the matter of it, so full of goodness, justice, and sanctity, that it could be breathed from none but from God; the holiness of it shows it to be of God, it bears his very image. The scripture is compared to silver refined seven times, Ps. 12:6. This book of God hath no errata in it; it is a beam of the Sun of Righteousness,—a crystal stream flowing from the fountain of life. All laws and edicts of men have had their corruptions, but the word of God hath not the least tincture, it is of a meridian splendour, Ps. 119:140, "Thy word is very pure," like wine that comes from the grape, which is not mixed nor adulterated. It is so pure, that it purifies every thing else, John 17:17., "Sanctify them through thy truth." The scripture presseth holiness, so as never any book did; it bids us live "soberly, righteously, godly," Tit. 2:12. Soberly, in acts of temperance; righteously, in acts of justice; godly, in the acts of zeal and devotion. It commends to us whatever is just, lovely, and of good report, Phil. 4:8. This sword of the Spirit. Eph. 6:17. cuts down vice. Out of this tower of scripture is thrown down a millstone upon the head of sin. The scripture is the royal law, which commands not only

the actions, but affections; it binds the heart to its good behaviour. Where is there such holiness to be found, as is digged out of this sacred mine? who could be the author of such a book, as God himself? 4. That the scripture is the word of God, is evident by its predictions; it prophesieth of things to come. This shows the voice of God speaking in it. It was foretold by the prophet, "A virgin shall conceive," Isa. 7:14.; and, the "Messiah shall be cut off," Dan. 9:26. The scripture foretels things that should fall out many ages and centuries after; as how long Israel should serve in the iron furnace, and the very day of their deliverance, Exod. 12:41., "At the end of the four hundred and thirty years, even the self-same day, it came to pass, that the host of the Lord went out of Egypt." This prediction of future things, merely contingent, and not depending upon natural causes, is a clear demonstration of its divine original. 5. The impartiality of those men of God, who wrote the scriptures. They do not spare to set down their own failings. What man that writes an history would black his own face, viz., record those things of himself that might stain his reputation? Moses records his own impatience when he struck the rock, and tells us, therefore he could not enter into the land of promise; David writes of his own adultery and bloodshed, which stands as a blot in his scutcheon to succeeding ages; Peter relates his own pusillanimity in denying Christ; Jonah sets down his own passions, "I do well to be angry to the death." Surely, had not their pen been guided by God's own hand, they would never have written that which did reflect dishonour upon themselves! Men do usually rather hide their blemishes than publish them to the world: but these penmen of holy scripture eclipse their own name,—they take away all the glory from themselves, and give the glory to God.

6. The mighty power and efficacy the word hath had upon the souls and consciences of men.—1. It hath changed their hearts. Some by reading of scripture have been turned into other men, they have been made holy and gracious. By reading other books the heart may be warmed, but by reading this book it is transformed, 2 Cor. 3:3., "Ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle Christ, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God." The word was copied out into their hearts, and they were become Christ's epistle, so that others might read Christ in them. If you should set a seal upon marble, and it should make an impression upon the marble, and leave a print behind, there were a strange virtue in that seal: so, when the seal of the word leaves a heavenly print of grace upon the heart, there must needs be a power going along with that word no less than divine.—2. It hath comforted their hearts. When Christians have sitten by the rivers weeping, the word hath dropped as honey and sweetly revived them. A Christian's chief comfort is drawn out of these wells of salvation: Rom. 15:4., "That we through comfort of the Scriptures might have hope." When a poor soul hath been ready to faint, he hath had nothing to comfort him but a scripture-cordial. When he hath been sick, the word hath revived him: 2 Cor. 4:17., "Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." When he hath been deserted, the word hath dropped in the golden oil of joy into his heart: Lam. 3:31., "The Lord will not cast off for ever." He may change his providence, not his purpose; he may have the look of an enemy, but the heart of a father. Thus the word hath a power in it to comfort the heart: Ps. 119:50., "This is my comfort in mine affliction; for thy word hath quickened me." As the spirits are conveyed through the arteries of the body; so divine comforts are conveyed through the promises of the word. Now the scriptures having such an exhilarating, heart-comforting power in them, it shows clearly that

they are of God, and it is he that hath put this milk of consolation into these breasts. 7. The great miracles wherewith the Lord hath confirmed scripture. Miracles were used by Moses, Elijah, Christ, and continued many years after by the apostles, to confirm the verity of the holy scriptures. As props are set under weak vines, so these miracles were set under the weak faith of men, that if they would not believe the writings of the word, yet they might believe the miracles. We read of God's dividing the waters,—making a causeway in the sea for his people to go over,—the iron swimming,—the oil increasing by pouring out,—Christ's making wine of water,—his curing the blind,— and raising the dead: thus God hath set a seal to the truth and divinity of the scriptures by miracles. OBJECT. The papists indeed cannot deny but that the scripture is divine and sacred; but they affirm that quoad nos, 'with respect to us,' it receives its divine authority from the church; and they bring that scripture, 1 Tim. 3:15., where the church is said to be 'the ground, and pillar of truth.' Ans. It is true, the church is the pillar of truth; but it doth not therefore follow, that the scripture hath its authority from the church. The king's proclamation is fixed on the pillar, the pillar holds it out, that all may read, but the proclamation doth not receive its authority from the pillar, but from the king; so the church holds forth the scriptures, but they do not receive their authority from the church, but from God. If the word of God be divine, merely because the church holds it forth, then it will follow, that our faith is to be built upon the church and not upon the word; contrary to that, Eph. 2:20., "Built upon the foundation (that is the doctrine) of the apostles, and prophets."

Q. Are all the books in the Bible of the same divine authority? A. Those which we call canonical. Q. Why are the scriptures called canonical? A. Because the word is a rule of faith,—a canon to direct our lives. The word is the judge of controversies, the rock of infallibility; that only is to be received for truth, which is consonant to, and agrees with scripture, as the transcript with the original. All maxims in divinity are to be brought to the touchstone of scripture, as all measures are brought to the standard. Q. Are the scriptures a complete rule? A. The scripture is a full and perfect canon containing in it all things necessary to salvation: 2 Tim. 3:15., "From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation." It shows the credenda,—what we are to believe; and agenda,—what we are to practise. It gives us an exact model of religion, and perfectly instructs us in the deep things of God. The papists therefore make themselves guilty, who go to eke out scripture with their traditions, to which they equalize it. The council of Trent saith, that the traditions of the church of Rome are to be received pari pietatis affectu,—with the same devotion that scripture is to be received with; so bringing themselves under the curse, Rev. 22:18., "If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book." Q. What is the main scope and end of scripture? A. To chalk out a way to salvation. It makes a clear discovery of Christ: John 20:31., "These things are written, that ye might believe

that Jesus is the Christ, and that believing ye might have life through his name." The design of the word is to be an examen whereby our grace is to be tried; a sea-mark to show us what rocks we are to avoid. The word is to sublimate and quicken our affections; it is to be our directory and consolatory; it is to waft us over to the land of promise. Q. Who shall have the power of interpreting scriptures? The Papists do assert that it is in the power of the church. If you ask who they mean by the church, they say, the Pope who is head of it, and he is infallible; so Bellarmine. But that assertion is false, because many of the Popes have been ignorant and vicious, as Platina affirms, who writes of the lives of Popes. Pope Liberius was an Arian; and Pope John XII. denied the immortality of the soul; therefore Popes are not fit interpreters of scripture. Who then? A. The scripture is to be its own interpreter, or rather the Spirit speaking in it; nothing can cut the diamond but the diamond; nothing can interpret scripture but scripture; the sun best discovers itself by its own beams; the scripture interprets itself in easy places to the understanding. But the question is concerning hard places of scripture where the weak Christian is ready to wade beyond his depth. Who shall interpret here? A. In the church, God hath appointed some to expound and interpret scripture; therefore he hath given gifts to men; the several pastors of churches, like bright constellations, give light to dark scriptures: Mal. 2:7., "The priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth." Q. But this is to pin our faith upon men?

A. We are to receive nothing for currant but what is agreeable to the word. As God hath given to his ministers gifts for the interpreting obscure places, so he hath given to his people so much of the spirit of discerning, that they can tell (at least in things necessary to salvation) what is consonant to scripture, and what is not: 1 Cor. 12:10., "To one is given a spirit of prophecy, to another discerning of spirits." God hath endued his people with such a measure of wisdom and discretion, that they can discern between truth and error, and judge what is sound, and what is spurious: Acts 17:11., "The Bereans searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were so." They weighed the doctrine they heard, whether it was agreeable to scripture, though Paul and Silas were their teachers, 2 Tim. 3:16. Use 1st. See the wonderful goodness of God, who, besides the light of nature, hath committed to us the sacred scriptures. The heathens are enveloped with ignorance, Ps. 147:20., "As for his judgments they have not known them." They have the oracles of the sybils, but not the writings of Moses and the apostles. How many live in the region of death where this bright star of scripture never appeared? We have this blessed book of God to resolve all our cases, to chalk out a way of life to us. John 14:22., "Lord, how is it thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?" Seeing God hath given us his written word to be our directory, this takes away all excuses from men. No man can say, "I went wrong for want of light." No, God hath given thee his word, as a lamp to thy feet; therefore now, if thou goest wrong, thou dost it wilfully. No man can say, "If I had known the will of God, I would have obeyed." No, thou art inexcusable, O man! God hath given thee a rule to go by, he hath written his law with his own finger, therefore now, if thou obeyest not, thou hast no apology left. If a master leaves his mind in writing with his servant, and tells him what work he will have done, yet the servant neglects the work, that

servant is left without excuse, John 15:22., "Now you have no cloak for your sins." Use 2d. Is all scripture of divine inspiration? Is it a book made by God himself? Then this reproves: 1. The Papists, who take away part of scripture, and so clip the king of heaven's coin; they expunge the second commandment out of their catechisms, because it makes against images; it is usual with them, if they meet with any thing in scripture which they dislike, either they put a false gloss upon it, or, if that will not do, pretend it is corrupted. These are like Ananias, who kept back part of the money, Acts 5:2. So they keep back part of the scripture from the people. This is an high affront to God, to deface and obliterate any part of his word; by this they bring themselves under that premunire, Rev. 22:19., "If any man shall take away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life."—Is all scripture of divine inspiration?—2. It condemns the Antinomians, that lay aside the Old Testament as useless, and out of date; they call them Old Testament Christians. God hath stamped a divine majesty upon both Testaments; and till they can shew me where God hath given a repeal to the Old, it stands in force. The two Testaments are the two wells of salvation: the Antinomians would stop up one of these wells,—they would dry up one of the breasts of scripture. There is much gospel in the Old Testament; the comforts of the gospel in the New Testament have their rise from the Old. The great promise of the Messiah is in the Old Testament, "A virgin shall conceive and bear a son." Nay, I say more, the moral law, in some parts of it, speaks gospel, "I am the Lord thy God:" here is the pure wine of the gospel. The saint's great charter, where God promiseth to "sprinkle clean water upon them, and put his Spirit within them," is to be found primarily in the Old Testament, Ezek. 36:25, 26. So that they who take away the Old Testament, do, as Samson, pull down the pillars, they would take

away the pillars of a Christian's comfort.—3. It condemns the enthusiasts, who, pretending the Spirit, lay aside the whole Bible: they say the scripture is a dead letter, and they live above it. What imprudence is this? Till we are above sin, we shall not be above scripture. Let not men talk of a revelation from the Spirit; suspect it to be an imposture. The Spirit of God acts regularly, it works in and by the word; and he that pretends to a new light, which is either above the word, or contrary to it, abuseth both himself and the Spirit, —his light is borrowed from him who transforms himself into an angel of light.—4. It condemns the slighters of scripture: such are they, who can go whole weeks and months and never read the word. They lay it aside as rusty armour; they prefer a play or romance before scripture, the magnalia legis are to them minulta. O how many can be looking their faces in a glass all the morning, but their eyes begin to be sore, when they look upon a Bible! Heathens die in the want of scripture, and these in the contempt of it. They surely must needs go wrong who slight their guide; such as lay the reins upon the neck of their lusts, and never use the curbing bit of scripture to check them, are carried to hell, and never stop.—5. It condemns the abusers of scripture: (1.) Who do mud and poison this pure crystal fountain with their corrupt glosses; who wrest scripture, 2 Pet. 3:16. The Greek word is, they set it upon the rack; they give wrong interpretations of it, not comparing scripture with scripture: as the Antinomians pervert that scripture, Num. 23:21., "He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob,"—hence they infer, God's people may take liberty in sin, because God sees no sin in them. It is true, God sees no sin in his people with an eye of revenge, but he sees it with an eye of observation. He sees not sin in them, so as to damn them; but he sees it, so as to be angry, and severely to punish them. Did not David find it so, when he cried out of his broken bones? In like manner the Arminians wrest scripture, John 5:40., "Ye will not come to me;" here they bring in free will. This text shews, 1. How willing God is

that we should have life; 2. That sinners may do more than they do,— they may improve the talents God hath given them: but it doth not prove the power of free-will, for it is contrary to that scripture, John 6:44., "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him." These therefore wring the text so hard, as they make the blood come; they do not compare scripture with scripture. (2.) Who do jest with scripture; when they are sad, they take the scripture as their lute or minstrel, to play with, and so drive away the sad spirit, as that drunkard I have read of, who having drunk off his cups, called to some of his fellows, "Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out." In the fear of God, take heed of this. Eusebius tells us of one, who took a piece of scripture to make a jest of, but was presently struck with a frenzy and ran mad. And, it is a saying of Luther, Quos Deus vult perdere, &c. "Whom God intends to destroy, he gives them leave to play with scripture." Use 3d. Of exhortation. If the scripture be of divine inspiration, then be exhorted, 1. To study the scripture. It is a copy of God's will; be scripture men, bible Christians. "I adore the fulness of scripture," saith Tertullian. In the book of God are scattered many truths as so many pearls: John 5:39., "Search the scriptures,"—search as for a vein of silver: this blessed book will fill your head with knowledge, and your heart with grace. God wrote the two tables with his own fingers; and if God took pains to write, well may we take pains to read. Apollos was mighty in the scriptures, Acts. 18:24. The word is our magna charta for heaven; shall we be ignorant of our charter? Col. 3:16., "Let the word of God dwell in you richly." The memory must be a table-book where the word is written. To make us read the word, consider, 1. There is majesty sparkling in every line of scripture. Take but one instance, Isa. 63:1., "Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? This that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak

in righteousness, mighty to save." Behold here a lofty magnificent style! What angel could speak after this manner? Junius was converted by reading one verse of John; he beheld a majesty in it beyond all human rhetoric.—2. There is a melody in scripture. This is that blessed harp, which drives away sadness of spirit: hear the sounding of this harp a little, 1 Tim. 1:15., "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners;" he took not only our flesh upon him, but our sins. And Mat. 11:28., "Come unto me, all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." How sweetly doth this harp of scripture sound, what heavenly music doth it make in the ears of a distressed sinner, especially when the finger of God's Spirit toucheth upon this instrument!—3. There is divinity in scripture. It contains the marrow and quintessence of religion. The scripture is a rock of diamonds, a mystery of piety; the lips of scripture have grace poured into them. The scripture speaks of faith, self-denial, and all the graces which, as a chain of pearl adorn a Christian. The scripture excites to holiness; it treats of another world, it gives a prospect of eternity. Oh then search the scripture; make the word familiar to you! Had I the tongue of angels, I could not sufficiently set forth the excellency of scripture; it is a spiritual optic-glass, in which we behold God's glory; it is the tree of life,—the oracle of wisdom,—the rule of manners,—the heavenly seed of which the new creature is formed, James 1:18. "The two Testaments (saith Austin) are the two breasts which every Christian must suck, that he may get spiritual nourishment." The leaves of the tree of life were for healing, Rev. 22:2.: so these holy leaves of scripture, like those leaves, are for the healing of our souls. The scripture is profitable for all things: if we are deserted, here is spiced wine that cheers the heavy heart; if we are pursued by Satan, here is the sword of the Spirit to resist him; if we are diseased with sin's leprosy, here are the waters of the sanctuary, both to cleanse and cure. Oh, then, search the scriptures! There's no danger in

tasting this tree of knowledge; there was a penalty laid at first, that we might not taste of the tree of knowledge, Gen. 2:17., "In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die;" but there is no danger of plucking this tree of holy scriptures; if we do not eat of this tree of knowledge, we shall surely die. Oh, then, read the scriptures! Time may come, when the scriptures may be kept from us. Q. How should we so search the scriptures as to find life? A. 1. Read the Bible with reverence. Think every line you read, God is speaking to you. The ark wherein the law was put was overlaid with pure gold, and was carried on bars, that the Levites might not touch it, Exod. 25:14. And why was this, but to breed in the people reverence to the law?—2. Read with seriousness. It is matter of life and death; by this word you must be tried; conscience and scripture are the jury God will proceed by, in judging of you.—3. Read the word with affection. Get your hearts quickened with the word; go to it to fetch fire, Luke 24:32., "Did not our hearts burn within us?" Labour that the word may not only be a lamp to direct, but a fire to warm. Read the scripture, not only as an history, but as a love-letter sent to you from God which may affect your hearts.—4. Pray that the same Spirit that wrote the word, may assist you in the reading of it; that God's Spirit would show you the wonderful things of his law. "Go near, saith God to Philip, join thyself to this chariot," Acts 8:29. So when God's Spirit joins himself with his chariot of the word, then it becomes effectual. A. 2. Be exhorted to prize the word written, Job 23:12. David valued the word more precious than gold. What would the Martyrs have given for a leaf of the Bible! The word is the field where Christ the pearl of price is hid. In this sacred mine we dig, not for a wedge of gold, but a weight of glory.—1. The scripture is a sacred collyrium, or

eye-salve, to illuminate us: Prov. 6:23., "The commandment is a lamp, and the law is light." The scripture is the chart and compass by which we sail to the new Jerusalem.—2. The scripture is a sovereign cordial in all distresses. What are the promises but the water of life to renew fainting spirits? Is it sin troubles? There is a scripture-cordial, Ps. 65:3., "Iniquities prevail against me; as for our transgressions thou shalt purge them away;" or, as it is in the Hebrew, 'Thou shalt cover them.' Is it outward afflictions disquiet thee? There is a scripture-cordial, Ps. 91:15., "I will be with him in trouble,"—not only to behold, but to uphold. Thus, as in the ark was laid up manna, promises are laid up as manna in the ark of scripture.—3. The scripture will make us wise: wisdom is above rubies; Ps. 119:104., "By thy precepts I get understanding." What made Eve so desire the tree of knowledge? Gen. 3:6., "It was a tree to make one wise." The scriptures teach a man to know himself; they discover Satan's snares and stratagems, 2 Cor. 2:11., "They make one wise to salvation," 2 Tim. 3:15. O then highly prize the scriptures! I read of Queen Elizabeth, that at her coronation, she received the Bible presented to her, with both her hands, and kissing it, laid it to her breast, saying, that that book had ever been her chiefest delight. A. 3. If the scripture is of divine inspiration, believe the word. The Romans, that they might gain credit to their laws, reported that they were inspired by the gods at Rome. O give credence to the word! It is breathed from God's own mouth. Hence ariseth all the profaneness of men, they do not believe the scripture, Is. 53:1., "who hath believed our report?" Did you believe the glorious rewards the scripture speaks of, would you not give diligence to make your election sure? Did you believe the infernal torments the scriptures speaks of, would not this put you into a cold sweat, and cause a trembling at heart for sin? But people are in part atheists; they give but little credit to the word, therefore they are so impious, and draw

such dark shadows in their lives. Learn to realize scripture; get your hearts wrought to a firm belief of it. Some think, if God should send an angel from heaven, and declare his mind, then they should rather believe him,—or if he should send one from the damned, and preach the torments of hell all in flames, then they would believe,—but Luke 16:31., "If they believe not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead." God is wise, and he thinks this way fittest to make his mind known to us by writing; and such as shall not be convinced by the word, shall be judged by the word. The belief of the scripture is of high importance; it is the belief of scripture that will enable us to resist temptation, 1 John 2:14., "The word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one." It is the belief of scripture conduceth much to our sanctification; therefore these two are put together, sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the truth, 2 Thess. 2:13. If the word written be not believed, it is like writing on the water which takes no impression. A. 4. Love the word written: Ps. 119:97., "O how love I thy law!" "Lord (saith Augustine) let the holy scriptures be my chaste delight." Chrysostom compares the scripture to a garden; every truth is a fragrant flower, which we should wear, not on our bosom, but our heart. David counted the word "sweeter than honey and the honeycomb," Ps. 19:10. There is that in scripture may breed delight: it shews us the way to riches, Deut. 28:5., Prov. 3:10.; to long life, Ps. 34:12.; to a kingdom, Heb. 12:28. Well then may we count those the sweetest hours which are spent in reading the holy scriptures! Well may we say with the prophet, Jer. 15:16., "Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and they were the joy and rejoicing of my heart!" A. 5. Conform to scripture, let us lead scripture lives. O that the Bible might be seen printed in our lives! Do what the word commands.

Obedience is an excellent way of commenting upon the Bible, Ps. 86:11., "I will walk in thy truth." Let the word be the sun-dial by which you set your life. What are we the better for having the scripture, if we do not direct all our speeches and actions according to it? What is a carpenter the better to have his rule about him, if he sticks it at his back, and never makes use of it for the measuring and squaring his work? So, what are we the better for the rule of the word, if we do not make use of it, and regulate our lives by it? How many swerve and deviate from the rule! The word teacheth to be sober and temperate,—but they are drunk; to be chaste and holy,— but they are profane; they go quite from the rule. What a dishonour is this to religion, for men to live in contradiction to scripture! The word is called "a light to our feet," Ps. 119:105. It is not only a light to our eyes to mend our sight, but to our feet to mend our walk. O let us lead Bible conversations! A. 6. Contend for scripture. Though we should not be of contentious spirits, yet we ought to contend for the word of God; this jewel is too precious to be parted with, Prov. 4:13., "Keep her, for she is thy life." The scripture is beset with enemies, heretics fight against it: we must therefore "contend for the faith once delivered to the saints," Jude 3. The scripture is our book of evidences for heaven: shall we part with our evidences? The saints of old were both advocates and martyrs for truth; they would hold fast scripture, though it were with the loss of their lives. A. 7. Be thankful to God for the scriptures. What a mercy is it that God hath not only acquainted us what his will is, but that he hath made it known by writing! In the old times God did reveal his mind by revelations, but the word written is a surer way of knowing God's mind than by revelation, 2 Pet. 1:18. This voice which came from heaven we heard; we have also a more sure word of prophecy. The

devil is God's ape, and he can transform himself into an angel of light; he can deceive with false revelations: as I have heard of one who had, as he thought, a revelation from God to sacrifice his child, as Abraham had, whereupon he, following this impulsion of the devil, did kill his child. Thus Satan oft deceives people with delusions, instead of divine revelations, therefore we are to be thankful to God for revealing his mind to us by writing. We have a more sure word of prophecy. We are not left under a doubtful suspense that we should not know what to believe, but we have an infallible rule to go by. The scripture is our pole-star to direct us to heaven; it shews us every step we are to take; when we go wrong, it instructs us; when we go right, it comforts us; and it is matter of thankfulness, that the scriptures are made intelligible, by being translated. A. 8. Adore God's distinguishing grace, if you have felt the power and authority of the word upon your conscience; if you can say as David, Ps. 119:50., "Thy word hath quickened me." Christian, bless God that he hath not only given thee his word to be a rule of holiness, but his grace to be a principle of holiness! Bless God that he hath not only written his word, but sealed it upon thy heart, and made it effectual! Canst thou say it is of divine inspiration, because thou hast felt it to be of lively operation? O free grace! that God should send out his word, and heal thee; that he should heal thee, and not others; that the same scripture, which is to them a dead letter, should be to thee a savour of life.

THAT THERE IS A GOD
QUEST. III. WHAT do the scriptures principally teach?

ANS. The scriptures principally teach what man is to believe concerning God, and what duty God requires of man. Q. What is God? A. God is a spirit, infinite, eternal, and unchangeable, in his being, wisdom, power, holiness, justice, goodness, and truth. Here is, 1st. Something implied,—that there is a God; 2d. Expressed, —that He is a spirit.—3d. What kind of spirit. 1st. Implied,—That there is a God. The question, What is God? takes it for granted that there is a God; the belief of God's essence is the foundation of all religious worship, Heb. 11:6., "He that comes to God, must believe that he is." There must be a first cause which gives a being and existence to all things besides. We come to know that there is a God: 1. By the book of nature; the notion of a Deity is engraven on man's heart,—it is demonstrable by the light of nature. I think it hard for a man to be a natural atheist. He may wish there were no God,—he may dispute against a Deity,— but he cannot in his judgment believe there is no God, unless by accumulated sin his conscience be seared, and he hath such a lethargy upon him, that he hath sinned away his very sense and reason. 2. We come to know that there is a God by his works; and this is so evident a demonstration of a Godhead, that the most atheistical spirits, when they have considered these works of God, have been forced to acknowledge some wise and supreme power, the maker of these things; as it is reported of Galen and others.

(1.) We will begin with the greater world: 1. The creation of the glorious fabric of heaven and earth; sure there must be some architect or first cause, the world could not make itself. Who could hang the earth on nothing, but the great God? Who could provide such rich furniture for the heavens,—the glorious constellations,—the firmament bespangled with such glittering lights? All this speaks a Deity. We may see God's glory blazing in the sun, twinkling in the stars. Who could give the earth its clothing,—cover it with grass and corn,—adorn it with flowers,—enrich it with gold? Only God, Job 28:4. Who but God could make the sweet music in the heavens,— cause the angels to join in concert and sound forth the praises of their Maker, Job 38:7., "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" If a man should go into a far country, and see stately edifices there, he would never imagine that these could build themselves, but that some greater power built them; to imagine that the work of the creation was not framed by God, is as if we should conceive a curious landscape to be drawn by a pencil without the hand of a limner: Acts 17:24., "God that made the world, and all things therein." To create, is proper to the Deity.—2. The wise government of all things evinces there is a God. God is the great superintendent of the world; he holds the golden reins of government in his hand, guiding all things most regularly and harmoniously to their proper end. Who that eyes providence, but must be forced to acknowledge there is a God? Providence is the queen and governess of the world; it is the hand that turns the wheel of the whole creation; providence sets the sun its race, the sea its bounds. If God should not guide the world, things would run into disorder and confusion. When one looks on a clock, and sees the motion of the wheels, the striking of the hammer, the hanging of the plummets, he would say, there were some artificer did make it, and put it into that order: so when we see the excellent order and harmony in the universe,—the sun, that great luminary, dispensing

its light and heat to the world, without which the world were but a grave or a prison,—the rivers sending forth their silver streams to refresh the bodies of men, and prevent a drought,—and every creature acting within its sphere, and keeping its due bounds,—we must needs Acknowledge there is a God, who wisely orders and governs all these things. Who could set this great army of the creatures in their several ranks and squadrons, and keep them in their constant march, but HE, whose name is THE LORD OF HOSTS? And as God doth wisely dispose all things in the whole regiment of the creatures, so, by his power, he doth support them: did God suspend and withdraw his influence ever so little, the wheels of the creation would unpin, and the axle-tree break asunder.—3 The motion of the creatures. All motion as the philosophers say, is from something that is unmoveable: as for example, the elements are moved by the influence and motion of the heavenly bodies, the sun and moon, and thess planets are moved by the highest orb, called Primum Mobile: now, if one should ask, Who moves that highest orb, or the first mover of the planets? Sure it can be no other hand but God himself! (2.) Let us speak of man, who is a microcosm, or lesser world. The excellent contexture and frame of his body, which is wrought curiously as with needle-work, Ps. 139:15., "I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth;" and the endowment of this body with a noble soul; who but God could make such an union of different substances, flesh and spirit? "In him we live, and move, and have our being." The quick acute motion of every part of the body shows that there is a God. We may see something of him in the sparkling of the eye. And if the cabinet of the body be so curiously wrought, what is the jewel? The soul hath a celestial brightness in it; as Damascene saith, "It is a diamond set in a ring of clay." What noble faculties is the soul endowed with? Understanding,—Will,—

Affections,—which are a glass of the Trinity, as Plato speaks. The matter of the soul is spiritual; it is a divine spark lighted from heaven; and being spiritual, is immortal, as Scaliger notes; anima non senescit,—the soul doth not wax old, it lives for ever. And who could create a soul ennobled with such rare angelical properties, but God? We must needs say as the Psalmist, "It is he that hath made us, and not we ourselves," Ps. 100:3. 3. We may prove a Deity by our conscience. Conscience is God's deputy or vicegerent. Conscience is a witness of a Deity; if there were no Bible to tell us there is a God, yet conscience might. Conscience, as the apostle saith, 'either accuseth,' or 'excuseth,' Rom. 2:15. Conscience acts in order to a higher judicatory.—1. Natural conscience, being kept free from gross sin, excuseth. When a man doth virtuous actions,—live soberly and righteously,—observes the golden maxim, doing to others as he would have them to do to him— then conscience approves, and saith, "Well done!" Conscience, like a bee, gives honey.—2. Natural conscience in the wicked doth accuse. When men go against the light of conscience, then they feel the worm of conscience. Eheu, quis intus Scorpio! SEN. Conscience, being sinned against, spits fire in men's faces, fills them with shame and horror; when the sinner sees an handwriting on the wall of conscience, his countenance is changed. Many have hanged themselves to quiet their conscience. Tiberius the emperor, a bloody man, felt the lashes of his conscience; he was so haunted with that fury, that he told the senate, he suffered death daily. And what is it should put a man's conscience into such an agony, but the impression of a Deity, and the thought of coming before God's tribunal? Those who are above all human laws, yet are subject to the checks of their own conscience. And it is observable, the nearer the wicked approach to death, the more they are terrified, and conscience gives a louder alarm to them: and whence is this, but

from the apprehension of judgment approaching? The soul, being sensible of its immortal nature, trembles at him, who never ceaseth to live, and therefore will never cease to punish. 4. That there is a God, appears by the consent of nations, by the universal vote and suffrage of all. Nulla gens tam barbara cui non insideat hæc persuasio, Deum esse,—"No nation so barbarous," saith Tully, "as not to believe there is a God." Though the heathen did mistake in their devotion, and did not worship the true God, yet they worshipped a God. They set up an altar, 'To the unknown God,' Acts 17:22. They knew a God should be worshipped, though they knew not the God whom they worshipped. Some did worship Jupiter, some Neptune, some Mars; rather than not to worship something, they would worship any thing. 5. That there is a God, appears by his prediction of future things. He who can foretel things which shall surely come to pass, is the true God. God foretold, that a virgin should conceive; he prefixed the time when the Messias should be cut off, Dan. 9:26.; he foretold the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and who should be their deliverer, Isa. 45:1. This is such a strong argument to prove a Deity, as God himself useth it to prove he is the true God, and that all the gods of the heathens were fictions and nullities, Isa. 41:29. Testimonium divinitatis est veritas divinationis, TERTUL. To foretel things contingent, and which depend upon no natural causes, is proper to a Deity. 6. That there is a God, appears by God's unlimited power and sovereignty. He who can work, and none hinder him, is the true God; but God can do so, Isa. 43:13., "I will work, and who shall let it." Nothing can hinder action but some superior power; but there is no power above God,—all power that is, is by him,—therefore all power

is under him; he hath a 'mighty arm,' Ps. 89:13. He sees the designs men drive on against him, and plucks off their chariot-wheels; he maketh the diviners mad; Isa. 44:25.; he cutteth off the spirit of princes; he bridleth the sea, gives check to the leviathan, binds the devil in chains; he acts according to his pleasure; he doth what he will: "I will work, and who shall let it?" 7. There are devils, therefore there is a God. Atheists cannot deny but there are devils, and then they must grant there is a God. We read of diverse possessed of the devil. The devils are called in scripture, 'Hairy Ones,' because they often appeared in the form of goats or satyrs. Gerson, in his book De probatione spirituum, tells us how Satan on a time appeared to an holy man in a most glorious manner, professing himself to be Christ: the old man answered, "I desire not to see my Saviour here in this desert, it shall suffice me to see him in heaven." Now, if there be a devil, then there is a God. Socrates, an heathen, when he was accused at his death, confessed, that, as he thought there was a malus genius, an evil spirit, so he thought there was a good. Use 1. Seeing there is a God, this reproves such atheistical fools as deny it. Epicurus denied there was a providence, saying, that all things fell out by chance. He that saith there is no God, is the wickedest creature that is; he is worse than a thief, who doth but take away our goods from us, but the atheist would take away our God from us, John 20:13., "They have taken away my Lord." So we may say of atheists, they would take away our God from us, in whom all our hope and comfort is laid up. Ps. 14:1., "The fool hath said in his heart there is no God." He durst not speak it with his tongue, but said it in his heart; he wished it. Sure none can be speculative atheists! "The devils believe and tremble," James 2:19. I have read of one Arthur, a professed atheist, who, when he came to die, cried out he

was damned; but though there are few found who say, "There is no God," yet many deny him in their practices, Tit. 1:16., "In works they deny him." Cicero said of Epicurus, verbis reliquit, deos resustulit. The world is full of practical atheism; most people live as if they did not believe there was a God. Durst they lie, defraud, be unclean, if they believed there were a God who would call them to an account? If an Indian, who never heard of a God should come among us, and have no other means to convince him of a Deity, but the lives of men in our age, surely he would be of Protagoras' mind, who did hang in a doubtful suspense, and did question whether there were a God,— utrum Dii sint, non ausim affirmare! Use 2. Seeing there is a God, he will deal righteously, and give just rewards to men. Things seem to be carried in the world very unequally; the wicked flourish, Ps. 73; they who tempt God are delivered, Mal. 3:15., the ripe clusters of grapes are squeezed into their cup, and, in the mean while, the godly, who wept for sin and served God, are afflicted, Ps. 102:9., "I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping." Evil men enjoy all the good, and good men endure all the evil. But seeing there is a God, he will deal righteously with men, Gen. 18:25., "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?" Offenders must come to punishment. The sinner's deathday and doomsday is a coming; Ps. 37:13., "The Lord seeth that his day is coming." While there is an hell, the wicked shall be scourged enough; and while there is eternity, they shall lie there long enough; and God will abundantly compensate the faithful service of his people. They shall have their white robes and crowns: Ps. 58:11., "Verily there is a reward for the righteous! Verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth!" Because God is God, therefore he will give forth glorious rewards to his people.

Use 3. Seeing there is a God, wo to all such as engage this God against them! He lives for ever to be avenged upon them, Ezek. 22:14., "Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with thee?" Such as pollute God's sabbath,— oppose his saints, trampling these jewels in the dust,—such as live in a contradiction to God's word,—these do engage the Infinite Majesty of heaven against them; and how dismal will their case be? Deut. 32:41., "If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold of judgment, I will render vengeance to mine enemies; I will make mine arrows drunk with blood," &c. If it be so terrible to hear the lion roar, what is it when he begins to tear his prey? Ps. 50:22., "Consider this, ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces!" O that men would think of this, who go on in sin! Shall we engage the great God against us? God strikes slow but heavy; Job 40:9., "Hast thou an arm like God?" Canst thou strike such a blow? God is the best friend, but the worst enemy. If he can look men into their grave, how far can he throw them? "Who knows the power of his wrath?" Ps. 90:11. What fools are they, who, for a drop of pleasure, drink a sea of wrath? Paracelsus speaks of a frenzy some have, which will make them die dancing: sinners go dancing to hell. Use 4. Seeing there is a God, let us firmly believe this great article of our creed. What religion can there be in men, if they do not believe a Deity? "He that cometh to God, must believe that he is." To worship God, and pray to him, and not believe there is a God, is to put a high scorn and contempt upon God. Believe that God is the only true God; such a God as he hath revealed himself in his word, "A lover of righteousness, and hater of wickedness," Ps. 45:7. The real belief of a Deity gives life to all religious worship; the more we believe the truth and infiniteness of God, the more holy and angelical we are in our lives. Whether we are alone, or in company, God sees us; he is the heart-searcher; the belief of this would make us live always under

God's eye, Ps. 16:8., "I have set the Lord always before me." The belief of a Deity would be a bridle to sin, a spur to duty; it would add wings to prayer, and oil to the lamp of our devotion. The belief of a Deity would cause dependance upon God in all our straits and exigencies. Gen. 17:1., "I am God all-sufficient,"—a God that can supply all your wants, scatter all your fears, resolve all your doubts, conquer all your temptations; the arm of God's power can never be shrunk; he can create mercy for us, and therefore can help and not be beholden to the creature. Did we believe there is a God, we should so depend on his providence as not to use any indirect means; we should not run ourselves into sin to rid ourselves out of trouble: 2 Kings 1:3., "Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to inquire of Beelzebub the God of Ekron?" When men run to sinful shifts, is it not because they do not believe there is a God, or that he is all-sufficient? Use. 5. Seeing there is a God, let us labour to get an interest in him, Ps. 48:14., "This God is our God." Two things will comfort us,—Deity and property. Since the fall we have lost likeness to God, and communion with God; let us labour to recover this lost interest, and pronounce this Shibboleth, 'My God,' Ps. 43:5. It is little comfort to know there is a God, unless he be ours; God offers himself to be our God, Jer. 31:33., "I will be their God." And faith catcheth hold of the offer; it appropriates God, and makes all that is in him over to us to be ours,—his wisdom to be ours, to teach us,—his holiness ours, to sanctify us,—his Spirit ours, to comfort us,—his mercy ours, to save us. To be able to say, God is mine, is more than to have all the mines of gold and silver. Use 6. Seeing there is a God, let us serve and worship him as God. It was an indictment brought in against them, Rom. 1:21., "They glorified him not as God." 1. Let us pray to him as to God. Pray with

fervency, James 5:16., "An effectual fervent prayer availeth much." This is both the fire and the incense; without fervency it is no prayer. —2. Love him as God, Deut. 6:5., "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart." To love him with all thy heart, is to give him a precedency in our love: desire to let him have the cream of our affections,—to love him not only appreciatively, but intensively, as much as we can. As the sunbeams united in a burning glass, burn the hotter, so all our affections should be united, that our love to God may be more ardent.—3. Obey him as God. All creatures obey him: the stars fight his battles,—the wind and sea obey him, Mark 4:41.,— much more should man whom God hath endued with a principle of reason. He is God, and hath a sovereignty over us; therefore, as we received life from him, so we must receive a law from him, and submit to his will in all things. This is to kiss him with a kiss of loyalty, and it is to glorify him as God.

GOD IS A SPIRIT QUEST. IV. WHAT is God? ANS. God is a Spirit. 2d. The thing expressed, John 4:24., "God is a spirit." God is essentia spiritualissima. ZANCH. Q. What do you mean when you say, God is a Spirit? A. By a spirit I mean, God is an immaterial substance, of a pure, subtile, unmixed essence, not compounded of body and soul, without all extension of parts. The body is a dreggish thing: the more

spiritual God's essence is, the more noble and excellent. The spirits are the more refined part of the wine. Q. Wherein doth God differ from other spirits? 1. The angels are spirits. A. We must distinguish of spirits. 1. The angels are created, God is a spirit uncreated.—2. The angels are spirits, but they are finite, and capable of being annihilated; the same power which made them, is able to reduce them to their first nothing; but God is an infinine spirit.—3. The angels are confined spirits; they cannot be duobus locis simul, they are confined to a place; but God is an immense spirit, and cannot be confined, being in all places at once.—4. The angels, though they are spirits, yet they are but ministering spirits, Heb. 1:14. Though they are spirits, yet are they servants. God is a super-excellent spirit, "the Father of spirits," Heb. 12:9. 2. The soul is a spirit: Eccles. 12:7., "The spirit shall return unto God that gave it." Q. How doth God, being a spirit, differ from the soul? Servetus and Osiander thought, that the soul being infused did convey into man the very spirit and substance of God; an absurd opinion, for the essence of God is incommunicable. A. Therefore, when it is said, the soul is a spirit, it is meant God hath made it intelligent, and hath stamped upon it his likeness, not his essence. Q. But is it not said, that we are made partakers of the divine nature?

A. By divine nature there, is meant divine qualities, 2 Pet. 1:4. We are made partakers of the divine nature, not by identity or union with the divine essence, but by a transformation into the divine likeness. Thus you see how God differs from other spirits, angels and souls of men. He is a spirit of transcendent excellency, "the Father of spirits." OBJ. Against this Vorstius and the An thropomorphites object, that, in scripture, an human shape and figure is given to God; he is said to have eyes and hands. A. It is contrary to the nature of a spirit to have a corporeal substance: Luke 24:39., "Handle me, and see me: for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." Bodily members are ascribed to God, not properly, but metaphorically, and in a borrowed sense; he is only set out to our capacity; by the right hand of the Lord is meant his power; by the eyes of the Lord is meant his wisdom. Now that God is a spirit, and is not capable of bodily shape or substance, is clear. 1. A body is visible, but God is invisible; therefore he is a spirit, 1 Tim. 6:16., "whom no man hath seen, nor can see;" not by an eye of sense.—2. A body is terminated; can be but in one place at once; but God is every where, in all places at once; therefore he is a spirit, Ps. 139:7, 8. God's centre is every where, and his circumference is nowhere.—3. A body being compounded of integral parts may be dissolved,—quicquid divisible est corruptibile; but the Godhead is not capable of dissolution; he can have no end, from whom all things have their beginning. So that it clearly appears that God is a spirit, which adds to the perfection of his nature. Use 1. If God be a spirit, then he is impassible,—he is not capable of being hurt. Wicked men set up their banners, and bend their forces against God; they are said to fight against God, Acts 5:39. But what will this fighting avail? What hurt can they do to the Deity? God is a

spirit, and therefore cannot receive any hurtful impression; wicked men may imagine evil against the Lord, Nahum 1:9., "What do ye imagine against the Lord?" But God, being a spirit, is impenetrable. The wicked may eclipse his glory, but cannot touch his essence. God can hurt his enemies, but they cannot hurt him. Julian might throw up his dagger into the air against heaven, but could not touch the Deity. God is a spirit, invisible. How can the wicked with all their forces hurt him, when they cannot see him? Hence all the attempts of the wicked against God are foolish, and prove abortive: Ps. 2:2, 4., "The kings of the earth set themselves against the Lord and against his anointed. He that sits in the heaven shall laugh." He is a spirit, he can wound them, but they cannot touch him. Use 2. If God be a spirit, then it shows the folly of the papists, who worship him by pictures and images. Being a spirit, we cannot make any image to represent him by: Deut. 4:12., "The Lord spake to you out of the midst of the fire, ye heard the voice of the words, but saw no similitude." 1. God being a spirit is imperceptible, cannot be discerned; how then can there be any resemblance made of him? Isa. 40:18., "To whom then will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him?" How can you paint the Deity? Can we make an image of that which we never saw? "Ye saw no similitude." God is a spirit. It were a folly to go to make the picture of the soul, because it is a spiritual thing; or to paint the angels, because they are spirits. OBJ. Are not the angels in scripture represented by the cherubims? A. There is imago personæ et officii,—there is the image of the person, and the image that represents the office. The cherubims did not represent the persons of the angels, but their office. The cherubims were made with wings, to show the swiftness of the

angels, in discharge of their office; and if we cannot picture the soul, nor the persons of angels, because they are spirits, much less can we make an image or picture of God, who is infinite and the Father of spirits. 2. God is also an omnipresent spirit; he is present in all places, Jer. 23:24., "Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the Lord." Therefore, being every where present, it is absurd to worship him by an image. Were it not a foolish thing to bow down to the king's picture, when the king is present? So it is to worship God's image, when God himself is present. Q. But how then shall we conceive of God, being a spirit, if we may make no image or resemblance of him? A. We must conceive of him spiritually: viz. (1.) In his attributes,—his holiness; justice, goodness, which are the beams by which his divine nature shines forth. (2.) We must conceive of him as he is in Christ, Christ "is the image of the invisible God," Col 1:15. Set the eyes of your faith on Christ, God-man. In Christ we see some sparklings of the divine glory; in him there is the exact resemblance of all his Father's excellencies. The wisdom, love, and holiness of God the Father shine forth in Christ, John 14:9., "He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father." Use 3. If God be a spirit, it shows us, that the more spiritual we grow, the more we grow like to God. How do earth and spirit agree? Phil. 3:9. Earthly ones may give for their crest, the mole or tortoise that live in the earth. What resemblance is there between an earthly heart, and him who is a spirit? The more spiritual any one is, the more like God. Q. What is it to be spiritual?

A. To be refined and sublimated, to have the heart still in heaven, to be thinking of God and glory, and to be carried up in a fiery chariot of love to God,—this is to be spiritual: Ps. 73:25., "Whom have I in heaven but thee:" on which Beza paraphrased thus, Apaga terra, utinam tecum in cœlo essem! "O that I were in heaven with thee!" A Christian, who is taken off these earthly things, as the spirits are taken off from the lees, hath a noble spiritual soul, and doth most resemble him who is a spirit. Use 4. It shows what that worship is God requires of us, and is most acceptable to him, viz. such a worship as is suitable to his nature, 'spiritual worship.' John 4:24., "They which worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth." Spiritual worship is the virgin worship. Though God will have the service of our bodies,—our eyes and hands lifted up, to testify to others what reverence we have of God's glory and majesty,—yet chiefly he will have the worship of the soul, 1 Cor. 6:20., "Glorify God in your body and in your spirit." Spirit worship God prizeth, because it comes so near to his own nature who is a spirit. Q. What is it to worship God in spirit? A. 1. To worship him without ceremonies. The ceremonies of the law, which God himself ordained, are now abrogated, and out of date; Christ the substance being come, the shadows fly away; and therefore the apostle calls the legal ceremonies 'carnal rites,' Heb. 10:10.; and if we may not use those Jewish ceremonies which God did once appoint, then not those which he did never appoint. A. 2. To worship God in spirit, is to worship him, 1. With faith in the blood of the Messiah, Heb. 11:9.; and, 2. To worship him with the utmost zeal and intenseness of soul, Acts 26:7., "Our twelve tribes instantly serving God day and night,"—with intenseness of spirit,—

not only constantly, but instantly. This is to worship God in spirit. The more spiritual any service is, the nearer it comes to God, who is a spirit, and the more excellent it is; the spiritual part of duty is the fat of the sacrifice,—it is the soul and quintessence of religion. The richest cordials are made of spirits, and the best duties are such as are of a spiritual nature. God is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit; it is not pomp of worship, but purity, which God accepts. Repentance is not in the outward severities used to the body, penance, fasting, and chastising the body, but it consists in the sacrifice of a broken heart; thanksgiving doth not stand in church music, the melody of an organ, but rather in making melody in the heart to the Lord, Eph. 5:19. Prayer is not the tuning the voice into an heartless confession, or telling over a few beads, but it consists in sighs and groans, Rom. 8:26. When the fire of fervency is put to the incense of prayer, then it ascends as a sweet odour; that is the true holy water, not that which the pope sprinkles, but what is distilled from the limbeck of a penitent eye. Spirit-worship best pleaseth that God who is a spirit: John 4:23., "The Father seeketh such to worship him;" to shew the great acceptance of such, and how God is delighted with spiritual worship. This is the savoury meat God loves. How few mind this! Worshipping him who is a spirit, in the spirit, they give him more dregs than spirits; they think it enough to bring their duties, but not their hearts, which hath made God disclaim these very services he himself appointed, Isa. 1:12; Ezek. 33:31. Let us then give God spirit-worship, this best suits with his nature; a sovereign elixir full of virtue may be given in a few drops; a little prayer, if it be with the heart and spirit, may have much virtue and efficacy in it. The publican made but a short prayer, "God be merciful to me a sinner," Luke 18:13., but it was full of life and spirit; it came from the heart, therefore it was accepted.

Use 5. Of Exhortation. Pray to God, that as he is a spirit; so he will give us of his Spirit. The essence of God is incommunicable; but not the motions, the presence, and influences of his Spirit. When the sun shines in a room, not the body of the sun is there, but the light, heat, and influence of the sun. God hath made a promise of his Spirit, Ezek. 36:27., "I will put my Spirit within you." Turn promises into prayers. "O Lord, thou who art a spirit, give me of thy Spirit: I flesh, beg thy Spirit, thy enlightening, sanctifying, quickening Spirit!" Melancthon prayed, "Lord, inflame my soul with thy holy Spirit!" How needful is his Spirit? We cannot do any duty without it, in a lively manner; when this wind blows upon our sails, then we move swiftly towards heaven. Pray therefore, that God would give us of 'the residue of his Spirit,' Mal. 2:15., that we may move more vigorously in the sphere of religion. Use 6. Of Comfort. As God is a spirit, so the reward that he gives is spiritual; that is the excellency of it. As the chief blessings he gives us in this life are spiritual blessings, Eph. 1:3., not gold and silver,—he gives Christ, his love,—he fills us with grace,—so the main rewards he gives us after this life are spiritual, 'a crown of glory that fadeth not away," 1 Pet. 5:4. Earthly crowns fade, but the beliver's crown, being spiritual, is immortal, a never-fading crown. "It is impossible (saith Joseph Scaliger) for that which is spiritual to be subject to change or corruption." This may comfort a Christian in all his labours and sufferings; he lays out himself for God, and hath little or no reward here; but remember, God, who is a spirit, will give spiritual rewards, —a sight of his face in heaven,—white robes,—a weight of glory. Be not then weary of God's service; think of the spiritual reward, a crown of glory which fadeth not away!
