PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 28
On Spiritualizing


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 7. On Spiritualizing.

LECTURE VII
ON SPIRITUALIZING

Many writers upon Homiletics condemn in unmeasured terms even
the occasional spiritualizing of a text. "Select texts," say they, "which
give a plain, literal sense; never travel beyond the obvious meaning
of the passage; never allow yourself to accommodate or adapt; it is
an artifice of men of artificial culture, a trick of mountebanks, a
miserable display of bad taste and impudence." Honour to whom
honour is due, but I humbly beg leave to dissent from this learned
opinion, believing it to be more fastidious than correct, more
plausible than true. A great deal of real good may be done by
occasionally taking forgotten, quaint remarkable, out-of-the-way
texts; and I feel persuaded that if we appeal to a jury of practical,
successful preachers, who are not theorizers, but men actually in the
field, we shall have a majority in our favour. It may be that the
learned rabbis of this generation are too sublime and celestial to
condescend to men of low estate; but we who have no high culture,
or profound learning, or enchanting eloquence to boast of, have
deemed it wise to use the very method which the grandees have
proscribed; for we find it one of the best ways of keeping out of the
rut of dull formality, and it yields us a sort of salt with which to give
flavour to unpalatable truth. Many great soul-winners have felt it
meet to give a fillip to their ministry, and to arrest their people's
attention by now and then striking out a path which had not been
trodden heretofore. Experience has not taught them that they were
in error, but the reverse. Within limit, my brethren, be not afraid to
spiritualize, or to take singular texts. Continue to look out passages
of Scripture, and not only give their plain meaning, as you are bound
to do, but also draw from them meanings which may not lie upon
their surface. Take the advice for what it is worth, but I seriously
recommend you to show the superfine critics that everybody does
not worship the golden image which they have set up I counsel you to
employ spiritualizing within certain limits and boundaries, but I pray
you do not, under cover of this advice, rush headlong into incessant
and injudicious "imaginings," as George Fox would call them. Do not
drown yourselves because you are recommended to bathe, or hang
yourselves on an oak because tannin is described as a valuable
astringent. An allowable thing carried to excess is a vice, even as fire

is a good servant in the grate, gut a bad master when raging in a
burning house. Too much even of a good thing surfeits and disgusts,
and in no case is this fact more sure than in the one before us.
The first canon to be observed is this--do not violently strain a text
by illegitimate spiritualizing. This is a sin against common sense.
How dreadfully the word of God has been mauled and mangled by a
certain band of preachers who have laid texts on the rack to make
them reveal what they never would have otherwise spoken. Mr.
Slopdash, of whom Rowland Hill tells us in his Village Dialogues, is
but a type of a numerous generation. That worthy is described as
delivering himself of a discourse upon, "I had three white baskets on
my head," from the dream of Pharaoh's baker. Upon this the "thriceanointed ninny-hammer," as a friend of mine would call him,
discoursed upon the doctrine of the Trinity! A dear minister of
Christ, a venerable and excellent brother, one of the most instructive
ministers in his country, told me that he missed one day a labouring
man and his wife from his chapel, He missed them again and again,
Sunday after Sunday, and one Monday, meeting the husband in the
street, he said to him,"Well John, I have not seen you lately." "No
sir," was the reply, "We did not seem to profit under your ministry as
we used to do." " Indeed, John, I am very sorry to her it." "Well, me
and my missis likes the doctrines of grace, and therefore we've gone
to hear Mr. Bawler lately." "Oh! You mean the good man at the High
Calvanist Meeting?" "Yes, sir, and we are so happy; we get right good
food there, sixteen ounces to the pound. We were getting half starved
under your ministry--though I always respect you as a man, sir." "All
right, my friend; of course you ought to go where you get good food
for your soul, I only hope it is good; but what did you get last
Sunday?" "Oh! We had a most refreshing time, sir. In the morning
we had--I don't seem to like to tell you--however, we had really a
most precious time." "Yes, but what was it, John?" "Well, sir, Mr.
Bawley led us blessedly into that passage, 'Art thou a man given to
appetite? Put a knife to thy throat when thou sittest before a ruler.'"
"Whatever did he make out of that?" "Well, sir, I can tell you what he
made out of it, but I should like to know first what you would have

said upon it." "I don't know, John; I dont think I should have taken it
at all, but if I must have spoken about it, I should have said that a
person given to eating and drinking should take care what he was
about when he was in the presence of great men, or he would ruin
himself. Gluttony even in this life is ruinous." "Ah!" said the man,
"that is your dead-letter way of rendering it. As I told my missis the
other day, ever since we have been to hear Mr. Bawler, the Bible has
been opened up to us so that we can see a great deal more in it than
we used to do." "Yes, but what did Mr. Bawler tell you about his
text?" "Well, he said a man given to appetite was a young convert,
who is sure to have a tremendous appetite for preaching, and always
wants food; but he ain't always nice about what sort of food it is."
"What next John?" "He said that if the young convert went to sit
before a ruler--that is to say, a legal preacher, or a duty-faith man, it
would be the worse for him." "But how about the knife, John?" "Well,
sir, Mr. Bawler said it was a very dangerous thing to hear legal
preachers, it would be sure to ruin the man; and he might just as well
cut his throat at once, sir!" The subject was, I suppose, the
mischievous effects of young Christians listening to any preachers
but those of the hyper school; and the moral drawn from it was, that
sooner than this brother should go to hear his former minister, he
had better cut his throat! That was accommodating considerably! Ye
critics, we give over such dead horses as these to your doggish teeth.
Rend and devour as ye will, we will not upbraid. We have heard of
another performer who delivered his mind upon Proverbs xxi. 17.
"He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loveth wine and
oil shall not be rich." The Proverbs are a favourite field for
spiritualizers to disport themselves withal. Our worthy disposed of
the proverb in this fashion: "'He that loveth pleasure,' that is, the
Christian who enjoys the means of grace, 'shall be a poor man,' that
is, he shall be poor in spirit; 'and he that loveth wine and oil;' that is
to say, rejoices in covenant provisions, and end enjoys the oil and
wine of the gospel, 'shall not be rich,' that is, he shall not be rich in
his own esteem;' showing the excellence of those who are poor in
spirit, and how they shall enjoy the gospel--a very proper sentiment,
but my carnal eyes fail to see it in the text. You have all heard of

William Huntingdon's famous rendering of the passage in Isaiah xi.
8; "The sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den." "'The
sucking child,' that is, the babe in grace, 'shall play on the hole of the
asp,' the asp, that is, the Arminian: 'the hole of the asp,' that is, the
Arminian's mouth." Then follows an account of the games in which
simple minds are more than a match for Arminian wisdom.
Professors of the other school of divinity have usually had the good
sense not to return the compliment, or the Antinomians might have
found themselves ranked with cockatrices, and their opponents
boastfully defying them at the mouths of their dens, Such abuse only
injures those who use it. Theological differences are better
expounded and enforced than by such buffoonery.
Ludicrous results sometimes arise from sheer stupidity inflated with
conceit. One instance may suffice. A worthy minister told me the
other day that he had been preaching lately to his people upon the
nine and twenty knives of Ezra. I am sure he would handle these
edged tools discreetly, but I could not refrain from saying that I
hoped he had not imitated the very sage interpreter who saw in that
odd number of knives a reference to the four-and-twenty elders of
the Apocalypse.
A passage in the Proverbs reads as follows: "For three things the
earth is disquieted, and for four which it cannot bear: for a servant
when he reigneth; and a fool when he is filled with meat: for an
odious woman when she is married; and an handmaid that is heir to
her mistress." A raving spiritualizer declares that this is a sweet
picture of the work of grace in the soul, and shows what it is that
disquiets Arminians, and sets them by the ears. "'A servant when he
reigneth,' that is, poor servants like ourselves, when we are made to
reign with Christ; 'a fool when he is filled with meat,' that is, poor
foolish men like us, when we are fed with the finest of the wheat of
gospel truth; 'an odious woman when she is married,' that is, a sinner
when he is united to Christ; 'A handmaid that is heir to her mistress,'
that is, when we poor handmaids that were under the law,

bondslaves, come into the privileges of Sarah, and become heirs to
our own mistress.'"
These are a few specimens of ecclesiastical curiosities which are as
numerous and valuable as the relics which are every day gathered so
plentifully on the battle-field of Waterloo, and accepted by the more
verdant as priceless treasures. But we have surfeited you, and have
no wish to waste more of your time. From all such rank absurdity
need you be admonished to turn away! Such maunderings dishonour
the Bible, are an insult to the common-sense of the hearers, and a
deplorable lowering of the minister. This, however, is no more the
spiritualizing which we recommend to you than the thistle in
Lebanon is the cedar of Lebanon. Avoid that childish trifling and
outrageous twisting of texts which will make you a wise man among
fools, but a fool among wise men.
Our second is, never spiritualize upon indelicate subjects. It is
needful to say this, for the Slopdash family are never more at home
than when they speak in a way to crimson the cheek of modesty.
There is a kind of beetle which breeds in filth, and this creature has
its prototype among men. Do I not at this moment call to mind a
savoury divine who enlarged with wonderful gusto and sensuous
unction upon the concubine cut into ten pieces: Greenacre himself
could not have done it better. What abominable things have been
said upon some of the sterner and more horrifying similes of
Jeremiah and Ezekiel! Where the Holy Spirit is veiled and chaste,
these men have torn away the veil, and spoken as none but naughty
tongues would venture to do. I am not, squeamish, indeed, far from
it, but explanations of the new birth by analogies suggested by a
monthly nurse, expositions of the rite of circumcision, and minute
descriptions of married life, would arouse my temper and make me
feel inclined to command with Jehu that the shameless one should
be thrown down from the exalted position disgraced by such brazenfaced impudence. I know it is said, "Honi soit qui mal y pense," but I
aver that no pure mind ought to be subjected to the slightest breath
of indelicacy from the pulpit. Caesar's wife must be without

suspicion, and Christ's ministers must be without speck in their lives
or stain in their speech. Gentlemen, the kissing and hugging which
some preachers delight in is disgusting: Solomon's Song had better
be let alone than dragged in the mire as it often is. Young men
especially must be scrupulously, jealously modest and pure in word:
an old man is pardoned, I scarce know why, but a young man is
utterly without excuse should he overstep the strict line of delicacy.
Next, and thirdly, never spiritualize for the sake of showing what an
uncommonly clever fellow you are. Such an intention will be wicked,
and the method used will be foolish. Only an egregious simpleton
will seek to be noted for doing what nine out of ten could do quite as
well. A certain probationer once preached a sermon upon the word
"but," thus hoping to ingratiate himself with the congregation, who
would, he thought, be enraptured with the powers of a brother who
could enlarge so marvellously upon a mere conjunction. His subject
appears to have been, the fact that whatever there may be of good in
a man's character, or admirable in a man's position, there is sure to
be some difficulty, some trial in connection with us all: "Naaman was
a great man with his master, but--?' When the orator descended from
the pulpit the deacons said, "Well, sir, you have given us a singular
sermon, but--you are not the man for the place; that we can see very
clearly." Alas! for wit when it becomes so common, and withal puts a
weapon into the hand of its own adversaries! Remember that
spiritualizing is not such a wonderful display of ingenuity, even if you
are able to do it well, and that without discretion it is the most ready
method of revealing your egregious folly. Gentlemen, if you aspire to
emulate Origen in wild, daring, interpretations, it may be as well to
read his life and note attentively the follies into which even his
marvellous mind was drawn by allowing a wild fancy to usurp
absolute authority over his judgment; and if you set yourselves to
rival the vulgar declaimers of a past generation, let me remind you
that the cap and bells do not now command the same patronage as
fell to their share a few years ago.

Our fourth caution is, never pervert Scripture to give it a novel and
so-called spiritual meaning, lest you be found guilty of that solemn
curse with which the roll of inspiration is guarded and closed. Mr.
Cook, of Maidenhead, felt himself obliged to separate from William
Huntingdon because of his making the seventh commandment to
mean the Lord speaking to his Son and saying, "Thou shalt not covet
the devil's wife, i.e., the non-elect." One can only say, horrible!
Perhaps it would be an insult to your reason and your religion to say,
loathe the thought of such profanity. You instinctively shrink from it.
Once more, in no case allow your audience to forget that the
narratives which you spiritualize are facts, and not mere myths or
parables. The first sense of the passage must never be drowned in the
outflow of your imagination; it must be distinctly declared and
allowed to hold the first rank; your accommodation of it must never
thrust out the original and native meaning, or even push it into the
background. The Bible is not a compilation of clever allegories or
instructive poetical traditions; it teaches literal facts and reveals
tremendous realities: let your full persuasion of this truth be
manifest to all who attend your ministry. It will be an ill day for the
church if the pulpit should even appear to endorse the sceptical
hypothesis that Holy Scripture is but the record of a refined
mythology, in which globules of truth are dissolved in seas of poetic
and imaginary detail.
However, there is a legitimate range for spiritualizing, or rather for
the particular gift which leads men to spiritualize. For instance, you
have frequently been shown that the types yield ample scope for the
exercise of a sanctified ingenuity. Why need you go about to find
"odious women" to preach upon, when you have before you the
tabernacle in the wilderness, with all its sacred furniture, the burntoffering, the peace-offering, and all the various sacrifices which were
offered before God? Why struggle for novelties when the temple and
all its glories are before you? The largest capacity for typical
interpretation will find abundant employment in the undoubted

symbols of the Word of God, and it will be safe to enter upon such an
exercise, because the symbols are of divine appointment.
When you have exhausted all the Old Testament types, you have left
to you an heirloom of a thousand metaphors. Benjamin Keach, in his
laborious treatise, proves most practically what mines of truth lie
concealed in the metaphors of Scripture. His work, by the way, is
open to much criticism on the score of making metaphors run not
only on all-fours, but on as many legs as a centipede; but it does not
deserve the condemnation of Dr. Adam Clarke, when he says it has
done more to debase the taste both of preachers and people than any
other work of the kind. A discreet explanation of the poetical
allusions of Holy Scripture will be most acceptable to your people,
and, with God's blessing, not a little profitable.
But supposing you have expounded all the usually accepted types,
and have cast light upon the emblems and figurative expressions,
must your fancy and delight in sirnilitudes go to sleep? By no means.
When the apostle Paul finds a mystery in Melchisedek, and speaking
of Hagar and Sarah, says, "Which things are an allegory," he gives us
a precedent for discovering scriptural allegories in other places
besides the two mentioned. Indeed, the historical books not only
yield us here and there an allegory, but seem as a whole to be
arranged with a view to symbolical teaching. A passage from Mr.
Andrew Jukes' preface to his work on the types of Genesis, will show
how, without violence, a most elaborate theory may be constructed
by a devout mind: "As a base or ground for what is to follow, we first
are shown what springs from man, and all the different forms of life,
which either by nature or grace can grow out of the root of old Adam.
This is the book of Genesis. Then we see, that be it bad or good which
has come out of Adam, there must be redemption; so an elect people
by the blood of the Lamb are saved from Egypt. This is Exodus. After
redemption is known, we come to the experience of the elect as
needing access, and learning the way of it, to God the Redeemer in
the sanctuary. This we get in Leviticus. Then in the wilderness of this
world, as pilgrims from Egypt, the house of bondage, to the promised

land beyond Jordan, the trials of the journey are learnt, from that
land of wonders and man's wisdom to the land flowing with milk and
honey. This is the book of Numbers. Then comes the desire to
exchange the wilderness for the better land, from entering which for
a season after redemption is known the elect yet shrink; answering to
the desire of the elect at a certain stage to know the power of the
resurrection, to live even now as in heavenly places. The rules and
precepts which must be obeyed, if this is to be done, come next.
Deuteronomy, a second giving of the law, a second cleansing, tells
the way of progress. After which Canaan is indeed reached. We go
over Jordan: we know practically the death of the flesh, and what it is
to be circumcised, and to roll away the reproach of Egypt. We know
now what it is to be risen with Christ, and to wrestle, not with flesh
and blood, but with principalities and powers in heavenly places.
This is Joshua. Then comes the failure of the elect in heavenly places,
failure arising from making leagues with Canaanites instead of
overcoming them. This is Judges. After which the different forms of
rule, which the church may know, pass in review in the books of
Kings, from the first setting up of rule in Israel down to its
extinction, when for their sin the rule of Babylon supersedes that of
the elect. When this is known with all its shame, we see the remnants
of the elect, each according to its measure, doing what may be done,
if possible, to restore Israel; some, like Ezra, returning to build the
temple, that is, to restore the forms of true worship; and some
coming up, like Nehemiah, to build the wall, that is, to reestablish, by
Gentile permission, a feeble imitation of the ancient polity; while a
third remnant in Esther is seen in bonds, but faithful, providentially
saved, though God's name (and this is characteristic of their state)
never appears throughout the whole record." I should be far from
recommending you to become as fanciful as the ingenious author I
have just quoted sometimes becomes, through the large indulgence
of his tendency to mysticism, but nevertheless, you will read the
Word with greatly increased interest if you are a sufficiently careful
reader to have noticed the general run of the books of the Bible, and
their consecutiveness as a system of types.

Then, too, the faculty which turns to spiritualizing will be well
employed in generalizing the great universal principles evolved by
minute and separate facts. This is an ingenious, instructive, and
legitimate pursuit. Perhaps you might not elect to preach upon,
"Take it by the tail," but the remark arising from it is natural enough-"there is a way of taking everything." Moses took the serpent by the
tail, so there is a mode of grasping our afflictions and finding them
stiffen in our hands into a wonder-working rod; there is a way of
holding the doctrines of grace, a way of encountering ungodly men,
and so on. In hundreds of scriptural incidents you may find great
general principles which may nowhere be expressed in so many
words. Take the following instances from Mr. Jay. From Psalm
lxxiv.14, "Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest
him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness," he teaches
the doctrine that the greatest foes of God's pilgrim people shall be
slain, and the remembrance of the mercy shall refresh the saints.
From Genesis xxxv. 8, "But Deborah, Rebekah's nurse died, and she
was buried beneath Beth-el, under an oak: and the name of it was
called Allon-bachuth," he discourses upon good servants, and the
certainty of death. Upon 2 Samuel xv. 15, "And the king's servants
said unto the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatsoever
my lord the king shall apoint," he shows that such language may with
propriety be adopted by Christians, and addressed to Christ. Should
anyone take exception to the form of spiritualizing which Mr. Jay so
efficiently and judiciously indulged in, he must be a person whose
opinion need not sway you in the least. After my own ability I have
taken the liberty to do the same, and the outlines of many sermons of
the kind may be found in my little work entitled Evening by
Evening, and a less liberal sprinkling in its companion, Morning by
Morning.
A notable instance of a good sermon fixed upon a strained and
unjustifiable basis, is that of Everard, in his Gospel Treasury. In the
discourse upon Joshua xv.16,17, where the words are, "And Caleb
said, He that smiteth Kirjath-sepher, and taketh it, to him will I give
Achsah my daughter to wife. And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the

brother of Caleb, took it: and he gave him Achsah his daughter to
wife;" here the run of the preacher's utterance is based upon the
translation of the Hebrew proper names, so that he makes it read, "A
good heart said. Whosoever smiteth and taketh the city of the letter,
to him will I give the rending of the veil; and Othniel took it as being
God's fit time or opportunity, and he married Achsah, that is,
enjoyed the rending of the veil, and thereby had the blessing both of
the upper and nether springs." Was there no other method of
showing that we are to search after the inner sense of Scripture, and
not rest in the mere words or letter of the Book?
The parables of our Lord in their expounding and enforcement
afford the amplest scope for a matured and disciplined fancy, and if
these have all passed before you, the miracles still remain, rich in
symbolical teaching. There can be no doubt that the miracles are the
acted sermons of our Lord Jesus Christ. You have his "word
sermons" in his matchless teaching, and his "deed sermons" in his
peerless acts. Despite many doctrinal failures, you will find Trench,
on the miracles, most helpful in this direction. All our Lord's mighty
works are full of teaching. Take the story of the healing of the deaf
and dumb man. The poor creature's maladies are eminently
suggestive of man's lost estate, and our Lord's mode of procedure
most instructively illustrates the plan of salvation. "Jesus took him
aside from the multitude"--the soul must be made to feel its own
personality and individuality, and must be led into loneliness. He
"put his fingers into his ears," the source of the mischief indicated;
sinners are convinced of their state. "And spat"--the gospel is a
simple and a despised means, and the sinner, in order to salvation,
must humble himself to receive it. He "touched his tongue," further
pointing out where the mischief lay--our sense of need grows on us.
He "looked up to heaven"--Jesus reminded his patient that all
strength must come from above--a lesson which every seeker must
learn. "He sighed," showing that the sorrows of the Healer are the
means of our healing. And then he said, "Ephphatha, Be opened"-here was the effectual word of grace which wrought an immediate,
perfect, and lasting cure. From this one exposition learn all, and ever

believe that the miracles of Christ are a great picture gallery,
illustrating His work among the sons of men.
Let it be an instruction, however, to all who handle either the
parables or the metaphors, to be discreet. Dr. Gill is one whose name
must ever be mentioned with honour and respect in this house in
which his pulpit still stands, but his exposition of the parable of the
Prodigal Son strikes me as being sadly absurd in some points. The
learned commentator tells us, "the fatted calf" was the Lord Jesus
Christ! Really, one shudders to see spiritualizing come to this. Then
also there is his exposition of the Good Samaritan. The beast on
which the wounded man was placed is again our Lord Jesus, and the
two pence which the Good Samaritan gave to the host, are the Old
and New Testament, or the ordinances of Baptism and the Lord's
Supper.
Despite this caution, you may allow much latitude in spiritualizing to
men of rare poetical temperament, such as John Bunyan.
Gentlemen, did you ever read John Bunyan's spiritualizing of
Solomon's Temple? It is a most remarkable performance, and even
when a little strained it is full of a consecrated ingenuity. Take, for a
specimen, one of his most far-fetched explanations, and see if it can
be improved. It is on "the leaves of the Gate of the Temple." "The
leaves of this gate or door, as I told you before, were folding, and so,
as was hinted, have something of signification in them. For by this
means a man, especially a young disciple, may easily be mistaken;
thinking that the whole passage, when yet but a part, was open,
whereas three parts might be yet kept undiscovered to him. For these
doors, as I said before, were never yet set wide open, I mean in the
antitype; never man yet saw all the riches and fulness which is in
Christ. So that I say, a new comer, if he judged by present sight,
especially if he saw but little, might easily be mistaken, wherefore
such for the most part are most horribly afraid that they shall never
get in thereat. How sayest thou, young corner, is not this the case
with thy soul? So it seems to thee that thou art too big, being so
great, so tun-bellied a sinner! But, O thou sinner, fear not, the doors

are folding-doors, and may be opened wider, and wider again after
that; wherefore when thou comest to this gate, and imaginest that
there is not space enough for thee to enter, knock, and it shall be
wider opened unto thee, and thou shalt be received. Luke xi. 9; John
vi. 37. So then, whoever thou art, thou art come to the door of which
the temple was a type, trust not to thy first conceptions of things, but
believe there is grace abundant. Thou knowest not yet what Christ
can do, the doors are folding-doors. He can 'do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think.' Eph. iii. 20. The
hinges on which these doors do hang, were, as I told you, gold; to
signify that they both turned upon motives and motions of love, and
also that the openings thereof were rich. Golden hinges the gate to
God doth turn upon. The posts on which these doors did hang were
of the olive tree, that fat and oily tree, to show that they do never
open with lothness, or sluggishness as doors do whose hinges want
oil. They are always oily, and so open easily and quickly to those who
knock at them. Hence you read that he that dwells in this house gives
freely, loves freely, and doth us good with all his heart. 'Yea,' saith he,
'I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant them in this
land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole soul.' Jer.
iii. 12, 14, 22; xxxii. 41; Rev. xxi. 6; xxii. 17. Wherefore, the oil of
grace, signified by this oily tree, or these olive-posts, on which these
doors do hang, do cause that they open glibly or frankly to the soul."
When Bunyan opens up the meaning of the doors being made of fir
wood, who but he would have said, "The fir tree is also the house of
the stork, that unclean bird, even as Christ is a harbour and shelter
for sinners. As for the stork, saith the text, the fir tree is her house;
and Christ saith to the sinners that see their want of shelter, 'Come
unto me, and I will give you rest.' He is a refuge for the oppressed, a
refuge in time of trouble. Deut. xiv. 18; Lev. xi. 19; Ps. civ. 17; lxxiv. 2,
3; Matt. xi. 27, 28; Heb. vi. 17-20." In his "House of the Forest of
Lebanon" he is still more puzzled, but works his way out as no other
man could have done. He finds the three rows of pillars of fifteen
each to be an enigma rather too deep for him, and gives it up, but not
until he has made some brave attempts upon it. Mr. Bunyan is the

chief, and head, and lord of all allegorists, and is not to be followed
by us into the deep places of typical and symbolical utterance. He
was a swimmer, we are but mere waders, and must not go beyond
our depth.
I am tempted before I close this address to give a sketch or two of
spiritualizings which were familiar to me in my earliest days. I shall
never forget a sermon preached by an uneducated but remarkable
man, who was my near neighbour in the country. I had the notes of
the discourse from his own lips, and I trust they will remain as notes,
and never be preached from again in this world. The text was, "The
night-hawk, the owl, and the cuckoo." That might not strike you as
being exceedingly rich in matter; it did not so strike me, and
therefore I innocently enquired, "And what were the heads?" He
replied most archly, "Heads? why, wring the bird's necks, and there
are three directly, 'the night-hawk, the owl, and the cuckoo.'" He
showed that these birds were all unclean under the law, and were
plain types of unclean sinners. Night-hawks were persons who
pilfered on the sly, also people who adulterated their goods, and
cheated their neighbours in an underhand way without being
suspected to be rogues. As for the owls, they typified drunkards, who
are always liveliest at night, while by day they will almost knock their
heads against a post because they are so sleepy. There were owls also
among professors. The owl is a very small bird when he is plucked;
he only looks big because he wears so many feathers; so, many
professors are all feathers, and if you could take away their boastful
professions there would be very little left of them. Then the cuckoos
were the church clergy, who always utter the same note whenever
they open their mouths in the church, and live on other birds' eggs
with their church-rates and tithes. The cuckoos were also, I think, the
free-willers, who were always saying, "Do-do-do-do." Was not this
rather too much of a good thing? Yet from the man who delivered it
the sermon would not seem at all remarkable or odd. The same
venerable brother delivered a sermon equally singular but far more
original and useful; those who heard it will remember it to their
dying day. It was from this text: "The slothful man roasteth not that

which he took in hunting." The good old man leaned upon the top of
the pulpit, and said, "Then, my brethren, he was a lazy fellow!" That
was the exordium; and then he went on to say, "He went out a
hunting, and after much trouble he caught his hare, and then was too
idle to roast it. He was a lazy fellow indeed!" The good man made us
all feel how ridiculous such idleness was, and then he said, "But then
you are very likely quite as much to blame as this man, for you do
just the same. You hear of a popular minister coming down from
London, and you put the horse in the cart, and drive ten or twenty
miles to hear him; and then when you have heard the sermon you
forget to profit by it. You catch the hare and do not roast it; you go
hunting after the truth, and then you do not receive it." Then he went
on to show, that just as meat needs cooking to prepare it for
assimilation in the bodily system--I do not think he used that word
though--so the truth needs to go through a process before it can be
received into the mind so that we may feed thereon and grow. He
said he should show how to cook a sermon, and he did so most
instructively. He began as the cookery books do--"First catch your
hare." "So," he said, "first get a gospel sermon." Then he declared
that a great many sermons were not worth hunting for, and that good
sermons were mournfully scarce, and it was worth while to go any
distance to hear a solid, old-fashioned, Calvinistic discourse. Then
after the sermon had been caught, there was much about it which
might be necessary because of the preacher's infirmity, which was
not profitable, and must be put away. Here he enlarged upon
discerning and judging what we heard, and not believing every word
of any man. Then followed directions as to roasting a sermon; run
the spit of memory through it from end to end, turn it round upon
the roasting-jack of meditation, before the fire of a really warm and
earnest heart, and in that way the sermon would be cooked and
ready to yield real spiritual nourishment. I do but give you the
outline, and though it may look somewhat laughable, it was not so
esteemed by the hearers. It was full of allegory, and kept up the
attention of the people from the beginning to the end. "Well, my dear
sir, how are you?" was my salutation to him one morning, "I'm
pleased to see you so well at your age." "Yes, I am in fine order for an

old man, and hardly feel myself failing at all." "I hope your good
health will continue for years to come, and that like Moses you will
go down to your grave with your eye undimmed and your natural
force unabated." "All very fine," said the old gentleman, "but in the
first place, Moses never went down to his grave at all, he went up to
it; and in the next place, what is the meaning of all you have been
talking about? Why did not the eye of Moses wax dim?" "I suppose,
sir," said I, very meekly, "that his natural mode of life and quiet spirit
had helped to preserve his faculties and make him a vigorous old
man." "Very likely," said he, "but that's not what I am driving at:
what's the meaning, the spiritual teaching of the whole matter? Is it
not just this: Moses is the law, and what a glorious end of the law the
Lord gave it on the mount of His finished work; how sweetly its
terrors are all laid to sleep with a kiss from God's mouth! and, mark
you, the reason why the law no more condemns us is not because its
eye is dim, so that it cannot see our sins, or because its force is
abated with which to curse and punish; but Christ has taken it up to
the mount, and gloriously made an end of it." Such was his usual talk
and such was his ministry. Peace to his ashes. He fed sheep the first
years of his life, and was a shepherd of men the next, and, as he used
to tell me, "found men by far the more sheepish of the two." The
converts who found the road to heaven under him were so many
that, when we remember them, we are like those who saw the lame
man leaping through the word of Peter and John; they were disposed
to criticise, but "beholding the man that was healed standing with
Peter and John, they could say nothing against it."
With this I close, re-asserting the opinion, that guided by discretion
and judgment, we may occasionally employ spiritualizing with good
effect to our people; certainly we shall interest them and keep them
awake.
