PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 2 of 10
The Book of the Watchers — Chapters 12 through 21

---

Continuing our reading of the Book of Enoch. In this section, Enoch is called to pronounce judgment upon the fallen Watchers, he intercedes on their behalf, and he begins his journeys through the heavens and the places of cosmic judgment.

CHAPTER 12

1. Before these things Enoch was hidden, and no one of the children of men knew where he was hidden, and where he abode, and what had become of him.

2. And his activities had to do with the Watchers, and his days were with the holy ones.

3. And I, Enoch, was blessing the Lord of majesty and the King of the ages, and lo! the Watchers called me — Enoch the scribe — and said to me:

4. "Enoch, thou scribe of righteousness, go, declare to the Watchers of the heaven who have left the high heaven, the holy eternal place, and have defiled themselves with women, and have done as the children of earth do, and have taken unto themselves wives: 'Ye have wrought great destruction on the earth:

5. And ye shall have no peace nor forgiveness of sin: and inasmuch as they delight themselves in their children,

6. The murder of their beloved ones shall they see, and over the destruction of their children shall they lament, and shall make supplication unto eternity, but mercy and peace shall ye not attain.'"

CHAPTER 13

1. And Enoch went and said: "Azazel, thou shalt have no peace: a severe sentence has gone forth against thee to put thee in bonds:

2. And thou shalt not have toleration nor request granted to thee, because of the unrighteousness which thou hast taught, and because of all the works of godlessness and unrighteousness and sin which thou hast shown to men."

3. Then I went and spoke to them all together, and they were all afraid, and fear and trembling seized them.

4. And they besought me to draw up a petition for them that they might find forgiveness, and to read their petition in the presence of the Lord of heaven.

5. For from thenceforward they could not speak with Him nor lift up their eyes to heaven for shame of their sins for which they had been condemned.

6. Then I wrote out their petition, and the prayer in regard to their spirits and their deeds individually and in regard to their requests that they should have forgiveness and length of days.

7. And I went off and sat down at the waters of Dan, in the land of Dan, to the south of the west of Hermon: I read their petition till I fell asleep.

8. And behold a dream came to me, and visions fell down upon me, and I saw visions of chastisement, and a voice came bidding me to tell it to the sons of heaven, and reprimand them.

9. And when I awaked, I came unto them, and they were all sitting gathered together, weeping in Abelsjail, which is between Lebanon and Seneser, with their faces covered.

10. And I recounted before them all the visions which I had seen in sleep, and I began to speak the words of righteousness, and to reprimand the heavenly Watchers.

CHAPTER 14

1. The book of the words of righteousness, and of the reprimand of the eternal Watchers in accordance with the command of the Holy Great One in that vision.

2. I saw in my sleep what I will now say with a tongue of flesh and with the breath of my mouth: which the Great One has given to men to converse therewith and understand with the heart.

3. As He has created and given to man the power of understanding the word of wisdom, so hath He created me also and given me the power of reprimanding the Watchers, the children of heaven.

4. I wrote out your petition, and in my vision it appeared thus, that your petition will not be granted unto you throughout all the days of eternity, and that judgement has been finally passed upon you: yea, your petition will not be granted unto you.

5. And from henceforth you shall not ascend into heaven unto all eternity, and in bonds of the earth the command has gone forth to bind you for all the days of the world.

6. And previously you shall have seen the destruction of your beloved sons and ye shall have no pleasure in them, but they shall fall before you by the sword.

7. And your petition on their behalf shall not be granted, nor yet on your own: even though you weep and pray and speak all the words contained in the writing which I have written.

8. And the vision was shown to me thus: Behold, in the vision clouds invited me and a mist summoned me, and the course of the stars and the lightnings sped and hastened me, and the winds in the vision caused me to fly and lifted me upward, and bore me into heaven.

9. And I went in till I drew nigh to a wall which is built of crystals and surrounded by tongues of fire: and it began to affright me.

10. And I went into the tongues of fire and drew nigh to a large house which was built of crystals: and the walls of the house were like a tesselated floor made of crystals, and its groundwork was of crystal.

11. Its ceiling was like the path of the stars and the lightnings, and between them were fiery cherubim, and their heaven was clear as water.

12. A flaming fire surrounded the walls, and its portals blazed with fire.

13. And I entered into that house, and it was hot as fire and cold as ice: there were no delights of life therein: fear covered me, and trembling gat hold upon me.

14. And as I quaked and trembled, I fell upon my face.

15. And I beheld a vision, and lo! there was a second house, greater than the former, and the entire portal stood open before me, and it was built of flames of fire.

16. And in every respect it so excelled in splendour and magnificence and extent that I cannot describe to you its splendour and its extent.

17. And its floor was of fire, and above it were lightnings and the path of the stars, and its ceiling also was flaming fire.

18. And I looked and saw therein a lofty throne: its appearance was as crystal, and the wheels thereof as the shining sun, and there was the vision of cherubim.

19. And from underneath the throne came streams of flaming fire so that I could not look thereon.

20. And the Great Glory sat thereon, and His raiment shone more brightly than the sun and was whiter than any snow.

21. None of the angels could enter and could behold His face by reason of the magnificence and glory, and no flesh could behold Him.

22. The flaming fire was round about Him, and a great fire stood before Him, and none around could draw nigh Him: ten thousand times ten thousand stood before Him, yet He needed no counsellor.

23. And the most holy ones who were nigh to Him did not leave by night nor depart from Him.

24. And until then I had been prostrate on my face, trembling: and the Lord called me with His own mouth, and said to me: "Come hither, Enoch, and hear my word."

25. And one of the holy ones came to me and waked me, and He made me rise up and approach the door: and I bowed my face downwards.

CHAPTER 15

1. And He answered and said to me, and I heard His voice: "Fear not, Enoch, thou righteous man and scribe of righteousness: approach hither and hear my voice.

2. And go, say to the Watchers of heaven, who have sent thee to intercede for them: 'You should intercede for men, and not men for you:

3. Wherefore have ye left the high, holy, and eternal heaven, and lain with women, and defiled yourselves with the daughters of men and taken to yourselves wives, and done like the children of earth, and begotten giants as your sons?

4. And though ye were holy, spiritual, living the eternal life, you have defiled yourselves with the blood of women, and have begotten children with the blood of flesh, and, as the children of men, have lusted after flesh and blood as those also do who die and perish.

5. Therefore have I given them wives also that they might impregnate them, and beget children by them, that thus nothing might be wanting to them on earth.

6. But you were formerly spiritual, living the eternal life, and immortal for all generations of the world.

7. And therefore I have not appointed wives for you; for as for the spiritual ones of the heaven, in heaven is their dwelling.

8. And now, the giants, who are produced from the spirits and flesh, shall be called evil spirits upon the earth, and on the earth shall be their dwelling.

9. Evil spirits have proceeded from their bodies; because they are born from men and from the holy Watchers is their beginning and primal origin; they shall be evil spirits on earth, and evil spirits shall they be called.

10. As for the spirits of heaven, in heaven shall be their dwelling, but as for the spirits of the earth which were born upon the earth, on the earth shall be their dwelling.

11. And the spirits of the giants afflict, oppress, destroy, attack, do battle, and work destruction on the earth, and cause trouble: they take no food, but nevertheless hunger and thirst, and cause offences. And these spirits shall rise up against the children of men and against the women, because they have proceeded from them.'"

CHAPTER 16

1. "From the days of the slaughter and destruction and death of the giants, from the souls of whose flesh the spirits, having gone forth, shall destroy without incurring judgement — thus shall they destroy until the day of the consummation, the great judgement in which the age shall be consummated, over the Watchers and the godless, yea, shall be wholly consummated.

2. And now as to the Watchers who have sent thee to intercede for them, who had been aforetime in heaven, say to them:

3. 'You have been in heaven, but all the mysteries had not yet been revealed to you, and you knew worthless ones, and these in the hardness of your hearts you have made known to the women, and through these mysteries women and men work much evil on earth.'

4. Say to them therefore: 'You have no peace.'"

CHAPTER 17

1. And they took and brought me to a place in which those who were there were like flaming fire, and, when they wished, they appeared as men.

2. And they brought me to the place of darkness, and to a mountain the point of whose summit reached to heaven.

3. And I saw the places of the luminaries and the treasuries of the stars and of the thunder and in the uttermost depths, where were a fiery bow and arrows and their quiver, and a fiery sword and all the lightnings.

4. And they took me to the living waters, and to the fire of the west, which receives every setting of the sun.

5. And I came to a river of fire in which the fire flows like water and discharges itself into the great sea towards the west.

6. I saw the great rivers and came to the great river and to the great darkness, and went to the place where no flesh walks.

7. I saw the mountains of the darkness of winter and the place whence all the waters of the deep flow.

8. I saw the mouths of all the rivers of the earth and the mouth of the deep.

CHAPTER 18

1. I saw the treasuries of all the winds: I saw how He had furnished with them the whole creation and the firm foundations of the earth.

2. And I saw the corner-stone of the earth: I saw the four winds which bear the earth and the firmament of the heaven.

3. And I saw how the winds stretch out the vaults of heaven, and have their station between heaven and earth: these are the pillars of the heaven.

4. I saw the winds of heaven which turn and bring the circumference of the sun and all the stars to their setting.

5. I saw the winds on the earth carrying the clouds: I saw the paths of the angels. I saw at the end of the earth the firmament of the heaven above.

6. And I proceeded and saw a place which burns day and night, where there are seven mountains of magnificent stones, three towards the east, and three towards the south.

7. And as for those towards the east, one was of coloured stone, and one of pearl, and one of jacinth, and those towards the south of red stone.

8. But the middle one reached to heaven like the throne of God, of alabaster, and the summit of the throne was of sapphire.

9. And I saw a flaming fire. And beyond these mountains

10. Is a region the end of the great earth: there the heavens were completed.

11. And I saw a deep abyss, with columns of heavenly fire, and among them I saw columns of fire fall, which were beyond measure alike towards the height and towards the depth.

12. And beyond that abyss I saw a place which had no firmament of the heaven above, and no firmly founded earth beneath it: there was no water upon it, and no birds, but it was a waste and horrible place.

13. I saw there seven stars like great burning mountains, and to me, when I inquired regarding them,

14. The angel said: "This place is the end of heaven and earth: this has become a prison for the stars and the host of heaven.

15. And the stars which roll over the fire are they which have transgressed the commandment of the Lord in the beginning of their rising, because they did not come forth at their appointed times.

16. And He was wroth with them, and bound them till the time when their guilt should be consummated even for ten thousand years."

CHAPTER 19

1. And Uriel said to me: "Here shall stand the angels who have connected themselves with women, and their spirits assuming many different forms are defiling mankind and shall lead them astray into sacrificing to demons as gods, here shall they stand, till the day of the great judgement in which they shall be judged till they are made an end of.

2. And the women also of the angels who went astray shall become sirens."

3. And I, Enoch, alone saw the vision, the ends of all things: and no man shall see as I have seen.

CHAPTER 20

1. And these are the names of the holy angels who watch.

2. Uriel, one of the holy angels, who is over the world and over Tartarus.

3. Raphael, one of the holy angels, who is over the spirits of men.

4. Raguel, one of the holy angels, who takes vengeance on the world of the luminaries.

5. Michael, one of the holy angels, to wit, he that is set over the best part of mankind and over chaos.

6. Saraqael, one of the holy angels, who is set over the spirits, who sin in the spirit.

7. Gabriel, one of the holy angels, who is over Paradise and the serpents and the Cherubim.

8. Remiel, one of the holy angels, whom God set over those who rise.

CHAPTER 21

1. And I proceeded to where things were chaotic.

2. And I saw there something horrible: I saw neither a heaven above nor a firmly founded earth, but a place chaotic and horrible.

3. And there I saw seven stars of the heaven bound together in it, like great mountains and burning with fire.

4. Then I said: "For what sin are they bound, and on what account have they been cast in hither?"

5. Then said Uriel, one of the holy angels, who was with me, and was chief over them, and said: "Enoch, why dost thou ask, and why art thou eager for the truth?

6. These are of the number of the stars of heaven, which have transgressed the commandment of the Lord, and are bound here till ten thousand years, the time entailed by their sins, are consummated."

7. And from thence I went to another place, which was still more horrible than the former, and I saw a horrible thing: a great fire there which burnt and blazed, and the place was cleft as far as the abyss, being full of great descending columns of fire: neither its extent nor magnitude could I see, nor could I conjecture.

8. Then I said: "How fearful is the place and how terrible to look upon!"

9. Then Uriel answered me, one of the holy angels who was with me, and said unto me: "Enoch, why hast thou such fear and affright?" And I answered: "Because of this fearful place, and because of the spectacle of the pain."

10. And he said unto me: "This place is the prison of the angels, and here they will be imprisoned for ever."

---

This concludes Part 2 of our reading of the Book of Enoch, covering chapters 12 through 21. In our next part, we continue with Enoch's visions of Sheol, the tree of life, and the ends of the earth.