PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 14
Duties and Discouragements


The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 8. Duties and Discouragements.

8. Duties and Discouragements
From what has been said it will not be difficult, with a little further
discussion, to resolve that question which some require help in, namely,
whether we ought to perform duties when our hearts are altogether
averse to them. To be satisfied on this point, we must take account of
certain things.
WE SHOULD PERSIST IN DUTIES
1. Our hearts of themselves are reluctant to give up their liberty, and are
only with difficulty brought under the yoke of duty. The more spiritual
the duty is, the more reluctance there is. Corruption gains ground, for the
most part, in every neglect. It is as in rowing against the tide, one stroke
neglected will not be gained in three; and therefore it is good to keep our
hearts close to duty, and not to listen to the excuses they are ready to
frame.
2. As we set about duty, God strengthens the influence that he has in us.
We find a warmness of heart and increase of strength, the Spirit going
along with us and raising us up by degrees, until he leaves us as it were in
heaven. God often delights to take advantage of our averseness, that he
may manifest his work the more clearly, and that all the glory of the work
may be his, as all the strength is his.
3. Obedience is most direct when there a nothing else to sweeten the
action. Although the sacrifice is imperfect, yet the obedience with which it
is offered is accepted.
4. What is won as a spoil from our corruptions will have as great a degree
of comfort afterwards as it has of obstruction for the present. Feeling and
freeness of spirit are often reserved until duty is discharged. Reward
follows work. In and after duty we find that experience of God's presence
which, without obedience, we may long wait for, and yet go without. This
does not hinder the Spirit's freedom in blowing upon our souls when he
pleases (John 3:8), for we speak only of such a state of soul as is

becalmed and must row, as it were, against the stream. As in sailing the
hand must be to the helm and the eye to the star, so here we must put
forth that little strength we have to duty and look up for assistance, which
the Spirit, as freely as seasonably, will afford.
Yet in these duties that require the body as well as the soul there may be a
cessation till strength is restored. Whetting a tool does not hinder, but
prepares. In sudden passions, also, there should be a time to compose
and calm the soul, and to put the strings in tune. The prophet asked for a
minstrel to bring his soul into frame (2 Kings 3:15).
OVERCOMING DISCOURAGEMENTS
Suffering brings discouragements, because of our impatience. `Alas!', we
lament, `I shall never get through such a trial.' But if God brings us into
the trial he will be with us in the trial, and at length bring us out, more
refined. We shall lose nothing but dross (Zech. 13:9). From our own
strength we cannot bear the least trouble, but by the Spirit's assistance we
can bear the greatest. The Spirit will add his shoulders to help us to bear
our infirmities. The Lord will give his hand to heave us up (Psa. 37:24).
'Ye have heard of the patience of job,' says James (James 5:11). We have
heard of his impatience too, but it pleased God mercifully to overlook
that. It yields us comfort also in desolate conditions, such as contagious
sicknesses and the like, in which we are more immediately under God's
hand, that then Christ has a throne of mercy at our bedside and numbers
our tears and our groans. And, to come to the matter we are now about,
the Sacrament', it was ordained not for angels, but for men; and not for
perfect men, but for weak men; and not for Christ, who is truth itself, to
bind him, but because we are ready, by reason of our guilty and
unbelieving hearts, to call truth itself into question.
Therefore it was not enough for his goodness to leave us many precious
promises, but he gives us confirming tokens to strengthen us. And even if
we are not so prepared as we should be, yet let us pray as Hezekiah did:
`The good LORD pardon every one that prepareth his heart to seek God,
the LORD God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary' (2 Chron. 30:18,19). Then we come
comfortably to this holy sacrament, and with much fruit. This should

carry us through all duties with much cheerfulness, that, if we hate our
corruptions and strive against them, they shall not be counted ours. `It is
no more I that do it,' says Paul, `but sin that dwelleth in me' (Rom. 7:17).
For what displeases us shall never hurt us, and we shall be esteemed by
God to be what we love and desire and labour to be. What we desire to be
we shall be, and what we desire truly to conquer we shall conquer, for
God will fulfill the desire of them that fear him (Psa. 145:19). The desire is
an earnest of the thing desired. How little encouragement will carry us to
the affairs of this life! And yet all the helps God offers will hardly prevail
with our backward natures.
1 A marginal note in early editions reads, `This was preached at the

Sacrament'.
THE SOURCE OF DISCOURAGEMENTS
Where, then, do these discouragements come from?
1. Not from the Father, for he has bound himself in covenant to pity us as
a father pities his children (Psa. 103:13) and to accept as a father our
weak endeavors. And what is wanting in the strength of duty, he gives us
leave to take up in his gracious indulgence. In this way we shall honor
that grace in which he delights as much as in more perfect performances.
Possibilitas tua mensura tua (What is possible to you is what you will be
measured by).
2. Not from Christ, for he by office will not quench the smoking flax. We
see how Christ bestows the best fruits of his love on persons who are
mean in condition, weak in abilities, and offensive for infirmities, nay, for
grosser falls. And this he does, first, because thus it pleases him to
confound the pride of the flesh, which usually measures God's love by
some outward excellency; and secondly, in this way he delights to show
the freedom of his grace and confirm his royal prerogative that `he that
glorieth' must `glory in the Lord' (1 Cor. 1:31).
In the eleventh chapter of Hebrews, among that cloud of witnesses, we
see Rahab, Gideon and Samson ranked with Abraham, the father of the

faithful (Heb. 11:31,32). Our blessed Saviour, as he was the image of his
Father, so in this he was of the same mind, glorifying his Father for
revealing the mystery of the gospel to simple men, neglecting those that
carried the chief reputation of wisdom in the world (Matt. 11:25, 26).
It is not unworthy of being recorded, what Augustine speaks of a simple
man in his time, destitute almost altogether of the use of reason, who,
although he was most patient of all injuries done to himself, yet from a
reverence of religion he would not endure any injury done to the name of
Christ, so much so that he would cast stones at those that blasphemed,
not even sparing his own governors. This shows that none have abilities
so meager as to be beneath the gracious regard of Christ. Where it pleases
him to make his choice and to exalt his mercy he passes by no degree of
understanding, though never so simple.
3. Neither do discouragements come from the Spirit. He helps our
infirmities, and by office is a comforter (Rom. 8:26; John 14:16). If he
convinces of sin, and so humbles us, it is that he may make way for his
office of comforting us. Discouragements, then, must come from
ourselves and from Satan, who labors to fasten on us a loathing of duty.
SOME SCRUPLES REMOVED
Among other causes of discouragement, some are much vexed with
scruples, even against the best duties; partly by disease of body, helped by
Satan's malice in casting dust in their eyes in their way to heaven; and
partly from some remainder of ignorance, which, like darkness, breeds
fears- ignorance especially of this merciful disposition in Christ, the
persuasion of which would easily banish false fears. They conceive of him
as one on watch for all advantages against them, in which they may see
how they wrong not only themselves but his goodness. This scrupulosity,
for the most part, is a sign of a godly soul, as some weeds are of a good
soil. Therefore they are the more to be pitied, for it is a heavy affliction,
and the ground of it in most is not so much from trouble of conscience as
from a disordered imagination. The end of Christ's coming was to free us
from all such groundless fears. There is still in some such ignorance of
that comfortable condition we are in under the covenant of grace as to
discourage them greatly. Therefore we must understand that:

1. Weaknesses do not break covenant with God. They do not break the
covenant between husband and wife, and shall we make ourselves more
pitiful than Christ who makes himself a pattern of love to all other
husbands?
2. Weaknesses do not debar us from mercy; rather they incline God to us
the more (Psa. 78:39). Mercy is a part of the church's marriage
inheritance. Christ betroths her to him `in mercy' (Hos. 2:19). The
husband is bound to bear with the wife, as being the `weaker vessel' (1
Pet. 3:7), and shall we think Christ will exempt himself from his own rule,
and not bear with his weak spouse?
3. If Christ should not be merciful to our weaknesses, he should not have
a people to serve him. Suppose therefore we are very weak, yet so long as
we are not found amongst malicious opposers and underminers of God's
truth, let us not give way to despairing thoughts; we have a merciful
Saviour.
But lest we flatter ourselves without good grounds, we must know that
weaknesses are to be reckoned either imperfections cleaving to our best
actions, or actions proceeding from immaturity in Christ, whilst we are
babes, or the effects of want of strength, where ability is small, or sudden
unintended breakings out, contrary to our general bent and purpose,
whilst our judgment is overcast with the cloud of a sudden temptation,
after which we feel our infirmity, grieve for it and from grief, complain,
and, with complaining, strive and labour to reform; finally, in laboring,
we make some progress against our corruption.
Weaknesses so considered, although a matter of humiliation and the
object of our daily mortification, yet may be consistent with boldness with
God, nor is a good work either extinguished by them or tainted so far as
to lose all acceptance with God. But to plead for an infirmity is more than
an infirmity; to allow ourselves in weaknesses is more than a weakness.
The justification of evil shuts our mouths, so that the soul cannot call God
Father with childlike liberty, or enjoy sweet communion with him, until
peace be made by shaming ourselves, and renewing our faith. Those that
have ever been bruised for sin, if they fall, are soon recovered. Peter was
recovered with a gracious look of Christ, David by Abigail's words. If you

tell a thief or a vagrant that he is out of the way, he pays no heed, because
his aim is not to walk in any particular way, except as it suits his purpose.
WHAT ARE SINS OF INFIRMITY?
To clarify this further, we must understand that:
1. Wherever sins of infirmity are in a person, there must be the life of
grace begun.
There can be no weakness where there is no life.
2. There must be a sincere and general bent to the best things.
Though a godly man may suddenly be drawn or driven aside in some
particulars, yet, by reason of that interest the Spirit of Christ has in him,
and because his aims are right in the main, he will either recover of
himself, or yield to the counsel of others.
3. There must be a right judgment, allowing of the best ways, or else the
heart is rotten. Then it will infuse corruption into the whole conversation,
so that all men's actions become infected at the spring head. They then
justify looseness and condemn God's ways as too much strictness. Their
principles whereby they work are not good.
4. There must be a conjugal love to Christ, so that there are no terms on
which they will change their Lord and husband, and yield themselves
absolutely over to be ruled by their own lusts, or the lusts of others.
A Christian's behavior towards Christ may in many things be very
offensive, and cause some strangeness; yet he will own Christ, and Christ
him; he will not resolve upon any way wherein he knows he must break
with Christ. Where the heart is thus in these respects qualified, there we
must know this, that Christ counts it his honor to pass by many
infirmities, nay, in infirmities he perfects his strength. There are some
almost invincible infirmities, such as forgetfulness, heaviness of spirit,
sudden passions and fears which, though natural, yet are for the most
part tainted with sin. Of these, if the life of Christ be in us, we are weary,
and would fain shake them off, as a sick man his fever; otherwise it is not
to be esteemed weakness so much as willfulness, and the more will, the

more sin. And little sins, when God shall awaken the conscience and `set
them in order' before us (Psa. 50:21) will prove great burdens, and not
only bruise a reed, but shake a cedar. Yet God's children never sin with
full will, because there is a contrary law in their minds by which the
dominion of sin is broken and which always has some secret working
against the law of sin. Nevertheless there may be so much will in a sinful
action as may destroy our comfort to a remarkable degree afterwards and
keep us long on the rack of a disquieted conscience, God in his fatherly
dispensation suspending the sense of his love. To the extent that we give
way to our will in sinning, to that extent we set ourselves at a distance
from comfort. Sin against conscience is as a thief2 in the candle, which
spoils our joy, and thereby weakens our strength. We must know,
therefore, that willful breaches in sanctification will much hinder the
sense of our justification.
What course shall such take to recover their peace? They must condemn
themselves sharply, and yet cast themselves upon God's mercy in Christ,
as at their first conversion. And now they must embrace Christ the more
firmly, as they see more need in themselves; and let them remember the
mildness of Christ here, that he will not quench the smoking flax. Often
we see that, after a deep humiliation, Christ speaks more peace than
before, to witness the truth of this reconciliation, because he knows
Satan's enterprises in casting such down lower, because they are most
abased in themselves and are ashamed to look Christ in the face, because
of their ingratitude.
We see that God did not only pardon David but, after much bruising, gave
him wise Solomon to succeed him in the kingdom. We see in Song of
Solomon 6:4 that, after the church has been humbled for her slighting of
Christ, he sweetly entertains her again, and begins to commend her
beauty. We must know for our comfort that Christ was not anointed to
this great work of Mediator for lesser sins only, but for the greatest, if we
have but a spark of true faith to lay hold on him. Therefore, if there be
any bruised reed, let him not make an exception of himself, when Christ
does not make an exception of him. `Come unto me, all ye that labour
and are heavy laden' (Matt. 11:28). Why should we not make use of so
gracious a disposition? We are only poor for this reason, that we do not

know our riches in Christ. In time of temptation, believe Christ rather
than the devil. Believe truth from truth itself. Hearken not to a liar, an
enemy and a murderer.
2 A flaw in a candle wick which causes guttering.
