PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Part 9 of 10
Chapters 43 through 47


We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach. In these chapters, Ben Sira sings of the glory of God in creation — the sun, the moon, the stars, the rainbow, the snow — and then begins his great hymn in praise of the famous men of Israel, from Enoch and Noah through Abraham, Moses, Joshua, and David.

CHAPTER 43

Verse 1. The pride of the height, the clear firmament, the beauty of heaven, with his glorious show;

Verse 2. The sun when it appeareth, declaring at his rising a marvelous instrument, the work of the Most High.

Verse 3. At noon it parcheth the country, and who can abide the burning heat thereof?

Verse 4. A man blowing a furnace is in works of heat, but the sun burneth the mountains three times more; breathing out fiery vapors, and sending forth bright beams, it dimmeth the eyes.

Verse 5. Great is the Lord that made it, and at His commandment it runneth hastily.

Verse 6. He made the moon also to serve in her season for a declaration of times, and a sign of the world.

Verse 7. From the moon is the sign of feasts, a light that decreaseth in her perfection.

Verse 8. The month is called after her name, increasing wonderfully in her changing, being an instrument of the armies above, shining in the firmament of heaven.

Verse 9. The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, an ornament giving light in the highest places of the Lord.

Verse 10. At the commandment of the Holy One they will stand in their order, and never faint in their watches.

Verse 11. Look upon the rainbow, and praise Him that made it; very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof.

Verse 12. It compasseth the heaven about with a glorious circle, and the hands of the Most High have bended it.

Verse 13. By His commandment He maketh the snow to fall apace, and sendeth swiftly the lightnings of His judgment.

Verse 14. Through this the treasures are opened, and clouds fly forth as fowls.

Verse 15. By His great power He maketh the clouds firm, and the hailstones are broken small.

Verse 16. At His sight the mountains are shaken, and at His will the south wind bloweth.

Verse 17. The noise of the thunder maketh the earth to tremble; so doth the northern storm and the whirlwind. As birds flying He scattereth the snow, and the falling down thereof is as the lighting of grasshoppers.

Verse 18. The eye marvelleth at the beauty of the whiteness thereof, and the heart is astonished at the raining of it.

Verse 19. The hoar frost also as salt He poureth on the earth, and being congealed, it lieth on the top of sharp stakes.

Verse 20. When the cold north wind bloweth, and the water is congealed into ice, it abideth upon every gathering together of water, and clotheth the water as with a breastplate.

Verse 21. It devoureth the mountains, and burneth the wilderness, and consumeth the grass as fire.

Verse 22. A present remedy of all is a mist coming speedily, a dew coming after heat refresheth.

Verse 23. By His counsel He appeaseth the deep, and planteth islands therein.

Verse 24. They that sail on the sea tell of the danger thereof, and when we hear it with our ears we marvel thereat.

Verse 25. For therein be strange and wondrous works, variety of all kinds of beasts and whales created.

Verse 26. By Him the end of them hath prosperous success, and by His word all things consist.

Verse 27. We may speak much, and yet come short; wherefore in sum, He is all.

Verse 28. How shall we be able to magnify Him? For He is great above all His works.

Verse 29. The Lord is terrible and very great, and marvelous is His power.

Verse 30. When ye glorify the Lord, exalt Him as much as ye can; for even yet will He far exceed. And when ye exalt Him, put forth all your strength, and be not weary; for ye can never go far enough.

Verse 31. Who hath seen Him, that he might tell us? And who can magnify Him as He is?

Verse 32. There are yet hid greater things than these be, for we have seen but a few of His works.

Verse 33. For the Lord hath made all things, and to the godly hath He given wisdom.

CHAPTER 44

Verse 1. Let us now praise famous men, and our fathers that begat us.

Verse 2. The Lord hath wrought great glory by them through His great power from the beginning.

Verse 3. Such as did bear rule in their kingdoms, men renowned for their power, giving counsel by their understanding, and declaring prophecies;

Verse 4. Leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their knowledge of learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent in their instructions;

Verse 5. Such as found out musical tunes, and recited verses in writing;

Verse 6. Rich men furnished with ability, living peaceably in their habitations:

Verse 7. All these were honored in their generations, and were the glory of their times.

Verse 8. There be of them that have left a name behind them, that their praises might be reported.

Verse 9. And some there be which have no memorial, who are perished as though they had never been; and are become as though they had never been born; and their children after them.

Verse 10. But these were merciful men, whose righteousness hath not been forgotten.

Verse 11. With their seed shall continually remain a good inheritance, and their children are within the covenant.

Verse 12. Their seed standeth fast, and their children for their sakes.

Verse 13. Their seed shall remain forever, and their glory shall not be blotted out.

Verse 14. Their bodies are buried in peace, but their name liveth forevermore.

Verse 15. The people will tell of their wisdom, and the congregation will show forth their praise.

Verse 16. Enoch pleased the Lord, and was translated, being an example of repentance to all generations.

Verse 17. Noah was found perfect and righteous; in the time of wrath he was taken in exchange for the world; therefore was he left as a remnant unto the earth, when the flood came.

Verse 18. An everlasting covenant was made with him, that all flesh should perish no more by the flood.

Verse 19. Abraham was a great father of many people; in glory was there none like unto him;

Verse 20. Who kept the law of the Most High, and was in covenant with Him. He established the covenant in his flesh, and when he was proved he was found faithful.

Verse 21. Therefore He assured him by an oath, that He would bless the nations in his seed, and that He would multiply him as the dust of the earth, and exalt his seed as the stars, and cause them to inherit from sea to sea, and from the river unto the utmost part of the land.

Verse 22. With Isaac did He establish likewise, for Abraham his father's sake, the blessing of all men and the covenant.

Verse 23. And He made it rest upon the head of Jacob. He acknowledged him in His blessings, and gave him a heritage, and divided his portions; among the twelve tribes did He part them.

CHAPTER 45

Verse 1. And He brought out of him a merciful man, which found favor in the sight of all flesh, even Moses, beloved of God and men, whose memorial is blessed.

Verse 2. He made him like to the glorious saints, and magnified him, so that his enemies stood in fear of him.

Verse 3. By his words He caused the wonders to cease, and He made him glorious in the sight of kings, and gave him a commandment for his people, and showed him part of His glory.

Verse 4. He sanctified him in his faithfulness and meekness, and chose him out of all men.

Verse 5. He made him to hear His voice, and brought him into the dark cloud, and gave him commandments before his face, even the law of life and knowledge, that he might teach Jacob His covenants, and Israel His judgments.

Verse 6. He exalted Aaron, a holy man like unto Moses, even his brother, of the tribe of Levi.

Verse 7. He established unto him an everlasting covenant, and gave him the priesthood among the people; He beautified him with comely ornaments, and clothed him with a robe of glory.

Verse 8. He put upon him perfect glory, and strengthened him with rich garments, with breeches, with a long robe, and the ephod.

Verse 9. And He compassed him with pomegranates, and with many golden bells round about, that as he went there might be a sound, and a noise made that might be heard in the temple, for a memorial to the children of his people.

Verse 10. With a holy garment, with gold, and blue silk, and purple, the work of the embroiderer, with a breastplate of judgment, and with Urim and Thummim;

Verse 11. With twisted scarlet, the work of the cunning workman, with precious stones graven like seals, and set in gold, the work of the jeweler, with a writing engraved for a memorial, after the number of the tribes of Israel.

Verse 12. He set a crown of gold upon the mitre, wherein was engraved Holiness, an ornament of honor, a costly work, the desires of the eyes, goodly and beautiful.

Verse 13. Before him there were none such, neither did ever any stranger put them on, but only his children and his children's children perpetually.

Verse 14. Their sacrifices shall be wholly consumed every day twice continually.

Verse 15. Moses consecrated him, and anointed him with holy oil; this was appointed unto him by an everlasting covenant, and to his seed, so long as the heavens should remain, that they should minister unto Him, and execute the office of the priesthood, and bless the people in His name.

Verse 16. He chose him out of all men living to offer sacrifices to the Lord, incense and a sweet savor, for a memorial, to make reconciliation for his people.

Verse 17. He gave unto him His commandments, and authority in the statutes of judgments, that he should teach Jacob the testimonies, and inform Israel in His laws.

Verse 18. Strangers conspired together against him, and maligned him in the wilderness, even the men that were of Dathan's and Abiram's side, and the congregation of Korah, with fury and wrath.

Verse 19. This the Lord saw, and it displeased Him, and in His wrathful indignation were they consumed. He did wonders upon them, to consume them with the fiery flame.

Verse 20. But He made Aaron more honorable, and gave him a heritage, and divided unto him the firstfruits of the increase; especially He prepared bread in abundance.

Verse 21. For they eat of the sacrifices of the Lord, which He gave unto him and his seed.

Verse 22. Howbeit in the land of the people he had no inheritance, neither had he any portion among the people; for the Lord Himself is his portion and inheritance.

Verse 23. The third in glory is Phinehas the son of Eleazar, because he had zeal in the fear of the Lord, and stood up with good courage of heart when the people were turned back, and made reconciliation for Israel.

Verse 24. Therefore was there a covenant of peace made with him, that he should be the chief of the sanctuary and of his people, and that he and his posterity should have the dignity of the priesthood forever.

Verse 25. According to the covenant made with David son of Jesse, of the tribe of Judah, that the inheritance of the king should be to his posterity alone; so the inheritance of Aaron should also be unto his seed.

Verse 26. God give you wisdom in your heart to judge His people in righteousness, that their good things be not abolished, and that their glory may endure for all their generations.

CHAPTER 46

Verse 1. Joshua the son of Nun was valiant in the wars, and was the successor of Moses in prophecies, who according to his name was made great for the saving of the elect of God, and taking vengeance of the enemies that rose up against them, that he might set Israel in their inheritance.

Verse 2. How great glory gat he, when he did lift up his hands, and stretched out his sword against the cities!

Verse 3. Who before him so stood to it? For the Lord Himself brought His enemies unto him.

Verse 4. Did not the sun go back by his means? And was not one day as long as two?

Verse 5. He called upon the Most High Lord, when the enemies pressed upon him on every side; and the great Lord heard him.

Verse 6. And with hailstones of mighty power He made the battle to fall violently upon the nations, and in the descent of Beth-horon He destroyed them that resisted, that the nations might know all their strength, because he fought in the sight of the Lord, and he followed the Mighty One.

Verse 7. In the time of Moses also he did a work of mercy, he and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, in that they withstood the congregation, and withheld the people from sin, and appeased the wicked murmuring.

Verse 8. And of six hundred thousand people on foot, they two were preserved to bring them into the heritage, even into a land that floweth with milk and honey.

Verse 9. The Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which remained with him unto his old age, so that he entered upon the high places of the land, and his seed obtained it for a heritage;

Verse 10. That all the children of Israel might see that it is good to follow the Lord.

Verse 11. And concerning the judges, every one by name, whose heart went not a-whoring, and who turned not away from the Lord: let their memory be blessed.

Verse 12. Let their bones flourish out of their place, and let the name of them that were honored be continued upon their children.

Verse 13. Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, beloved of his Lord, established a kingdom and anointed princes over his people.

Verse 14. By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, and the Lord had respect unto Jacob.

Verse 15. By his faithfulness he was found a true prophet, and by his word he was known to be faithful in vision.

Verse 16. He called upon the Lord Almighty, when his enemies pressed upon him on every side, when he offered the sucking lamb.

Verse 17. And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a great noise made His voice to be heard.

Verse 18. And he destroyed the rulers of the Tyrians, and all the princes of the Philistines.

Verse 19. And before his long sleep he made protestations in the sight of the Lord and His anointed: I have not taken any man's goods, not so much as a shoe; and no man did accuse him.

Verse 20. And after his death he prophesied and showed the king his end, and lifted up his voice from the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of the people.

CHAPTER 47

Verse 1. And after him rose up Nathan to prophesy in the time of David.

Verse 2. As is the fat taken away from the peace offering, so was David chosen out of the children of Israel.

Verse 3. He played with lions as with kids, and with bears as with lambs.

Verse 4. Slew he not a giant when he was yet but young? And did he not take away reproach from the people, when he lifted up his hand with the stone in the sling, and beat down the boasting of Goliath?

Verse 5. For he called upon the Most High Lord, and He gave him strength in his right hand to slay that mighty warrior, and set up the horn of his people.

Verse 6. So the people honored him with ten thousands, and praised him in the blessings of the Lord, in that he gave him a crown of glory.

Verse 7. For he destroyed the enemies on every side, and brought to nought the Philistines his adversaries, and brake their horn in sunder unto this day.

Verse 8. In all his works he praised the Holy One Most High with words of glory; with his whole heart he sang songs, and loved Him that made him.

Verse 9. He set singers also before the altar, that by their voices they might make sweet melody, and daily sing praises in their songs.

Verse 10. He beautified their feasts, and set in order the solemn times until the end, that they should praise His holy name, and that the temple should sound from morning.

Verse 11. The Lord took away his sins, and exalted his horn forever; He gave him a covenant of kings, and a throne of glory in Israel.

Verse 12. After him rose up a wise son, and for his sake he dwelt at large.

Verse 13. Solomon reigned in a peaceable time, and was honored; for God made all quiet round about him, that he might build a house in His name, and prepare His sanctuary forever.

Verse 14. How wise wast thou in thy youth, and as a flood filled with understanding!

Verse 15. Thy soul covered the whole earth, and thou filledst it with dark parables.

Verse 16. Thy name went far unto the islands, and for thy peace thou wast beloved.

Verse 17. The countries marveled at thee for thy songs, and proverbs, and parables, and interpretations.

Verse 18. By the name of the Lord God, which is called the Lord God of Israel, thou didst gather gold as tin, and didst multiply silver as lead.

Verse 19. Thou didst bow thy loins unto women, and by thy body thou wast brought into subjection.

Verse 20. Thou didst stain thine honor, and pollute thy seed, so that thou broughtest wrath upon thy children, and wast grieved for thy folly.

Verse 21. So the kingdom was divided, and out of Ephraim ruled a rebellious kingdom.

Verse 22. But the Lord will never leave off His mercy, neither shall any of His works perish, neither will He abolish the posterity of His elect, and the seed of him that loveth Him He will not take away; wherefore He gave a remnant unto Jacob, and out of him a root unto David.

Verse 23. Thus rested Solomon with his fathers, and of his seed he left behind him Rehoboam, even the foolishness of the people and one that had no understanding, who turned away the people through his counsel.

Verse 24. There was also Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin, and showed Ephraim the way of sin; and their sins were multiplied exceedingly, that they drove them out of the land.

Verse 25. For they sought out all wickedness, till the vengeance came upon them.

This concludes Part 9 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 43 through 47. In our final reading, we shall hear the conclusion of the praise of famous men — Elijah, Elisha, the kings, the high priest Simon — and Ben Sira's closing prayer and hymn of thanksgiving.
