PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 14
Preparatory Direction V: Consider the Occasions of Sin

---

Chapter 13

PREPARATORY DIRECTIONS
Speak No Peace
9. Speak No Peace until God Speaks Peace
The ninth and last preparatory direction for mortification of sin is:
In case God disquiets your heart about the guilt of its distempers, either in respect of sin’s
root and indwelling, or in respect of any eruptions of sin, take heed that you speak not
peace to yourself before God speaks it. Instead, hearken to what He says to your soul.
This is our next direction. Without its observation, the heart will be exceedingly exposed to the
deceitfulness of sin.
This is a business of great importance. It is a sad thing for a man to deceive his own soul in
this. All the warnings God gives us in tenderness to our souls to try and examine ourselves do
tend to the preventing of this great evil of speaking peace groundlessly to ourselves. Such
groundless speaking peace results in blessing ourselves in opposition to God! It is not my
business to insist upon the danger of it, but to help believers to prevent it, and to let them
know when they do so.

a. Preparatory observations
To manage this direction aright, observe the following.
1). God sovereignly chooses
It is the great prerogative and sovereignty of God to give grace to whom He pleases. He has
“mercy on whom he will”; and among all the sons of men, He calls whom He will and sanctifies whom He will (Rom 9:18; 8:30). In the same way, among those so called and justified, and
among those whom He will save, He yet reserves this privilege to Himself: to speak peace to
whom He pleases and in what degree He pleases, even among them on whom He has bestowed
grace. He is the “God of all comfort” in an especial manner in His dealing with believers (2Co
1:3); that is, of the good things that He keeps locked up in His family, and gives out of it to all
His children at His pleasure. This the Lord insists on in Isaiah 57:16-18. It is this case we are
considering that is there insisted on. When God says He will heal their breaches and disconsolations, He assumes this privilege to Himself in an especial manner. “I create… peace”
(57:19)—that is, even in respect of these poor wounded creatures, I create peace. According to
my sovereignty, I make it out as I please.
Hence, as it is with the bestowal of grace to them who are in the state of nature, God does it
very surprisingly, and His proceedings therein in taking and leaving, as to outward appearances, are quite different, and often contrary, to all probable expectations. So is it in His commu-

68

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

nication of peace and joy in reference unto them that are in the state of grace: He often gives
them out quite besides our expectation as to any apparent basis for His dealings.
2). Christ sovereignly speaks
As God creates peace for whom He pleases, so it is the prerogative of Christ to speak peace
home to the conscience. Speaking to the church of Laodicea, who had healed her wounds
falsely and spoke peace to herself when she ought not, Christ takes to Himself that title, “the
Amen, the faithful and true witness” (Rev 3:14). He bears testimony concerning our condition
as it is indeed. We may possibly mistake and trouble ourselves in vain, or flatter ourselves upon false grounds, but He is “the Amen, the faithful and true witness”; and what He speaks of
our state and condition, that it indeed is. He is said not to “judge after the sight of his eyes”
(Isa 11:3)—that is, not according to any outward appearance, or anything that may be subject
to a mistake, as we are apt to do—but He shall judge and determine every cause as it indeed is.

b. Evidences for when peace is self-spoken
Given these two previous observations, I shall give some rules whereby men may know
whether God speaks peace to them, or whether they speak peace to themselves only.
1). If sin is not detested
Men certainly speak peace to themselves when their so doing is not attended with the greatest detestation imaginable of the sin involved, and abhorrence of themselves for it. Often men
are wounded, disquieted, and perplexed by sin, knowing that there is no remedy for them but
only in the mercies of God through the blood of Christ. When these look to God and to the
promises of the new covenant in Christ (Heb 8:8-13), they quiet their hearts that it shall be
well with them, and that God will be exalted by His being gracious to them. But if their souls
are not wrought to the greatest detestation of the sin or sins on whose account they are disquieted, then they have healed themselves, and have not been healed of God. This is only a
great and strong wind in which the Lord is near, but not in (1Ki 19:11).
When men do truly “look upon [Christ] whom they have pierced,” without which there is
no healing or peace, they will “mourn” (Zec 12:10). They will mourn for Him, even upon this
account, and detest the sin that pierced Him. When we go to Christ for healing, faith eyes Him
peculiarly as one pierced. Faith takes several views of Christ, according to the occasions it has
for prayer and communion with Him. Sometimes faith views His holiness, sometimes His
power, sometimes His love, sometimes His favor with His Father. And when faith seeks healing and peace, it looks especially on the blood of the covenant, on Christ’s sufferings; for “the
chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed” (Isa 53:5). When
we look for healing, His stripes are to be eyed—not in the outward story of them, which is the
course of popish devotionists, but in the love, kindness, mystery, and purpose of the cross. And
when we look for peace, His chastisements must be in our eye.
Now this, I say, if it be done according to the mind of God and in the strength of that Spirit
which is poured out on believers, it will beget a detestation of that sin or sins for which healing and peace is sought. So, “Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days
of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.” And what then? “Then
thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed” (Eze 16:60-61). When God comes home to
speak peace in a sure covenant of peace (Isa 54:10; Eze 34:25; 37:26), it fills the soul with
shame for all the ways in which it has been alienated from Him.

13. Preparatory Direction 9: Speak No Peace

69

One of the things that the apostle mentions as attending that godly sorrow which is accompanied with repentance unto salvation, never to be repented of, is revenge: “Yea, what revenge!” (2Co 7:11). They reflected on their transgressions with indignation and revenge for
their folly in them. When Job comes up to a thorough healing from his sin, he cries, “Wherefore I abhor myself ” (Job 42:6). Until he did so, he had no abiding peace. He might perhaps
have made peace to himself with that doctrine of free grace which was so excellently preached
by Elihu (33:14-30); but he had then only skinned his wounds—he must come to selfabhorrence if he would come to healing.
So was it with those in Psalm 78:33-35, in their great trouble and perplexity for and upon
the account of sin. I doubt not but upon the address they made to God in Christ (for that so
they did is evident from the titles they gave Him: they call Him their Rock and their Redeemer, two words everywhere pointing out the Lord Christ), they spoke peace to themselves. But
was it sound and abiding? No, it passed away as the early dew. God speaks not one word of
peace to their souls. But why had they not peace? Why, because in their address to God they
flattered Him. But how does that appear? “Their heart was not right with him, neither were
they stedfast” (v. 37); they had not a detestation nor forsaking of that sin for which they spoke
peace to themselves.
Let a man make what application he will for healing and peace, let him do it to the true
Physician, let him do it the right way, let him quiet his heart in the promises of the covenant.
Yet, when peace is spoken, if it be not attended with the detestation and abhorrence of that sin
which was the wound and caused the disquietment, 90 this is no peace of God’s creating, but of
our own purchasing. It is but a skinning over the wound while the core lies underneath, which
will putrefy, corrupt, and corrode until it breaks out again with injury, vexation, and danger.
Let not poor souls that walk in such a path as this, who are more sensible of the trouble of sin
than of the pollution of uncleanness that attends it; who address themselves for mercy even to
the Lord Jesus Christ, but yet will keep the sweet morsel of their sin under their tongue—let
them, I say, never think to have true and solid peace.
For instance, you find your heart running out after the world, and it disturbs you in your
communion with God; the Spirit speaks expressly to you: “If any man love the world, the love
of the Father is not in him” (1Jo 2:15). This puts you on dealing with God in Christ for the
healing of your soul, the quieting of your conscience—but yet, with all this, a thorough detestation of the evil itself does not abide upon you. Perhaps there is some detestation, but only in
respect of the consequences of your sin. Perhaps you may be saved, but only as through fire
(1Co 3:12-15). Perhaps God will still have some work with you before He is done, but you will
have little peace in this life. You will be sick and fainting all your days (Isa 57:17).
This is a deceit that lies at the root of the peace of many professors and destroys it. They
deal with all their strength about mercy and pardon, and seem to have great communion with
God in their so doing. They lie before Him and bewail their sins and follies, so that anyone
would think—yea, they even think themselves—that surely they and their sins are now parted;
and so they receive in mercy what satisfies their hearts for a little season. But when a thorough search comes to be made, there has been some secret reserve for the folly or follies treated about—at least there has not been the thorough abhorrence of it that is necessary—and
90

disquietment – disturbance.

70

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

their whole peace is quickly discovered to be weak and rotten, scarce abiding any longer than
the words of begging it are in their mouths.
2). If rational principles are relied upon
a). The meaning of relying upon rational principles
When men measure out peace to themselves upon the conclusions that their convictions
and rational principles will carry them to, this is a false peace and will not abide. I shall a little
explain what I mean by this.
A man has got a wound by sin; he has a conviction of some sin upon his conscience. He has
not walked uprightly as becomes the gospel; all is not well and right between God and his soul.
He considers now what is to be done. He has light, and knows what path he must take, and
how his soul has been formerly healed. Considering that the promises of God’s Word are the
outward means of application for the healing of his sores and quieting of his heart, he goes to
them, searches them out, finds out some one or more of them whose literal words are directly
suited to his condition. He then says to himself, “God speaks in this promise; here I will take
91
myself a plaster as long and broad as my wound.” And so he brings the word of the promise to
his condition, and sets him down in peace. This is another appearance upon the mount: the
Lord is near, but the Lord is not in it (1Ki 19:11-12). It has not been the work of the Spirit,
Who alone can “reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment” (Joh 16:8),
but the mere actings of the intelligent, rational soul.
There are three sorts of lives: the vegetative, the sensitive, and the rational or intelligent.
Some things have only the vegetative; some the sensitive also, and that includes the former.
Some have the rational, which takes in and supposes both the others. Now, he who has the rational not only acts suitably to that principle, but also to both the others: he grows and is sensible. So it is with men in the things of God. Some are mere natural and rational men; some
have a superadded conviction with illumination; and some are truly regenerate. Now, he who
has the latter has also both the former; and therefore he acts sometimes upon the principles of
the rational, and sometimes upon the principles of the spiritually enlightened man. His true
spiritual life is not the principle of all his motions: he acts not always in spiritual strength, neither are all his fruits from that root. In this case that I speak of, he acts merely upon the principle of conviction and illumination, whereby his first natural inclinations are heightened.
But the Spirit breathes not at all upon all these waters. For example, suppose the wound
and disquiet of the soul is upon the account of relapses. Whatever the evil or folly is, even if
very small, yet there are no wounds nor disquietments deeper than those that are given the
soul on this account. In the inner turmoil of his mind, he finds out that promise: “The
Lord…will have mercy upon him, and our God…will abundantly pardon” (Isa 55:7)—that is,
He will multiply or add to pardon, He will do it again and again. Or he finds the promise in
Hosea 14:4, “I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely.” This the man considers, and
thereupon concludes peace to himself. Whether or not the Spirit of God makes the application,
whether or not the Spirit gives life and power to the letter, that he does not regard. He does
not hearken whether God the Lord speaks peace. He does not wait upon God, Who perhaps yet
hides His face, and sees the poor creature stealing peace and running away with it, knowing
that the time will come when He will deal with him again and call him to a new reckoning
91

plaster – bandage spread with a healing substance to cover and close wounds.

13. Preparatory Direction 9: Speak No Peace

71

(Hos 9:9), when he shall see that it is in vain to go one step where God does not take him by
the hand.
b). How to know when this is the case
I see here, indeed, various other questions about this arising and intervening themselves. I
cannot apply myself to them all: I shall speak a little to one.
It may be said then, “Seeing that this seems to be the path that the Holy Spirit leads us in
for the true healing of our wounds and quieting of our hearts, how shall we know when we go
alone ourselves, and when the Spirit also accompanies us?”
Answer 1). God will let us know. If any of you are out of the right way in this regard, God
will speedily let you know it. For besides, you have His promise that “the meek he will guide in
judgment: and the meek will he teach his way” (Psa 25:9). He will not let you always err. He
will, I say, not suffer your nakedness to be covered with fig-leaves, but will take them away and
all the peace you have in them, and will not suffer you to settle on such self-satisfaction. You
shall quickly know your wound is not healed; that is, you shall speedily know whether or not
this is your situation. The peace you thus get and obtain will not abide. While the mind is
overpowered by its own convictions, there is no hold for disquietments 92 to fix upon. Stay a
little, and all these reasonings will grow cold and vanish before the face of the first temptation
that arises.
Answer 2). This course is commonly taken without waiting; which is the grace and the peculiar acting of faith that God calls to be exercised in such a condition. I know God sometimes
comes in upon the soul instantly, in a moment as it were, wounding and healing it—as I am
persuaded was the case of David when he cut off the lap of Saul’s garment (1Sa 24:5). But ordinarily in such a case, God calls for waiting and laboring (Psa 130:6; 128:2), attending as the
eye of a servant upon his master. Says the prophet Isaiah, “I will wait upon the Lord, that
hideth his face from the house of Jacob” (8:17). When they have run from His house and are so
ashamed that they dare not come to Him, God will have His children lie a while at His door,
and not instantly rush in upon Him (Isa 28:16), unless He take them by the hand and pull
them in. Now, self-healers, or men that speak peace to themselves, do commonly make haste;
they will not tarry. They do not hearken what God speaks, but on they will go to be healed.
Answer 3). Such a course does not sweeten the heart with rest and gracious contentment,
though it may quiet the conscience and the mind, the rational part of the soul. The answer it
receives is much like that which Elisha gave Naaman: “Go in peace” (2Ki 5:19). It quieted his
mind, but I much question whether it sweetened his heart or gave him any joy in believing,
other than the natural joy that was then stirred in him upon his healing. “Do not my words do
good?” says the Lord (Mic 2:7). When God speaks, there is not only truth in His words, which
may answer the conviction of our understandings, but also they do good. They bring that
which is sweet, good, and desirable to the will and affections. By them the soul returns unto its
rest (Psa 116:7).
Answer 4). Which is worst of all, such a course amends not the life, it heals not the evil, it
cures not the distemper. When God speaks peace, it guides and keeps the soul so that it turns
not again to folly (Psa 85:8). When we speak peace to ourselves, the heart is not taken off the
evil; nay, it is the readiest course in the world to bring a soul into a continual practice of back92

disquietments – things that rob one of peace, rest, or quietness; disturbances.

72

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

sliding. If, upon your plastering yourself, you find yourself animated to the battle again, rather
than utterly weaned from it, it is too probable that you have been at work with your own soul,
but Jesus Christ and His Spirit were not there. Oftentimes nature, having done its work, will
come for its reward after a few days, and, having been active in the work of healing, will be
ready to reason for a new wounding. However, in God’s speaking peace, there comes along so
much sweetness and such a discovery of His love as is a strong obligation on the soul to deal
perversely no more (Luk 22:32).
3). If we do it slightly
We speak peace to ourselves when we do it slightly. 93 This the prophet complains of in some
teachers: “They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly” (Jer 6:14). And
it is so with some persons: they make the healing of their wounds a slight work. A look, a
glance of faith to the promises does it, and so the matter is ended. The apostle tells us that
“the word preached did not profit” some because it was “not…mixed with faith” (Heb 4:2)—
that is, it was not “well-tempered” and mingled with faith. Healing is not from a mere look to
the word of mercy in the promises, but it must be mingled with faith until faith is incorporated into the very nature of the healing. Then, indeed, it does good to the soul.
If you have had a wound upon your conscience that was attended with weakness and disquietness of which now you are free, how did you come to it? You might say: “I looked to the
promises of pardon and healing and so found peace.” Yes, but perhaps you have made too
much haste: you have done it overtly, you have not fed upon the promise so as to mix it with
faith, to have got all the virtue of it diffused into your soul—you have done it only slightly.
You will find your wound, ere long, breaking out again; and then you shall know that you are
not cured.
4). If you ignore an equal sin
Whoever speaks peace to himself upon any one account, and at the same time has another
evil of no less importance lying upon his spirit, about which he has had no dealing with God,
that man cries “Peace” when there is none. Let me explain my meaning: A man has neglected
a duty again and again, perhaps, when it was due from him in all righteousness. His conscience is perplexed, his soul wounded, he has no quiet in his bones by reason of his sin. He
then applies himself for healing, and finds peace. Yet, perhaps in the meantime, worldliness,
pride, or some other folly wherewith the Spirit of God is exceedingly grieved, may lie in the
bosom of that man, and they neither disturb him nor he them. Let not that man think that
any of his peace is from God! It shall be well with men when they have an equal respect to all
God’s commandments. God will justify us from our sins, but He will not justify the least sin in
us. He is a God “of purer eyes than to behold evil” (Hab 1:13).
5). If there is no humility
When men of themselves speak peace to their own consciences, it is seldom that God speaks
humiliation to their souls. God’s peace is humbling peace, melting peace, as it was in the case
of David (Psa 51:17)—never such deep humiliation as when Nathan brought him the tidings of
his pardon (2Sa 12:13). 94
93
94

slightly – negligently; superficially.
The scriptural introduction to Psalm 51 places its writing as David’s response to his conviction of deep sin
against Bathsheba and Uriah.

13. Preparatory Direction 9: Speak No Peace

73

c. When to take comfort from a promise of God
But you will say, “When may we take the comfort of a promise as our own, in relation to
some peculiar wound, for quieting the heart?”
1). When God speaks the promise to you
We may take the comfort of a promise for our own, first and in general, when God speaks
it—be it when He will, sooner or later. 95 I told you before, He may do it in the very instant of
the sin itself, and that with such irresistible power that the soul must receive His mind in it.
And sometimes He will make us wait longer. But when He does speak—be it sooner or later,
be it when we are sinning or repenting, be the condition of our souls what they please—if God
speaks, He must be received. There is not anything in our communion with Him that the Lord
is more troubled with us about, if I may so say, than our unbelieving fears, which keep us from
receiving that strong consolation He is so willing to give to us.
But you will say, “We are where we were. When God speaks it, we must receive it, that is
true; but how shall we know when He speaks?” I would we could all practically come up to
this, to receive peace when we are convinced that God speaks it, and that it is our duty to receive it.
There is, however, if I may so say, a secret instinct in faith whereby it knows the voice of
Christ when He speaks indeed. As the babe leaped in the womb when the blessed virgin came
to Elisabeth (Luk 1:41), faith leaps in the heart when Christ indeed draws nigh to it. “My
sheep,” says Christ, “hear my voice” (Joh 10:4, 27)—that is, they know My voice; they are used
to the sound of it. They know when His lips are opened to them and are full of grace. The
spouse was in a sad condition, asleep in security; but yet as soon as Christ speaks, she cries, “It
is the voice of my beloved” (Song 5:2). She knew His voice, and was so acquainted with communion with Him that instantly she discovers Him. And so will you also. If you exercise yourselves to acquaintance and communion with Him, you will easily discern between His voice
and the voice of a stranger. And take this criterion with you: when He speaks, He speaks as
never man spoke. He speaks with power, and one way or other will make your “heart burn
within” you as He did to the disciples (Luk 24:32). He does it by putting “in his hand by the
hole of the door” (Song 5:4)—that is, putting His Spirit into your hearts to seize on you.
He that has his senses exercised to discern good or evil is the best judge for himself in this
case, being increased in judgment and experience by a constant observation of the ways of
Christ’s communication, the manner of the operations of the Spirit, and the effects it usually
produces.
2). If the Word does true good to your soul
If the Word of the Lord does good to your souls, He speaks it: if it humble, if it cleanse, and
if it be useful to those ends for which His promises are given—namely, to endear, to cleanse,
to melt and bind to obedience, to self-emptiness, etc. But this is not my business, nor shall I
further divert in the pursuit of this direction. Without the observation of it, sin will have great
advantages towards the hardening of the heart.

95

See The Leading of the Holy Spirit by A. W. Pink (1886-1952), available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.