PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 10
Ten Motives for Keeping the Heart

---

Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 10. Ten Motives for Keeping the Heart.

service for God, and if it be attended with honour, it shall swell up
and over-top his spirit; if with suffering it will exanimate and sink
him.
Jesus Christ had an instrumental fitness for his Father's work above
all the servants that ever God employed: he was zealous in public
work for God; so zealous, that sometimes he forgot to eat bread, yea,
that his friends thought he had been besides himself: but yet he so
carried on his public work, as not to forget his own private
communion with God: and therefore you read, Mat. 13:23. that when
he had been labouring all day, yet, after that he went up to a
mountain apart to pray, and was there alone. O let the keepers of the
vineyards look to their own vineyard: We shall never be so
instrumental to the good of others, as when we are most diligent
about our own souls.
9 Motive. If the people of God would more diligently keep their
hearts, how exceedingly would the communion of saints be thereby
sweetened.
How goodly then would be thy tents, O Jacob! and thy tabernacles, O
Israel! Then it is prophesied of the Jews, Zech. 8:23. "Men would say,
we will go with you; for we have heard that God is among you." It is
the fellowship your souls have with the Father, and with the Son, that
draws out the desires of others after fellowship with you, 1 John 1:3. I
tell you, if saints would be persuaded to take more pains, and spend
more time about their hearts, there would quickly be such a divine
lustre upon the face of their conversations, that men would account
it no small privilege to be with or near them.
It is the pride, passion, and earthliness of our hearts that have
spoiled Christian fellowship. Whence is it, that when Christians
meet, they are often jarring and contending? but only from their
unmortified passions: whence are their uncharitable censures of
their brethren: but only from self-ignorance: Why are they so rigid
and unmerciful towards those that are fallen? but because they

consider not themselves as the apostle speaks, Gal. 6:1. Why is their
discourse so frothy and unprofitable when they meet? is not this
from the earthliness and vanity of their hearts?
My brethren, these be the things that have spoiled Christian
fellowship, and made it become a dry and sapless thing; so that many
Christians are even weary of it, and are ready to say with the prophet,
Jer. 9:2. "O that I had a cottage in the wilderness, &c. that I might
leave my people, and go from them!" And with David, Psal. 120:6.
"My soul hath long dwelt with them that hate peace." This hath made
them long for the grave that they might go from them that are not
their own people, to them that are their own people, as the original of
that text imports, 2 Cor. 5:8.
But now if professors would study their own hearts more, watch and
keep them better, all this would be prevented; and the beauty and
glory of communion again restored: they would divide no more,
contend no more, censure rashly no more; when their hearts are in
tune, their tongues will not jar; how charitable, pitiful, and tender
will they be of one another, when every one is daily humbled under
the evils of his own heart. Lord, hasten those much-desired days, and
bless these counsels in order to them!
10 Motive. Lastly, By this the comforts of the Spirit, and precious
influence of all ordinances would be fixed, and much longer
preserved in your souls than now they are.
Ah! what would I give, that my soul might be preserved in that frame
I sometimes find it in after an ordinance? Aliquando intromittis me,
Domine, in affectum multum inusitatim, introrsus ad quam nescio
dulcedinem, &c. Sometimes, O Lord, (saith one of the Fathers
sweetly) thou admittest me into the most inward, unusual, and sweet
delights, to I-know-not-what sweetness, which were it perfected in
me, I know not what it would be, or rather, what it would riot be. But
alas! the heart grows careless again, and quickly returns, like water
removed from the fire, to its native coldness. Could you but keep

those things for ever in your hearts, what Christians would you be?
what lives would you live? and how is it that these things remain no
longer with us? Doubtless it is because we suffer our hearts to take
cold again; we should be as careful after an ordinance or duty to
prevent this, as one that comes out of a hot bath, or great sweat, is of
going out into the chill air. We have our hot and cold fits by turns:
and what is the reason but our unskilfulness and carelessness in
keeping the heart?
It is a thousand pities, that the ordinances of God, as to their
quickening and comforting effects, should be like those human
ordinances the apostle speaks of, that perish in the using. O then, let
me say to you, as Job 15:11. "Do the consolations of God seem small
to you?" Look over these ten special benefits; weigh them in a just
balance: are they small matters? Is it a small matter to have thy weak
understanding assisted? Thy endangered soul antidoted, thy
sincerity cleared, thy communion with God sweetened, thy sails filled
in prayer? Is it a small thing to have the decayed power of godliness
again recovered, all fatal scandals removed, an instrumental fitness
to serve Christ obtained, the communion of saints restored to its
primitive glory, and the influences of ordinances abiding in the souls
of saints? If these be no common blessings, no small benefits, then,
surely, it is a great duty to keep the heart with all diligence.

The III. Use, for Direction
The next use shall be for direction to some special means for the
keeping of the heart. And here, besides what hath been hinted in the
explication of the duty at the beginning of this discourse, to which I
refer the reader, and all those directions throughout the whole,
appropriated to particular cases and seasons; I shall farther add
several other general means of excellent use to this end. And the first
is this:

1 Mean. Would you thus keep your hearts as hath been persuaded?
Then furnish your hearts richly with the word of God, which is their
best preservation against sin.
Keep the word, and the word will keep you: as the first receiving of
the word regenerated your hearts, so the keeping of the word within
you will preserve your hearts: Col. 3:16. "Let the word of Christ dwell
richly in you:" let it dwell, not tarry with you for a night, and let it
dwell richly or plentifully; in all that is of it, in its commands,
promises, threats; in all that is in you, in your understanding,
memories, consciences, affections, and then it will preserve your
hearts; Psalm 119:11. "Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I
might not sin against thee." It is the slipperiness of our hearts in
reference to the word, that causes so many slips in our lives.
Conscience cannot be urged or awed with forgotten truths; but keep
it in the heart, and it will keep both heart and life upright; Psalm
37:31. "The law of his God is in his heart: none of his steps shall
slide;" or if he do, the word will recover the straying heart again;
Mat. 26:75. "Then Peter remembered the word of Jesus, and wept
bitterly." We never lose our hearts, till they have first lost the
efficacious and powerful impression of the word.
2. Mean. Call your hearts frequently to an account, if ever you mean
to keep them with God.
Those that put a stock into the hands of unfaithful or suspicious
servants, will be sure to make short reckonings with them; "The
heart is deceitful, above all things, and desperately wicked," Jer. 17:9.
O it is as necessary as sweet, that we and our reins, that is, we and
our secret thoughts, should confer together every night, Psalm 16:7.
We should call our hearts to account every evening, and say, O my
heart! Where hast thou been to-day? Where have thy thoughts been
wandering to-day? What an account canst thou give of them? O
naughty heart! vain heart! couldst thou not abide by the fountain of
delights? Is there better entertainment with the creature than with
God? The oftener the heart meets with rebukes and checks for

wandering, the less it will wander: If every vain thought were
retracted with a sigh, every excursion of the heart from God with a
severe check, it would not dare so boldly and frequently to digress
and step aside: those actions which are committed with reluctancy,
are not committed with frequency.
3 Mean. He that will keep his heart, must take heed of plunging
himself into such a multiplicity of earthly business, as he cannot
manage without neglecting his main business.
It cannot be imagined he should keep his heart with God that hath
lost himself in a wood of earthly business: Take heed you do not
pinch your souls, by gratifying the immoderate desires of your flesh.
I wish many Christians could truly say what an* heathen once did! 'I
do not give, but only lend myself to business.' It is said Germanicus
reigned in the hearts of the Romans; Tiberius only in their provinces.
Though the world be in your hands, let it not justle Christ out of your
hearts.
Take heed, Christian, lest thy shop steal away thy heart from thy
closet; God never intended earthly employments for a stop, but
rather for a step to heavenly ones. O let not Aristippus the heathen,
arise in judgment against thee, who said, 'He would rather neglect
his means, than his mind; his farm, than his soul.' If thy ship be
overloaden, thou must cast some overboard: More business than
thou canst well manage, is like more meat than thou canst well
digest, which will quickly make a sickly soul.
4 Mean. He that means to keep his heart, must carefully observe its
first declinings from God, and stop it there.
He that will find his house in good repair, must stop every chink as
soon as discovered; and he that will keep his heart, must not let a
vain thought be long neglected; the serpent of heart-apostasy is best
killed in the egg of a small remission of care. Oh! if many poor
decayed Christians had looked to their hearts in time, they had never

come to that sad pass they now are in? We may say of heart-neglects,
as the apostle doth of vain babblings; that they increase to more and
more ungodliness. Nemo repente fit turpissimus; little sins
neglected, will quickly become great and masterless: The greatest
crocodile once lay in an egg; the greatest oak was once but an acorn.
The firing of a small train of powder may blow up all, by leading to a
greater quantity. Men little think what a proud, vain, wanton, or
worldly thought may grow to: Behold how great a matter a little fire
kindles!
5 Mean. Take heed of losing the liveliness and sweetnsss of your
communion with God, lest thereby your hearts be loosed off from
God.
The heart is an hungry and restless thing; it will have something to
feed upon; if it enjoy nothing from God, it will hunt for something
among the creatures, and there it often loses itself, as well as its end.
There is nothing more engages the heart to a constancy and evenness
in walking with God, than the sweetness which it tastes therein: As
the Gauls, when once they tasted the sweet wine of Italy, could never
be satisfied till they conquered the country where it grew.
It is true, conscience of duty may keep the heart from neglecting it;
but when there is no higher motive, it drives on deadly, and is filled
with distractions; that which we delight in, we are never weary of, as
is evident in the motions of the heart to earthly things, where the
wheels being oiled with delight, run nimbly, and have often need of
trigging; the motions of the heart upwards would be as free, if its
delight in heavenly things were as great.
6 Mean. Habituate thy heart to spiritual meditations, if thou wouldst
have it free from those burdensome diversions.
By this mean you will get a facility and dexterity in heart-work: It is
pity those smaller portions of our time betwixt solemn duties should
lie upon our hands, and be rendered useless to us. O learn to save,

and be good husbands upon your thoughts. To this purpose a neat
author* speaks; 'These parentheses, which happen to come between
the more solemn passages (whether business or recreations) of
human life, are wont to be lost by most men for want of a due value
for them, and even by good men, for want of skill to preserve them;
for though they do not properly despise them, yet they neglect, or
lose them, for want of knowing how to rescue them, or what to do
with them: But although grains of sand and ashes be, apart, but of a
despicable smallness, and liable to be scattered and blown away, yet
the skilful artificer, by a vehement fire, brings numbers of those to
afford him that noble substance, glass, by whose help we may both
see ourselves, and our blemishes lively represented (as in lookingglasses) and discern celestial objects (as with the telescopes) and
with the sun beams kindle disposed materials (as with burning
glasses:) So when these little fragments, or parcels of time, which if
not carefully looked to, would be dissipated and lost, come to be
managed by a skilful contemplator, and to be improved by the
celestial fire of devotion, they may be so ordered as to afford us both
looking-glasses to dress our souls by, and prospectives to discover
heavenly wonders and incentives to inflame our hearts with zeal;'
Thus far he.
Something of that nature I have under hand, for a public benefit, if
God give life to finish, and opportunity to produce it: Certainly this is
a great advantage for the keeping of the heart with God.

IV. Use of Consolation
I shall now close the whole with a word or two of consolation to all
diligent and serious Christians, that faithfully and closely ply heartwork; that are groaning and weeping in secret over the hardness,
pride, earthliness, and vanity of their hearts; that are fearing and
trembling over the experienced deceitfulness and falseness of them,
whilst other vain professors eyes are abroad, their time and strength
eaten up by fruitless disputes and earthly employments, or, at best,

by a cold and formal performance of some heartless and empty
duties. Poor Christian! I have three things to offer thee, in order to
thy support and comfort; and, doubtless, either of them alone, mixed
with faith, is sufficient to comfort thee over all the trouble thou hast
with thine own heart.
1. Comfort. This argues thy heart to be upright and honest, whatever
thy gifts and abilities are.
It is uprightness of heart will comfort thee upon a death-bed; 2 Kings
20:2, 3. "Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed to the Lord,
saying, remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart," &c.
I am really of his mind, who said, si mihi daretur optio, eligerim
Christiani rustici sordidissimum & maxime agreste opus prœ
omnibus victoriis & triumphis Alexandri aut Cœsaris; might I have
my wish, I would prefer the most despicable and sordid work of a
rustic Christian, before all the victories and triumphs of Alexander or
Cæsar; yea, let me add, before all the elaborated duties and excellent
gifts of vain professors; before the tongues of men and angels. It will
signify more to my comfort, to spend one solitary hour in mourning
before the Lord over heart-corruption, than many hours in a seeming
zealous, but really dead performance of common duties with the
greatest enlargements and richest embellishments of parts and gifts.
By this very thing Christ distinguishes the formal and serious
Christian, Matth. 6:5. The one is for the street and synagogue, for the
observation and applause of men, but the other is a closet-man, he
drives on a home-trade, a heart-trade. Never be troubled then for the
want of those things that a man may have and be eternally damned;
but rather bless God for that which none but the favourites and
darlings of heaven have. Many a one is now in hell that had a better
head than mine; and many a one now in heaven that complained of
as bad a heart as thine.

2 Comfort. Know further for thy comfort, that God would never leave
thee under so many heart-troubles and burdens if he intended not
thy real benefit thereby.
Thou art often crying out, Lord! why is it thus? Why go I-mourning
all the day, having sorrow in my heart? Thus long have I been
exercised with hardness of heart, and to this day have not obtained a
broken heart. Many years have I been praying and striving against
vain thoughts, yet am still infested and perplexed with them. O when
shall I get a better heart! I have been in travail, and brought forth but
wind; I have obtained no deliverance, neither have the corruptions of
my heart fallen. I have brought this heart many times to prayers,
sermons and sacraments, expecting and hoping for a cure from
them, and still my sore runneth, and ceaseth not.
Pensive soul! Let this comfort thee; thy God designs thy benefit, even
by these occasions of thy sad complaints. For (1.) Hereby he would
let thee see what thy heart by nature is and was, and therein take
notice how much thou art beholden to free grace. He leaves thee
under these exercises of spirit, that thou mayest lie, as with thy face
upon the ground, admiring that ever the Lord of glory should take so
vile a creature into his bosom. Thy base heart, if it be good for
nothing else, yet serves to commend and set off the unsearchable
riches of free grace. (2.) This serves to beat thee off continually from
resting, yea, or but glancing upon thine own righteousness or
excellency. The corruption of thy heart, working in all thy duties,
makes thee sensible to feel that the bed is too short, and the covering
too narrow. Were it not for those reflections thou hast after duties,
upon the dulness and distractions of thine heart in them; how apt
wouldst thou be to fall in love with, and admire thine own
performances and enlargements? For if notwithstanding these, thou
hast much to do with the pride of thy heart, how much more; if such
humbling and self-abasing considerations were wanting. And, lastly,
this tends to make thee the more compassionate and tender towards
others: Perhaps thou wouldst have little pity for the distresses and
soul-troubles of others, if thou hadst less experience of thine own.

3 Comfort. To conclude; God will shortly put a blessed end to all
these troubles, cares and watchings.
The time is coming, when thy heart shall be as thou wouldst have it;
when thou shalt be discharged of all these cares, fears, and sorrows,
and never cry out, O my hard, my proud, my vain, my earthly heart
any more! When all darkness shall be vanished from thine
understanding; and thou shalt clearly discover all truths in God, that
crystal ocean of truth: When all vanity shall be purged perfectly out
of thy thoughts, and they be everlastingly, ravishingly, and
delightfully entertained and exercised upon that supreme goodness,,
and infinite excellency of God, from whom they shall never start any
more like a broken bow. And as for thy pride, passion, earthliness,
and all other the matters of thy complaint and trouble, it shall be said
of them, as of the Egyptians to Israel, "Stand still, and see the
salvation of God." These corruptions thou seest to day, henceforth
thou shalt see them no more for ever! when thou shalt lay down thy
weapons of prayers, tears, and groans, and put on the armour of
light, not to fight, but triumph in.
Lord! when shall this blessed day come? How long! how long! holy
and true? My soul waiteth for thee! Come, my Beloved! and be thou
like a roe, or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether. Amen.

----MONERGISM BOOKS
Keeping the Heart, by John Flavel, Copyright © 2021

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted
the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text
of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored
in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system,
in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of Monergism Books.
ePub, .mobi & .pdf Editions June 2021 Requests for information
should be addressed to: Monergism Books, PO Box 491, West Linn,
Oregon, 97068