PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 28
The Minister's Self-Watch

---

Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 1. The Minister's Self-Watch.

LECTURE I
THE MINISTER'S SELF-WATCH
"Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine."-1 Timothy iv.16
EVERY workman knows the necessity of keeping his tools in a good
state of repair, for "if the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge,
then must he put to more strength." If the workman lose the edge
from his adze, he knows that there will be a greater draught upon his
energies, or his work will be badly done. Michael Angelo, the elect of
the fine arts, understood so well the importance of his tools, that he
always made his own brushes with his own hands, and in this he
gives us an illustration of the God of grace, who with special care
fashions for himself all true ministers. It is true that the Lord, like
Quintin Matsys in the story of the Antwerp well-cover, can work with
the faultiest kind of instrumentality, as he does when he occasionally
makes very foolish preaching to be useful in conversion; and he can
even work without agents, as he does when he saves men without a
preacher at all, applying the word directly by his Holy Spirit; but we
cannot regard God's absolutely sovereign acts as a rule for our action.
He may, in his own absoluteness, do as pleases him best, but we
must act as his plainer dispensations instruct us; and one of the facts
which is clear enough is this, that the Lord usually adapts means to
ends, from which the plain lesson is, that we shall be likely to
accomplish most when we are in the best spiritual condition; or in
other words, we shall usually do our Lord's work best when our gifts
and graces are in good order, and we shall do worst when they are

most out of trim. This is a practical truth for our guidance, when the
Lord makes exceptions, they do but prove the rule.
We are, in a certain sense, our own tools, and therefore must keep
ourselves in order. If I want to preach the gospel, I can only use my
own voice; therefore I must train my vocal powers. I can only think
with my own brains, and feel with my own heart, and therefore I
must educate my intellectual and emotional faculties.
I can only ,weep and agonise for souls in my own renewed nature,
therefore must I watchfully maintain the tenderness which was in
Christ Jesus. It will be in vain for me to stock my library, or organise
societies, or project schemes, if I neglect the culture of myself; for
books, and agencies, and systems, are only remotely the instruments
of my holy calling; my own spirit, soul, and body, are my nearest
machinery for sacred service; my spiritual faculties, and my inner
life, are my battle axe and weapons of war. M'Cheyne, writing to a
ministerial friend, who was travelling with a view to perfecting
himself in the German tongue, used language identical with our
own:- " I know you will apply hard to German, but do not forget the
culture of the inner man-I mean of the heart. How diligently the
cavalry officer keeps his sabre clean and sharp; every stain he rubs
off with the greatest care. Remember you are God's sword, his
instrument- I trust, a chosen vessel unto him to bear his name. In
great measure, according to the purity and perfection of the
instrument, will be the success. It is not great talents God blesses so
much as likeness to Jesus. A holy minister is an awful weapon in the
hand of God."
For the herald of the gospel to be spiritually out of order in his own
proper person is, both to himself and to his work, a most serious
calamity; and yet, my brethren, how easily is such an evil produced,
and with what watchfulness must it be guarded against! Travelling
one day by express from Perth to Edinburgh, on a sudden we came to
a dead stop, because a very small screw in one of the engines--every
railway locomotive consisting virtually of two engines-had been

broken, and when we started again we were obliged to crawl along
with one piston-rod at work instead of two. Only a small screw was
gone, if that had been right the train would have rushed along its
iron road, but the absence of that insignificant piece of iron
disarranged the whole. A train is said to have been stopped on one of
the United States' railways by flies in the grease-boxes of the carriage
wheels. The analogy is perfect; a man in all other respects fitted to be
useful, may by some small defect be exceedingly hindered, or even
rendered utterly useless. Such a result is all the more grievous,
because it is associated with the gospel, which in the highest sense is
adapted to effect the grandest results. It is a terrible thing when the
healing balm loses its efficacy through the blunderer who
administers it. You all know the injurious effects frequently produced
upon water through flowing along leaden pipes; even so the gospel
itself, in flowing through men who are spiritually unhealthy, may be
debased until it grows injurious to their hearers. It is to be feared
that Calvinistic doctrine becomes most evil teaching when it is set
forth by men of ungodly lives, and exhibited as if it were a cloak for
licentiousness; and Arminianism, on the other hand, with its wide
sweep of the offer of mercy, may do most serious damage to the souls
of men, if the careless tone of the preacher leads his hearers to
believe that they can repent whenever they please; and that,
therefore, no urgency surrounds the gospel message. Moreover,
when a preacher is poor in grace, any lasting good which may be the
result of his ministry, will usually be feeble and utterly out of
proportion with what might have been expected. Much sowing will
be followed by little reaping; the interest upon the talents will be
inappreciably small. In two or three of the battles which were lost in
the late American war, the result is said to have been due to the bad
gunpowder which was served out by certain "shoddy" contractors to
the army, so that the due effect of a cannonade was not produced. So
it may be with us. We may miss our mark, lose our end and aim, and
waste our time, through not possessing true vital force within
ourselves, or not possessing it in such a degree that God could
consistently bless us. Beware of being "shoddy" preachers.

IT SHOULD BE ONE OF OUR FIRST CARES THAT WE
OURSELVES BE SAVED MEN.
That a teacher of the gospel should first be a partaker of it is a simple
truth, but at the same time a rule of the most weighty importance.
We are not among those who accept the apostolical succession of
young men simply because they assume it; if their college experience
has been rather vivacious than spiritual, if their honours have been
connected rather with athletic exercises than with labours for Christ,
we demand evidence of another kind than they are able to present to
us. No amount of fees paid to learned doctors, and no amount of
classics received in return, appear to us to be evidences of a call from
above. True and genuine piety is necessary as the first indispensable
requisite; whatever "call" a man may pretend to have, if he has not
been called to holiness, he certainly has not been called to the
ministry.
"First be trimmed thyself, and then adorn thy brother, "say the
rabbins. "The hand," saith Gregory, "that means to make another
clean, must not itself be dirty." If your salt be unsavoury how can you
season others? Conversion is a sine qua non in a minister. Ye
aspirants to our pulpits, "ye must be born again." Nor is the
possession of this first qualification a thing to be taken for granted by
any man, for there is very great possibility of our being mistaken as
to whether we are converted or not. Believe me, it is no child's play to
"make your calling and election sure." The world is full of
counterfeits, and swarms with panderers to carnal self-conceit, who
gather around a minister as vultures around a carcass. Our own
hearts are deceitful, so that truth lies not on the surface, but must be
drawn up from the deepest well. We must search ourselves very
anxiously and very thoroughly, lest by any means after having
preached to others we ourselves should be castaways.
How horrible to be a preacher of the gospel and yet to be
unconverted! Let each man here whisper to his own inmost soul,
"What a dreadful thing it will be for me if I should be ignorant of the

power of the truth which I am preparing to proclaim!" Unconverted
ministry involves the most unnatural relationships. A graceless
pastor is a blind man elected to a professorship of optics,
philosophising upon light and vision, discoursing upon and
distinguishing to others the nice shades and delicate blendings of the
prismatic colours, while he himself is absolutely in the dark! He is a
dumb man elevated to the chair of music; a deaf man fluent upon
symphonies and harmonies! He is a mole professing to educate
eaglets; a limpet elected to preside over angels. To such a
relationship one might apply the most absurd and grotesque
metaphors, except that the subject is too solemn. It is a dreadful
position for a man to stand in, for he has undertaken a work for
which he is totally, wholly, and altogether unqualified, but from the
responsibilities of which this unfitness will not screen him, because
he wilfully incurred them. Whatever his natural gifts, whatever his
mental powers may be, he is utterly out of court for spiritual work if
he has no spiritual life; and it is his duty to cease the ministerial
office till he has received this first and simplest of qualifications for
it.
Unconverted ministry must be equally dreadful in another respect. If
the man has no commission, what a very unhappy position for him
to occupy! What can he see in the experience of his people to give
him comfort? How must he feel when he hears the cries of penitents;
or listens to their anxious doubts and solemn fears? He must be
astonished to think that his words should be owned to that end! The
word of an unconverted man may be blessed to the conversion of
souls, since the Lord, while he disowns the man, will still honour his
own truth. How perplexed such a man must be when he is consulted
concerning the difficulties of mature Christians! In the pathway of
experience, in which his own regenerate hearers are led, he must feel
himself quite at a loss. How can he listen to their deathbed joys, or
join in their rapturous fellowships around the table of their Lord?
In many instances of young men put to a trade which they cannot
endure, they have run away to sea sooner than follow an irksome

business; but where shall that man flee who is apprenticed for life to
this holy calling, and yet is a total stranger to the power of godliness?
How can he daily bid men come to Christ, while he himself is a
stranger to his dying love? O sirs, surely this must be perpetual
slavery. Such a man must hate the sight of a pulpit as much as a
galley-slave hates the oar.
And how unserviceable such a man must be. He has to guide
travellers along a road which he has never trodden, to navigate a
vessel along a coast of which he knows none of the landmarks! He is
called to instruct others, being himself a fool. What can he be but a
cloud without rain, a tree with leaves only. As when the caravan in
the wilderness, all athirst and ready to die beneath the broiling sun,
comes to the long, desired well, and, horror of horrors! finds it
without a drop of water; so when souls thirsting, after God come to a
graceless ministry, they are ready to perish because the water of life
is not to be found. Better abolish pulpits than fill them with men who
have no experimental knowledge of what they teach.
Alas! the unregenerate pastor becomes terribly mischievous too, for
of all the causes which create infidelity, ungodly ministers must be
ranked among the first. I read the other day, that no phase of evil
presented so marvellous a power for destruction, as the unconverted
minister of a parish, with a £1200 organ, a choir of ungodly singers,
and an aristocratic congregation. It was the opinion of the writer,
that there could be no greater instrument for damnation out of hell
than that. People go to their place of worship and sit down
comfortably, and think they must be Christians, when all the time all
that their religion consists in, is listening to an orator, having their
ears tickled with music, and perhaps their eyes amused with graceful
action and fashionable manners; the whole being no better than what
they hear and see at the opera--not so good, perhaps, in point of
aesthetic beauty, and not an atom more spiritual, Thousands are
congratulating themselves, and even blessing God that they are
devout worshippers, when at the same time they are living in an
unregenerate Christless state, having the form of godliness, but

denying the power thereof, He who presides over a system which
aims at nothing higher than formalism, is far more a servant of the
devil than a minister of God.
A formal preacher is mischievous while he preserves his outward
equilibrium, but as he is without the preserving balance of godliness,
sooner or later he is almost sure to make a trip in his moral
character, and what a position is he in then! How is God
blasphemed, and the gospel abused!
Terrible is it to consider what a death must await such a man! and
what must be his after-condition! The prophet pictures the king of
Babylon going down to hell, and all the kings and princes whom he
had destroyed, and whose capitals he had laid waste, rising up from
their places in Pandemonium, and saluting the fallen tyrant with the
cutting sarcasm," Art thou become like unto us?" And cannot you
suppose a man who has been a minister, but who has lived without
Christ in his heart, going down to hell, and all the imprisoned spirits
who used to hear him, and all the ungodly of his parish rising up and
saying to him in bitter tones, "Art thou also become as we are?
Physician, didst thou not heal thyself? Art thou who claimed to be a
shining light cast down into the darkness for ever?" Oh! if one must
be lost, let it not be in this fashion! To be lost under the shadow of a
pulpit is dreadful, but how much more so to perish from the pulpit
itself:
There is an awful passage in John Bunyan's treatise, entitled "Sighs
from Hell," which full often rings in my ears: --"How many souls
have blind priests been the means of destroying by their ignorance?
Preaching that was no better for their souls than rats-bane to the
body, Many of them, it is to be feared, have whole towns to answer
for. Ah! friend, I tell thee, thou that hast taken in hand to preach to
the people, it may be thou hast taken in hand thou canst not tell
what. Will it not grieve thee to see thy whole parish come bellowing
after thee into hell? crying out, 'This we have to thank thee for, thou
wast afraid to tell us of our sins, lest we should not put meat fast

enough into thy mouth. O cursed wretch, who wast not content,
blind guide as thou wast, to fall into the ditch thyself, but hast also
led us thither with thee.'"
Richard Baxter, in his "Reformed Pastor," amid much other solemn
matter, writes as follows: "Take heed to yourselves lest you should be
void of that saving grace of God which you offer to others, and be
strangers to the effectual working of that gospel which you preach;
and lest, while you proclaim the necessity of a Saviour to the world,
your hearts should neglect him, and you should miss of an interest in
him and his saving benefits. Take heed to yourselves, lest you perish
while you call upon others to take heed of perishing, and lest you
famish yourselves while you prepare their food. Though there be a
promise of shilling as stars to those that turn many to righteousness
(Dan. xii. 3), this is but on supposition that they be first turned to it
themselves: such promises are made) caeteris paribus, et suppositis
supponendis. Their own sincerity in the faith is the condition of their
glory simply considered, though their great ministerial labours may
be a condition of the promise of their greater glory. Many men have
warned others that they come not to that place of torment, which yet
they hasted to themselves; many a preacher is now in hell, that hath
an hundred times called upon his hearers to use the utmost care and
diligence to escape it. Can any reasonable man imagine that God
should save men for offering salvation to others, while they refused it
themselves, and for telling others those truths which they themselves
neglected and abused? Many a tailor goes in rags that maketh costly
clothes for others; and many a cook scarce licks his fingers, when he
hath dressed for others the most costly dishes. Believe it, brethren,
God never saved any man for being a preacher, nor because he was
an able preacher; but because he was a justified, sanctified man, and
consequently faithful in his Master's work. Take heed, therefore, to
yourselves first, that you be that which you persuade others to be,
and believe that which you persuade them daily to believe, and have
heartily entertained that Christ and Spirit which you offer unto
others. He that bade you love your neighbours as yourselves, did

imply that you should love yourselves and not hate and destroy both
yourselves and them."
My brethren, let these weighty sentences have due effect upon you.
Surely there can be no need to add more; but let me pray you to
examine yourselves, and so make good use of what has been
addressed to you.
This first matter of true religion being settled, IT IS OF THE NEXT
IMPORTANCE TO THE MINISTER THAT HIS PIETY BE
VIGOROUS.
He is not to be content with being equal to the rank and file of
Christians, he must be a mature and advanced believer; for the
ministry of Christ has been truly called "the choicest of his choice,
the elect of his election, a church picked out of the church." If he
were called to an ordinary position, and to common work, common
grace might perhaps satisfy him, though even then it would be all
indolent satisfaction; but being elect to extraordinary labours, and
called to a place of unusual peril, he should be anxious to possess
that superior strength which alone is adequate to his station. His
pulse of vital godliness must beat strongly and regularly; his eye of
faith must be bright; his foot of resolution must be firm; his hand of
activity must be quick; his whole inner man must be in the highest
degree of sanity. It is said of the Egyptians that they chose their
priests from the most learned of their philosophers, and then they
esteemed their priests so highly, that they chose their kings from
them. We require to have for God's ministers the pick of all the
Christian host; such men indeed, that if the nation wanted kings they
could not do better than elevate them to the throne. Our weakestminded, most timid, most carnal, and most ill-balanced men are not
suitable candidates for the pulpit. There are some works which we
should never allot to the invalid or deformed- A man may not be
qualified for climbing lofty buildings, his brain may be too weak, and
elevated work might place him in great danger; by all means let him
keep on the ground and find useful occupation where a steady brain

is less important: there are brethren who have analogous spiritual
deficiencies, they cannot be called to service which is conspicuous
and elevated, because their heads are too weak. If they were
permitted a little success they would be intoxicated with vanity-a vice
all too common among ministers, and of all things the least
becoming in them, and the most certain to secure them a fall. Should
we as a nation be called to defend our hearths and homes, we should
not send out our boys and girls with swords and guns to meet the foe,
neither may the church send out every fluent novice or inexperienced
zealot to plead for the faith. The fear of the Lord must teach the
young man wisdom, or he is barred from the pastorate; the grace of
God must mature his Spirit, or he had better tarry till power be given
him from on high.
The highest moral character must be sedulously maintained. Many
are disqualified for office in the church who are well enough as
simple members. I hold very stern opinions with regard to Christian
men who have fallen into gross sin; I rejoice that they may be truly
converted, and may be with mingled hope and caution received into
the church; but I question, gravely question whether a man who has
grossly sinned should be very readily restored to the pulpit. As John
Angell James remarks, "When a preacher of righteousness has stood
in the way of sinners, he should never again open his lips in the great
congregation until his repentance is as notorious as his sin." Let
those who have been shorn by the sons of Ammon tarry at Jericho till
their beards be grown; this has often been used as a taunt to
beardless boys to whom it is evidently inapplicable, it is an accurate
enough metaphor for dishonoured and characterless men, let their
age be what it may. Alas! the beard of reputation once shorn is hard
to grow again. Open immorality, in most cases, however deep the
repentance, is a fatal sign that ministerial graces were never in the
man's character. Caesar's wife must be beyond suspicion, and there
must be no ugly rumours as to ministerial inconsistency in the past,
or the hope of usefulness will be slender. Into the church such fallen
ones are to be received as penitents, and into the ministry they may
be received if God puts them there; my doubt is not about that, but

as to whether God ever did place them there; and my belief is that we
should be very slow to help back to the pulpit men, who having been
once tried, have proved themselves to have too little grace to stand
the crucial test of ministerial life.
For some work we choose none but the strong; and when God calls
us to ministerial labour we should endeavour to get grace that we
may be strengthened into fitness for our position, and not be mere
novices carried away by the temptations of Satan, to the injury of the
church and our own ruin. We are to stand equipped with the whole
armour of God, ready for feats of valour not expected of others: to us
self-denial, self-forgetfulness, patience, perseverance, long suffering,
must be every-day virtues, and who is sufficient for these things? We
had need live very near to God, if we would approve ourselves in our
vocation.
Recollect, as ministers, that your whole life, your whole pastoral life
especially, will be affected by the vigour of your piety. If your zeal
grows dull, you will not pray well in the pulpit; you will pray worse in
the family, and worst in the study alone. When your soul becomes
lean, your hearers, without knowing how or why, will find that your
prayers in public have little savour for them; they will feel your
barrenness, perhaps, before you perceive it yourself. Your discourses
will next betray your declension.
You may utter as well-chosen words, and as fitly-ordered sentences,
as aforetime; but there will be a perceptible loss of spiritual force.
You will shake yourselves as at other times, even as Samson did, but
you will find that your great strength has departed. In your daily
communion with your people, they will not be slow to mark the allpervading decline of your graces. Sharp eyes will see the grey hairs
here and there long before you do. Let a man be afflicted with a
disease of the heart, and all evils are wrapped up in that onestomach, lungs, viscera, muscles, and nerves will all suffer; and so,
let a man have his heart weakened in spiritual things, and very soon
his entire life will feel the withering influence. Moreover, as the

result of your own decline, everyone of your hearers will suffer more
or less; the vigorous amongst them will overcome the depressing
tendency, but the weaker sort will be seriously damaged. It is with us
and our hearers as it is with watches and the public clock; if our
watch be wrong, very few will be misled by it but ourselves; but if the
Horse Guards or Greenwich Observatory should go amiss, half
London would lose its reckoning. So is it with the minister; he is the
parish-clock, many take their time from him, and if he be incorrect,
then they all go wrongly, more or less, and he is in a great measure
accountable for all the sin which he occasions. This we cannot endure
to think of, my brethren. It will not bear a moment's comfortable
consideration, and yet it must be looked at that we may guard
against it.
You must remember, too, that we have need of very vigorous piety,
because our danger is so much greater than that of others. Upon the
whole, no place is so assailed with temptation as the ministry.
Despite the popular idea that ours is a snug retreat from temptation,
it is no less true that our dangers are more numerous and more
insidious than those of ordinary Christians. Ours may be a vantageground for height, but that height is perilous, and to many the
ministry has proved a Tarpeian rock. If you ask what these
temptations are, time might fail us to particularise them; but among
them are both the coarser and the more refined; the coarser are such
temptations as self-indulgence at the table, enticements to which are
superabundant among a hospitable people; the temptations of the
flesh, which are incessant with young unmarried men set on high
among an admiring throng of young women: but enough of this, your
own observation will soon reveal to you a thousand snares, unless
indeed your eyes are blinded. There are more secret snares than
these, from which we call less easily escape; and of these the worst is
the temptation to ministerialism--the tendency to read our Bibles as
ministers, to pray as ministers, to get into doing the whole of our
religion as not ourselves personally, but only relatively, concerned in
it. To lose the personality of repentance and faith is a loss indeed.
"No man," says John Owen, "preaches his sermon well to others if he

doth not first preach it to his own heart." Brethren, it is eminently
hard to keep to this. Our office, instead of helping our piety, as some
assert, is through the evil of our natures turned into one of its most
serious hindrances; at least, I find it so. How one kicks and struggles
against officialism, and yet how easily doth it beset us, like a long
garment which twists around the racer's feet and impedes his
running! Beware, dear brethren, of this and all the other seductions
of your calling; and if you have done so until now, continue still to
watch till life's latest hour.
We have noted but one of the perils, but indeed they are legion. The
great enemy of souls takes care to leave no stone unturned for the
preacher's ruin. "Take heed to yourselves," says Baxter, "because the
tempter will make his first and sharpest onset upon you. If you will
be the leaders against him, he will spare you no further than God
restraineth him. He beareth you the greatest malice that are engaged
to do him the greatest mischief. As he hateth Christ more than any of
us, because he is the General of the field, and the 'Captain of our
salvation,' and doth more than all the world besides against the
kingdom of darkness; so doth he note the leaders under him more
than the common soldiers, on the like account, in their proportion.
He knows what a rout he may make among the rest, if the leaders fall
before their eyes. He hath long tried that way of fighting, 'neither
with small nor great,' comparatively, but these; and of 'smiting the
shepherds, that he may scatter the flock.' And so great has been his
success this way, that he will follow it on as far as he is able. Take
heed, therefore, brethren, for the enemy hath a special eye upon you.
You shall have his most subtle insinuations, and incessant
solicitations, and violent assaults. As wise and learned as you are,
take heed to yourselves lest he overwit you. The devil is a greater
scholar than you, and a nimbler disputant; he can 'transform himself
into an angel of light' to deceive. He will get within you and trip up
your heels before you are aware; he will play the juggler with you
undiscerned, and cheat you of your faith or innocency, and you shall
not know that you have lost it; nay, he will make you believe it is
multiplied or increased when it is lost. You shall see neither hook nor

line, much less the subtle angler himself, while he is offering you his
bait. And his baits shall be so fitted to your temper and disposition,
that he will be sure to find advantages within you, and make your
own principles and inclinations to betray you; and whenever he
ruineth you, he will make you the instrument of your own ruin. Oh,
what a conquest will he think he hath got, if he can make a minister
lazy and unfaithful; if he can tempt a minister into covetousness or
scandal! He will glory against the church, and say, 'These are your
holy preachers: you see what their preciseness is, and whither it will
bring them.' He will glory against Jesus Christ himself, and say,
'These are thy champions! I can make thy chiefest servants to abuse
thee; I can make the stewards of thy house unfaithful. ' If he did so
insult against God upon a false surmise, and tell him he could, make
Job to curse him to his face (Job i. 2), what would he do if he should
indeed prevail against us? And at last he will insult as much over you
that ever he could draw you to be false to your great trust, and to
blemish your holy profession, and to do him so much service that
was your enemy. O do not so far gratify Satan; do not make him so
much sport: suffer him not to use you as the Philistines did Samsonfirst to deprive you of your strength, and then to put out your eyes,
and so to make you the matter of his triumph and derision."
Once more. We must cultivate the highest degree of godliness
because our work imperatively requires it. The labour of the
Christian ministry is well performed in exact proportion to the
vigour of our renewed nature. Our work is only well done when it is
well with ourselves. As is the workman, such will the world be. To
face the enemies of truth, to defend the bulwarks of the faith, to rule
well in the house of God, to comfort all that mourn, to edify the
saints, to guide the perplexed, to bear with the froward, to win and
nurse souls-all these and a thousand other works beside are not for a
Feeble-mind or a Ready-to-halt, but are reserved for Great-heart
whom the Lord has made strong for himself. Seek then strength from
the Strong One, wisdom from the Wise One, in fact, all from the God
of all.

Thirdly, let the minister take care THAT HIS PERSONAL
CHARACTER AGREES IN ALL RESPECTS WITH HIS MINISTRY.
We have all heard the story of the man who preached so well and
lived so badly, that when he was in the pulpit everybody said he
ought never to come out again, and when he was out of it they all
declared he never ought to enter it again. From the imitation of such
a Janus may the Lord deliver us. May we never be priests of God at
the altar, and sons of Belial outside the tabernacle door; but on the
contrary, may we, as Nazianzen says of Basil, "thunder in our
doctrine, and lighten in our conversation." We do not trust those
persons who have two faces, nor will men believe in those whose
verbal and practical testimonies are contradictory. As actions,
according to the proverb, speak louder than words, so an ill life will
effectually drown the voice of the most eloquent ministry. After all,
our truest building must be performed with our hands; our
characters must be more persuasive than our speech. Here I would
not alone warn you of sins of commission, but of sins of omission.
Too many preachers forget to serve God when they are out of the
pulpit, their lives are negatively inconsistent. Abhor, dear brethren,
the thought of being clockwork ministers who are not alive by
abiding grace within, but are wound up by temporary influences;
men who are only ministers for the time being, under the stress of
the hour of ministering, but cease to be ministers when they descend
the pulpit stairs. True ministers are always ministers. Too many
preachers are like those sand-toys we buy for our children; you turn
the box upside down, and the little acrobat revolves and revolves till
the sand is all run down, and then he hangs motionless; so there are
some who persevere in the ministrations of truth as long as there is
an official necessity for their work, but after that, no pay, no
paternoster; no salary, no sermon.
It is a horrible thing to be an inconsistent minister. Our Lord is said
to have been like Moses, for this reason, that he was "a prophet
mighty in word and in deed." The man of God should imitate his
Master in this; he should be mighty both in the word of his doctrine

and in the deed of his example, and mightiest, if possible, in the
second. It is remarkable that the only church history we have is, "The
Acts of the apostles." The Holy Spirit has not preserved their
sermons. They were very good ones, better than we shall ever preach,
but still the Holy Spirit has only taken care of their "acts." We have
no books of the resolutions of the apostles; when we hold our
church-meetings we record our minutes and resolutions, but the
Holy Spirit only puts down the "acts." Our acts should be such as to
bear recording, for recorded they will be. We must live as under the
more immediate eye of God, and as in the blaze of the great allrevealing day.
Holiness in a minister is at once his chief necessity and his goodliest
ornament. Mere moral excellence is not enough, there must be the
higher virtue; a consistent character there must be, but this must be
anointed with the sacred consecrating oil, or that which makes us
most fragrant to God and man will be wanting. Old John Stoughton,
in his treatise entitled "The Preacher's Dignity and Duty," insists
upon the minister's holiness in sentences full of weight. "If Uzzah
must die but for touching the ark of God, and that to stay it when it
was like to fall; if the men of Beth-shemesh for looking into it; if the
very beasts that do but come near the holy mount be threatened;
then what manner of persons ought they to be who shall be admitted
to talk with God familiarly, to 'stand before him,' as the angels do,
and 'behold his face continually;' 'to bear the ark upon their
shoulders,' 'to bear his name before the Gentiles;' in a word, to be his
ambassadors? 'Holiness becometh thy house, O Lord;' and were it
not a ridiculous thing to imagine, that the vessels must be holy, the
vestures must be holy, all must be holy, but only he upon whose very
garments must be written 'holiness to the Lord,' might be unholy;
that the bells of the horses should have an inscription of holiness
upon them, in Zechariah, and the saints' bells, the bells of Aaron,
should be unhallowed? No, they must be 'burning and shining lights,'
or else their influence will dart some malignant quality; they must
'chew the cud and divide the hoof,' or else they are unclean; they
must' divide the word aright,' and walk uprightly in their life, and so

join life to learning. If holiness be wanting, the ambassadors
dishonour the country from whence they come, and the prince from
whom they come; and this dead Amasa, this dead doctrine not
quickened with a good life, lying in the way, stops the people of the
Lord, that they cannot go on cheerfully in their spiritual warfare."
The life of the preacher should be a magnet to draw men to Christ,
and it is sad indeed when it keeps them from him. Sanctity in
ministers is a loud call to sinners to repent, and when allied with holy
cheerfulness it becomes wondrously attractive. Jeremy Taylor in his
own rich language tell us, "Herod's doves could never have invited so
many strangers to their dove-cotes, if they had not been besmeared
with opobalsamum:
but, said Didymus; 'make your pigeons smell sweet, and they will
allure whole flocks;' and if your life be excellent, if your virtues be
like a precious ointment, you will soon invite your charges to run 'in
odorem unguentorum,' 'after your precious odours;' 'but you must be
excellent, not 'tanquam unus de populo,' but 'tanquam homo Dei;'
you must be a man of God, not after the common manner of men,
but 'after God's own heart;' and men will strive to be like you, if you
be like to God: but when you only stand at the door of virtue, for
nothing but to keep sin out, you will draw into the folds of Christ
none but such as fear drives in. 'Ad majorem Dei gloriam,' 'To do
what will most glorify God,' that is the line you must walk by: for to
do no more than all men needs must is servility, not so much as the
affection of sons; much less can you be fathers to the people, when
you go not so far as the sons of God: for a dark lantern, though there
be a weak brightness on one side, will scarce enlighten one, much
less will it conduct a multitude, or allure many followers by the
brightness of its flame."
Another equally admirable episcopal divine has well and pithily said,
"The star which led the wise men unto Christ, the pillar of fire which
led the children unto Canaan, did not only shine, but go before them.
Matt. ii. 9; Exod. xiii. 21. The voice of Jacob will do little good if the

hands be the hands of Esau. In the law, no person who had any
blemish was to offer the oblations of the Lord (Lev. xxi. 17-20); the
Lord thereby teaching us what graces ought to be in his ministers.
The priest was to have in his robes bells and pomegranates; the one a
figure of sound doctrine, and the other of a fruitful life. Exod. xxviii.
33, 34. The Lord will be sanctified in all those that draw near unto
him (Isa.lii. 11); for the sins of the priests make the people abhor the
offering of the Lord (1 Sam. ii. 17); their wicked lives do shame their
doctrine; Passionem Christi annunciant profitendo, male agendo
exhonorant, as St. Austin speaks: with their doctrine they build, and
with their lives they destroy. I conclude this point with that
wholesome passage of Hierom ad Nepotianum. Let not, saith he, thy
works shame thy doctrine, lest they who hear thee in the church
tacitly answer, Why doest thou not thyself what thou teachest to
others?
He is too delicate a teacher who persuadeth others to fast with a full
belly. A robber may accuse covetousness. Sacerdotis Christi os,
mens, manusque concordent; a minister of Christ should have his
tongue, and his heart, and his hand agree."
Very quaint also is the language of Thomas Playfere in his "Say Well,
Do Well." "There was a ridiculous actor in the city of Smyrna, who,
pronouncing O coelum! O heaven! Pointed with his finger towards
the ground; which when Polemo, the chiefest man in the place, saw,
he could abide to stay no longer, but went from the company in a
great chafe, saying 'This fool hath made a solecism with his hand, he
has spoken false Latin with his finger.' And such are they who teach
well and do ill; that however they have heaven at their tongue's end,
yet the earth is at their finger's end; such as do not only speak false
Latin with their tongue, but false divinity with their hands; such as
live not according to their preaching. But he that sits in the heaven
will laugh them to scorn, and hiss them off the stage, if they do not
mend their action."

Even in little things the minister should take care that his life is
consistent with his ministry. He should be especially careful never to
fall short of his word. This should be pushed even to scrupulosity; we
cannot be too careful; truth must not only be in us, but shine from
us. A celebrated doctor of divinity in London, who is now in heaven I
have no doubt-a very excellent and godly man-gave notice one
Sunday that he intended to visit all his people, and said, that in order
to be able to get round and visit them and their families once in the
year, he should take all the seatholders in order. A person well
known to me, who was then a poor man, was delighted with the idea
that the minister was coming to his house to see him, and about a
week or two before he conceived it would be his turn, his wife was
very careful to sweep the hearth and keep the house tidy, and the
man ran home early from work, hoping each night to find the doctor
there. This went on for a considerable time. He either forgot his
promise, or grew weary in performing it, or for some other reason
never went to this poor man's house, and the result was this, the man
lost confidence in all preachers, and said, "They care for the rich, but
they do not care for us who are poor." That man never settled down
to any one place of worship for many years, till at last he dropped
into Exeter Hall and remained my hearer for years till providence
removed him. It was no small task to make him believe that any
minister could be an honest man, and could impartially love both
rich and poor. Let us avoid doing such mischief, by being very
particular as to our word.
We must remember that we are very much looked at. Men hardly
have the impudence to break the law in the open sight of their
fellows, yet in such publicity we live and move. We are watched by a
thousand eagle eyes; let us so act that we shall never need to care if
all heaven, and earth, and hell, swelled the list of spectators. Our
public position is a great gain if we are enabled to exhibit the fruits of
the Spirit in our lives; take heed, brethren, that you throw not away
the advantage.

When we say to you, my dear brethren, take care of your life, we
mean be careful of even the minutiae of your character. Avoid little
debts, unpunctuality, gossipping, nicknaming, petty quarrels, and all
other of those little vices which fill the ointment with flies. The selfindulgences which have lowered the repute of many must not be
tolerated by us. The familiarities which have laid others under
suspicion, we must chastely avoid. The roughnesses which have
rendered some obnoxious, and the fopperies which have made others
contemptible, we must put away. We cannot afford to run great risks
through little things. Our care must be to act on the rule, "giving no
offence in anything, that the ministry be not blamed."
By this is not intended that we are to hold ourselves bound by every
whim or fashion of the society in which we move. As a general rule, I
hate the fashions of society, and detest conventionalities, and if I
conceived it best to put my foot through a law of etiquette, I should
feel gratified in having it to do. No, we are men, not slaves; and are
not to relinquish our manly freedom, to be the lacqueys of those who
affect gentility or boast refinement. Yet, brethren, anything that
verges upon the coarseness which is akin to sin, we must shun as we
would a viper. The rules of Chesterfield are ridiculous to us, but not
the example of Christ; and he was never coarse, low, discourteous, or
indelicate.
Even in your recreations, remember that you are ministers. When
you are off the parade you are still officers in the army of Christ, and
as such demean yourselves. But if the lesser things must be looked
after, how careful should you be in the great matters of morality,
honesty, and integrity! Here the minister must not fail. His private
life must ever keep good tune with his ministry, or his day will soon
set with him, and the sooner he retires the better, for his continuance
in his office will only dishonour the cause of God and ruin himself.
Brethren, the limits of a lecture are reached, and we must adjourn.