PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 14 Life and Comfort Depend on Mortification

Chapter 4

USEFULNESS OF MORTIFICATION 1. The Third Principle for Mortification: Life and Comfort Depend on It The last principle I shall insist on (omitting, first, the necessity of mortification unto life and, secondly, the certainty of life upon mortification) is, Principle III: That the life, vigor, and comfort of our spiritual life depend much on our mortification of sin.

Strength, comfort, power, and peace in our walking with God are the things of our desires. Were any of us asked seriously what it is that troubles us, we must refer it to one of these heads: either we lack strength and power, vigor and life, in our obedience, in our walking with God; or we lack peace, comfort, and consolation therein. Whatever it is that may befall a believer that does not belong to one of these two heads does not deserve to be mentioned in the days of our complaints. 33 Now, all these do much depend on a constant course of mortification, concerning which observe the following. a. They do not proceed from mortification as though they were necessarily tied to it. A man may be carried on in a constant course of mortification all his days, and yet perhaps never enjoy a good day of peace and consolation. So it was with Heman (Psa 88): his life was a life of perpetual mortification and walking with God, yet terrors and wounds were his portion all his days. But God singled out Heman, a choice friend, to make him an example to them that afterward should be in distress. Can you complain if it be with you like it was with Heman, that eminent servant of God? This shall be his praise to the end of the world. God makes it His prerogative to speak peace and consolation. “I will heal him,” says God; “I will…restore comforts unto him” (Isa 57:18). But how? By a direct work of the new creation: “I create the fruit of the lips,” says God (v. 19). The use of means for the obtaining of peace is ours; the bestowing of it is God’s prerogative. b. Mortification not a direct cause. Mortification is not one of the direct causes instituted by God to give us life, vigor, courage, and comfort in our souls. These things are the privileges of our adoption made known to our souls. “The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God” (Rom 8:16), giving us a new name and a white stone (Rev 2:17). Our sense and assurance of adoption and justification, then, are the direct causes (in the hand of the Spirit) of life, vigor, courage, and comfort. But this I say, 33

in the days of our complaints – during our life on this earth, when we experience many woes.

20

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

c. Life and comfort depend upon mortification. In our ordinary walking with God, and in an ordinary course of His dealing with us, the vigor and comfort of our spiritual lives depend much on our mortification. Mortification is not only a causa sine qua non 34 of life and comfort, but also effectively works in bringing them about. We shall now consider the reasons for this.

2. Why Life and Comfort Depend on Mortification a. Mortification alone keeps sin from depriving us Mortification alone keeps sin from depriving us of these blessings. Every unmortified sin will certainly do two things: a) It will weaken the soul and deprive it of its vigor. b) It will darken the soul and deprive it of its comfort and peace. 1). Unmortified sin weakens the soul and deprives it of its strength. Unmortified sin weakens the soul and deprives it of its strength. When David had for a while harbored an unmortified lust in his heart, it broke all his bones and left him no spiritual strength; hence he complained that he was sick, weak, wounded, and faint. “There is,” he says, “no soundness in my flesh” (Psa 38:3); “I am feeble and sore broken” (v. 8), “so that I am not able to look up” (Psa 40:12). An unmortified lust will drink up the spirit and all the vigor of the soul, and weaken it for all duties. For, 1st. Unmortified sin unsettles the heart itself by entangling its affections. It diverts the heart from the spiritual disposition that is required for vigorous communion with God; it lays hold on the affections, rendering its object beloved and desirable, and so expelling the love of the Father (1Jo 2:15; 3:17); so that the soul cannot say uprightly and truly to God, “Thou art my portion” (Psa 119:57), having something else that it loves instead. Fear, desire, and hope, which are the choice affections of the soul and should be full of God, will be one way or other entangled with the unmortified sin. 2nd. Unmortified sin fills the thoughts with schemes about it. Thoughts are the great purveyors 35 of the soul to bring in provision to satisfy its affections; and if sin remains unmortified in the heart, those thoughts must ever and anon be making “provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof ” (Rom 13:14). They must glaze, adorn, and dress the objects of the flesh, and bring them home to give satisfaction. They are able to do this beyond all expression in the service of a defiled imagination. 3rd. Unmortified sin breaks out and actually hinders duty. The ambitious man must be studying, and the worldling must be working or contriving, and the sensual, vain person providing himself for vanity, when they should be engaged in the worship of God. Were it my present business to set forth the breaches, ruin, weakness, and desolations that one unmortified lust will bring upon a soul, this discourse must be extended much beyond my intention. 36 34

causa sine qua non – Latin = indispensable or necessary condition. purveyors – persons who supply provisions; therefore, used here figuratively to illustrate thoughts making provision for the fulfilment of a person’s desires. 36 Owen wrote the related works Indwelling Sin and Temptation. See also Free Grace Broadcasters 160, Temptation; 209, Secret Sins, and 240, The Sinfulness of Sin; available from CHAPEL LIBRARY. 35

4. Usefulness of Mortification

21

2). As sin weakens the soul, so it darkens the soul. As sin weakens the soul, so it darkens the soul. It is a cloud, a thick cloud, that spreads itself over the face of the soul and intercepts all the beams of God’s love and favor. It takes away all sense of the privilege of our adoption. And if the soul begins to gather up thoughts of consolation, sin quickly scatters them—of which I will say more later. Now, in this regard the vigor and power of our spiritual life depends on our mortification. It is the only means of the removal of the unmortified sin that will allow us neither vigor nor power. Men that are sick and wounded under the power of lust make many applications for help. They cry to God when the perplexity of their thoughts overwhelms them, but are not delivered. In vain do they use many remedies; they “shall not be healed” (Eze 47:11). So, “Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound” (Hos 5:13), and attempted various remedies. Nothing will do until they come to “acknowledge their offence” (5:15). Men may see their sickness and wounds, but yet if they make not due applications, their cure will not be effected.

b. Mortification prunes all the graces of God Mortification prunes all the graces of God and makes room for them to grow in our hearts. The life and vigor of our spiritual lives consists in the vigor and flourishing of the plants of grace in our hearts. Now, as you may see in a garden, let there be a precious herb planted, but let the ground be untilled and weeds grow about it. Perhaps it will live still, but be a poor, withering, unuseful thing. You must look and search for it, and sometimes can scarce find it; and when you do, you can scarce know it whether it is the plant you look for or not—and suppose it is, you can make no use of it at all. But let another of the same kind be set in the ground, naturally as barren and bad as the other; let it be well weeded, and everything that is noxious and hurtful removed from it. It flourishes and thrives. You may see it at your first look into the garden, and have it for your use when you please. So it is with the graces of the Spirit that are planted in our hearts. It is true that they are still there; they abide in a heart where there is some neglect of mortification. But they are ready to die; they are withering and decaying (Rev 3:2). The heart is like the sluggard’s field, so overgrown with weeds that you can scarce see the good corn. Such a man may search for faith, love, and zeal, and scarce be able to find any. And if he does discover that these graces are there yet alive and sincere, yet they are so weak, so clogged with lusts, that they are of very little use. They remain indeed, but are ready to die. But now let the heart be cleansed by mortification, the weeds of lust constantly and daily rooted up (as they spring daily, nature being their proper soil). Let room be made for grace to thrive and flourish. How will every grace act its part, and be ready for every use and purpose!

c. Our peace As to our peace, as there is nothing that has any evidence of sincerity without mortification, so I know nothing that has such an evidence of sincerity in it as there is in mortification— which is no small foundation of our peace. Mortification is the soul’s vigorous opposition to self; in such opposition sincerity is most evident.
