PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 14
The Glory of Christ in His Condescension

---

The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 4. The Glory of Christ in His Condescension.

sun. So is it with all that spend their thoughts about the objects of their sinful pleasures, – refusing to look up after one view of this
glory of Christ.
Some keep their thoughts in continual exercise about the things of this world, as unto the advantages and emoluments which they
expect from them. Hereby are they transformed into the image of the world, becoming earthly, carnal, and vain. Is it because there is
no God in Israel that these applications are made unto the idol of Ekron? That there is no glory, no desirableness in Christ for men to
inquire after, and fix their minds upon? O the blindness, the darkness, the folly of poor sinners! Whom do they despise? and for what?
Some, of more refined parts and notional minds, do arise unto a sedulous meditation on the works of creation and providence. Hence
many excellent discourses on that subject, adorned with eloquence, are published among us? And a work this is worthy of our nature,
and suited unto our rational capacities; yea, the first end of our natural endowment with them. But in all these things, there is no
glory in comparison of what is proposed to us in the mysterious constitution of the person of Christ. The sun has no glory, the moon
and stars no beauty, the order and influence of the heavenly bodies have no excellency, in comparison of it.
This is that which the Psalmist designs to declare, Pa 8, “0 LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set
thy glory above the heavens. When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou hast
ordained; what is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him? For thou hast made him a little
lower than the angels and hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy hands;
thou hast put all things under his feet.”
He is engaged in a contemplation of the glory of God in his works; and he concludes that the fabric of heaven, with the moon and
stars therein (for it was his meditation by night, when he beheld them), was exceeding glorious, and greatly to be admired. This casts
his thoughts on the poor, weak, infirm nature of man, which seems as nothing in comparison of those glories above; but immediately
hereon he falls into an admiration of the wisdom, goodness, and love of God, exalting that nature incomparably above all the works of
creation in the person of Jesus Christ; as the apostle expounds this place, Heb. 2: 5, 6.
This, therefore, is the highest, the best, the most useful object of our thoughts and affections. He who has had a real view of this glory,
though he know himself to be a poor, sinful, dying worm of the earth, yet would he not be an angel in heaven, if thereby he should
lose the sight of it; for this is the centre wherein all the lines of the manifestation of the divine glory do meet and rest.
Look unto the things of this world, – wives, children, possessions, estates, power, friends, and honour; how amiable are they! how
desirable unto the thoughts of the most of men! But he who has obtained a view of the glory of Christ, will, in the midst of them all,
say, “Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth that I desire besides thee,” Ps. 73: 25; “For who in the heaven can
be compared unto the Lord? who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?” Ps. 89: 6.
He himself, out of his infinite love and ineffable condescension, upon the sight and view of his church, and his own graces in her,
wherewith she is adorned, does say, “Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast ravished my heart with one of
thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck,” Cant. 4: 9. How much more ought a believing soul, upon a view of the glory of Christ, in
whom it pleased the Father that all fulness should dwell, to say, Thou hast ravished my heart, taken it away from me! “O thou whom
my soul loveth,” one glance of thy glorious beauty upon me has quite overcome me, – hath left no heart in me unto things here
below! If it be not thus with us frequently, – if we value not this object of our minds and affections, – if we are not diligent in looking
up unto him to behold his glory, – it is because we are carnal, and not in any good measure partakers of the promise, that “our eyes
shall see the King in his beauty.”
2. Our second direction unto the same end is, that we diligently study the Scripture, and the revelations that are made of this glory of
Christ therein. To behold it, is not a work of fancy or imagination; it is not conversing with an image framed by the art of men
without, or that of our own fancy within, but of faith exercised on divine revelations. This direction he gives us himself, John 5: 39,
“Search the Scriptures; for they are they which testify of me.” The way whereby this is done is fully set before us in the example of the
holy prophets under the Old Testament, 1 Peter 1: ll-13.
This principle is always to be retained in our minds in reading of the Scripture, – namely, that the revelation and doctrine of the
person of Christ and his office, is the foundation whereon all other instructions of the prophets and apostles for the edification of the
church are built, and whereinto they are resolved; as is declared, Eph. 2: 20-22. So our Lord Jesus Christ himself at large makes it
manifest, Luke 24: 26, 27, 45, 46. Lay aside the consideration hereof, and the Scriptures are no such thing as they pretend unto, –
namely, a revelation of the glory of God in the salvation of the church; nor are those of the Old Testament so at this day unto the
Jews, who own not this principle, 2 Cor. 3: 13-16. There are, therefore, such revelations of the person and glory of Christ treasured up
in the Scripture, from the beginning unto the end of it, as may exercise the faith and contemplation of believers in this world, and shall
never, during this life, be fully discovered or understood; and in divine meditations of these revelations does much of the life of faith
consist.
There are three ways whereby the glory of Christ is represented unto us in the Scripture. First, By direct descriptions of his glorious
person and incarnation. See, among other places, Gen. 3: 15; Ps. 2: 7-9, 45: 2-6, 68: 17, 18, 110; Isa. 6: 1-4, 9: 6; Zech. 3: 8; John 1: 13; Phil. 2: 6-8; Heb. 1: 1-3, 2: 14-16; Rev. 1: 17, 18. Secondly, By prophecies, promises, and express instructions concerning him, all
leading unto the contemplation of his glory, which are innumerable. Thirdly, By the sacred institutions of divine worship under the
Old Testament: for the end of them all was to represent unto the church the glory of Christ in the discharge of his office; as we shall
see afterward.
We may take notice of an instance in one kind under the Old Testament, and of one and another under the New.
His personal appearances under the Old Testament carried in them a demonstration of his glory. Such was that in the vision which
Isaiah had, “when he saw his glory, and spake of him,” chap. 6: 1, 2, “I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his
train filled the temple. Above it stood the seraphim,” &c. It was a representation of the glory of the divine presence of Christ filling his
human nature, the temple of his body, with a train of all-glorious graces. And if this typical representation of it was so glorious, as that
the seraphim were not able steadfastly to behold it, but “covered their faces” upon its appearance, verse 2, how exceeding glorious is it
in itself, as it is openly revealed in the Gospel! Of the same nature are the immediate testimonies given unto him from heaven in the

New Testament. So the apostle tells us, “he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him
from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased,” 2 Peter 1: 17. The apostle intends the time of his
transfiguration in the mount; for so he adds, verse 18, “And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in
the holy mount.” Howbeit, at sundry other times he had the same testimony, or to the same purpose, from God, even the Father, in
heaven. Herein God gave him honour and glory, which all those that believe in him should behold and admire; not only those who
heard this testimony with their bodily ears, but all unto whom it is testified in the Scripture, are obliged to look after, and contemplate
on, the glory of Christ, as thus revealed and proposed. From the throne of his excellency, by audible voices, by visible signs, by the
opening of the heavens above, by the descent of the Holy Spirit upon him, God testified unto him as his eternal Son, and gave him
therein honour and glory. The thoughts of this divine testimony, and the glory of Christ therein, has often filled the hearts of some
with Joy and delight.
This, therefore, in reading and studying the holy Scripture, we ought with all diligence to search and attend unto, as did the prophets
of old (1 Peter 1: 11, 12), if we intend by them to be made “wise unto salvation.” We should herein be as the merchant-man that seeks
for pearls; he seeks for all sorts of them, but when he has found one of “great price,” he parts with all to make it his own, Matt. 13: 46,
46. The Scripture is the field, the place, the mine where we search and dig for pearls. See Prov. 2: 1-6. Every sacred truth that is made
effectual unto the good of our souls, is a pearl whereby we are enriched; but when we meet with, when we fall upon this pearl of price,
the glory of Christ, – this is that which the soul of a believer cleaves unto with joy. Then do we find food for souls in the word of truth,
then do we taste how gracious the Lord is therein, then is the Scripture full of refreshment unto us as a spring of living water, – when
we are taken into blessed views of the glory of Christ therein. And we are in the best frame of duty, when the principal motive in our
minds to contend earnestly for retaining the possession of the Scripture against all that would deprive us of it, or discourage us from a
daily diligent search into it, is this, – that they would take from us the only glass wherein we may behold the glory of Christ. This is
the glory of the Scripture, that it is the great, yea, the only, outward means of representing unto us the glory of Christ; and he is the
sun in the firmament of it, which only has light in itself, and communicates it unto all other things besides.
3. Another direction unto this same end is, that having attained the light of the knowledge of the glory of Christ from the Scripture, or
by the dispensation of the truth in the preaching of the gospel, we would esteem it our duty frequently to meditate thereon.
Want hereof is that fundamental mistake which keeps many among us so low in their grace, so regardless of their privileges. They
hear of these things, they assent unto their truth, at least they do not gainsay them; but they never solemnly meditate upon them.
This they esteem a world that is above them, or are ignorant totally of it, or esteem themselves not much concerned in it, or dislike it
as fanaticism. For it is that which no considerations can engage a canal mind to delight in. The mind must be spiritual and holy, freed
from earthly affections and encumbrances, raised above things here below, that can in a due manner meditate on the glory of Christ.
Therefore are the most strangers unto this duty, because they will not be at the trouble and charge of that mortification of earthly
affections, – that extirpation of sensual inclinations, – that retirement from the occasions of life, which are required whereunto. See
the treatise on Spiritual-mindedness It is to be feared that there are some who profess religion with an appearance of strictness, who
never separate themselves from all other occasions, to meditate on Christ and his glory; and yet, with a strange inconsistency of
apprehensions, they will profess that they desire nothing more than to behold his glory in heaven for ever. But it is evident, even in the
light of reason, that these things are irreconcilable. It is impossible that he who never meditates with delight on the glory of Christ
here in this world, who labours not to behold it by faith as it is revealed in the Scripture, should ever have any real gracious desire to
behold it in heaven. They may love and desire the fruition of their own imaginations; – they cannot do so of the glory of Christ,
whereof they are ignorant, and wherewith they are unacquainted. It is, therefore, to be lamented that men can find time for, and
have inclinations to think and meditate on, other things, it may be earthly and vain; but have neither heart, nor inclination, nor
leisure, to meditate on this glorious object. What is the faith and love which such men profess? How will they find themselves deceived
in the issue! 4. Let your occasional thoughts of Christ be many, and multiplied every day. He is not far from us; we may make a
speedy address unto him at any time. So the apostle informs us, Rom. 10: 6-8, “Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into heaven?
(that is, to bring Christ down from above;) or, Who shall descend into the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead.)” For
“the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart.” The things that Christ did were done at a distance from us, and they are
long since past. But, saith the apostle, “The word” of the Gospel wherein these things are revealed, and whereby an application is made
of them unto our souls, is nigh unto us, even in our hearts; that is, if we are true believers, and have mixed the word with faith, – and
so it exhibiteth Christ and all the benefits of his mediation unto us. If, therefore, this word is in our hearts, Christ is nigh unto us. If we
turn at any time into ourselves to converse with the word that abideth in us, there we shall find him ready to receive us into
communion with himself; that is, in the light of the knowledge of Christ which we have by the word, we may have sudden, occasional
thoughts of him continually: and where our minds and affections are so filled with other things that we are not ready for converse
with him who is thus nigh unto us by the word, we are spiritually indisposed.
So, to manifest how nigh he is unto us, it is said that “he stands at the door, and knocks,” Rev. 3: 20, in the continual tender that he
makes of himself and his grace unto our souls. For he is always accompanied with the glorious train of his graces; and if they are not
received, he himself is not so. It is to no purpose to boast of Christ, if we have not an evidence of his graces in our hearts and lives. But
unto whom he is the hope of future glory, unto them he is the life of present grace.
Sometimes it may be that He is withdrawn from us, so as that we cannot hear his voice, nor behold his countenance, nor obtain any
sense of his love, though we seek him with diligence. In this state, all our thoughts and meditations concerning him will be barren and
fruitless, bringing in no spiritual refreshment into our souls. And if we learn to be content with such lifeless, unaffecting thoughts of
him as bring in no experience of his love, nor give us a real view of the glory of his person, we shall wither away as unto all the power
of religion.
What is our duty in this case is so fully expressed by the spouse in the Canticles, as represents it plainly unto the minds of believers,
who have any experience of these things, chap. 3: 1-4, “By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I
found him not. I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I
sought him, but I found him not. The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw ye him whom my soul
loveth? It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would not let him go.” The
like account she gives of herself, and of her behaviour on the like occasion, chap. 5: 2-8.

This is the substance of what by this example we are instructed unto. The Lord Christ is pleased sometimes to withdraw himself from
the spiritual experience of believers; as to any refreshing sense of his love, or the fresh communications of consolatory graces. Those
who never had experience of any such thing, who never had any refreshing communion with him, cannot be sensible of his absence;
– they never were so of his presence. But those whom he has visited, – to whom he has given of his loves, – with whom he has made
his abode, – whom he has refreshed, relieved, and comforted, – in whom he has lived in the power of his grace, – they know what it
is to be forsaken by him, though but for a moment. And their trouble is increased, when they seek him with diligence in the wonted
ways of obtaining his presence, and cannot find him. Our duty, in this case, is to persevere in our inquiries after him, in prayer,
meditation, mourning, reading and hearing of the Word, in all ordinances of divine worship, private and public, in diligent obedience,
– until we find him, or he return unto us, as in former days.
I t were well if all churches and professors now would manifest the same diligence herein as did the church of old in this example.
Many of them, if they are not hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, cannot but be sensible that the Lord Christ is variously withdrawn
from them, if ever they had experience of the power of his presence. Y et are the generality of them far from the frame of heart here
described in the spouse; for they are slothful, careless, negligent, and stir not up themselves to inquire after him, or his return unto
their souls. So was it with Laodicea of old, so was it with Sardis, and so it is to be feared that it is with many at present. But to return.
Generally, Christ is nigh unto believers, and of a ready access; and the principal acting of the life of faith consist in the frequency of
our thoughts concerning him; for hereby Christ liveth in us, as he is said to do, Gal. 2: 20. This we cannot do, unless we have frequent
thoughts of him and converse with him. It is often said among men, that one lives in another; this cannot be but where the affections
of one are so engaged unto another, that night and day he thinks of him, and is thereby, as it were, present with him. So ought it to be
between Christ and believers. He dwells in them by faith; but the acting of this life in them (as wherever life is, it will be in act and
exercise) are proportionable unto their thoughts of him, and delight in him.
I f, therefore, we would behold the glory of Christ, the present direction is, that on all occasions, and frequently when there are no
occasions for it by the performance of other duties, we would abound in thoughts of him and his glory. I intend not at present fixed
and stated meditations, which were spoken unto before; but such thoughts as are more transient, according as our opportunities are.
And a great rebuke it ought to be unto us, when Christ has at any time in a day been long out of our minds. The spouse affirms that,
ere she was aware, her soul made her as the chariots of Ammi-nadib, Cant. 6: 12. It so fell out, that when she had no thoughts, no
design or purpose, for attendance on communion with Christ, that she was surprised into a readiness and willingness unto it. So it will
be with them that love him in sincerity. Their own souls, without previous designs or outward occasions, will frequently engage them
in holy thoughts of him; which is the most eminent character of a truly spiritual Christian.
5. The next direction is, that all our thoughts concerning Christ and his glory should be accompanied with admiration, adoration, and
thanksgiving. For this is such an object of our thoughts and affections as, in this life, we can never fully comprehend, – an ocean
whose depths we cannot look into. If we are spiritually renewed, all the faculties of our souls are enabled by grace to exert their
respective powers towards this glorious object. This must be done in various duties, by the exercise of various graces, as they are to be
acted by the distinct powers of the faculties of our minds. This is that which is intended where we are commanded “to love the Lord
with all our souls, with all our minds, with all our strength” All the distinct powers of our souls are to be acted by distinct graces and
duties in cleaving unto God by love. In heaven, when we are come to our centre, that state of rest and blessedness which our nature is
ultimately capable of, nothing but one infinite, invariable object of our minds and affections, received by vision, can render that state
uninterrupted and unchangeable. But whilst we are here we know or see but in part, and we must also act our faith and love on part
of that glory, which is not at once entirely proposed unto us, and which as yet we cannot comprehend. Wherefore we must act various
graces in great variety about it; – some at one time, some at another, according unto the powers of all our renewed faculties. Of this
sort are those mentioned of adoration, admiration, and thanksgiving; which are those acts of our minds wherein all others do issue
when the object is incomprehensible. For unto them we are enabled by grace.
One end of his illustrious coming unto the judgement of the last day is, that he may be “admired in all them that believe,” 2 Thess. 1:
10. Even believers themselves shall be filled with an overwhelming admiration upon his glorious appearance. Or if the meaning be,
not that he shall be admired by them, but admired in them, because of the mighty works of his grace and power in their redemption,
sanctification, resurrection, and glory, it is to the same purpose, – he “comes to be admired.” And, according to the prospect which we
have of that glory ought our admiration to be.
And this admiration will issue in adoration and thanksgiving; whereof we have an eminent instance and example in the whole church
of the redeemed, Rev. 5: 9-14, “They sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for
thou wast slain, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and hast made
us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth. And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about
the throne, and of the living creatures, and of the elders: and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands; saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and
strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such
as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon
the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.”
The design of this Discourse is no more, but that when by faith we have attained a view of the glory of Christ, in our contemplations
on his person, we should not pass it over as a notion of truth which we assent unto, – namely, that he is thus glorious in himself, –
but endeavour to affect our hearts with it, as that wherein our own principal interest does lie; wherein it will be effectual unto the
transformation of our souls into his image.
But some, it may be, will say, at least I fear some may truly say, that these things do not belong unto them; they do not find that ever
they had any benefit by them: they hope to be saved as well as others by the mediation of Christ; but as to this beholding of his glory
by constant meditation and acting of faith therein, they know nothing of it, nor are concerned in it. The doctrine which they are
taught out of the Scripture concerning the person of Christ, they give their assent unto; but his glory they hope they shall see in
another world; – here they never yet inquired after it.
So it will be. It is well if these things be not only neglected, because the minds of men are carnal, and cannot discern spiritual things,

but also despised, because they have an enmity unto them. It is not for all to walk in these retired paths; – not for them who are
negligent and slothful whose minds are earthly and carnal. Nor can they herein sit at the feet of Christ with Mary when she chose the
better part, who, like Martha, are cumbered about many things here in this world. Those whose principal design is to add unto their
present enjoyments (in the midst of the prosecution whereof they are commonly taken from them, so as that their thoughts do perish,
because not accomplished) will never understand these things. Much less will they do so, whose work it is to make provision for the
flesh, to fulfil it in the lusts thereof.
They must make it their design to be heavenly-minded who will find a relish in these things. Those who are strangers unto holy
meditation in general will be strangers unto this mystery in a peculiar manner.
Some men can think of the world, of their relations, and the manifold occasions of life; but as unto the things that are above, and
within the veil, they are not concerned in them.
With some it is otherwise. They profess their desire to behold the glory of Christ by faith; but they find it, as they complain, too high
and difficult for them. They are at a loss in their minds, and even overwhelmed, when they begin to view his glory. They are like the
disciples who saw him in his transfiguration; – they were filled with amazement, and knew not what to say, or said they knew not
what. And I do acknowledge, that the weakness of our minds in the comprehension of this eternal glory of Christ, and their instability
in meditations thereon, whence we cannot steadfastly look on it or behold it, gives us an afflicting, abasing consideration of our
present state and condition. And I shall say no more unto this case but this alone: When faith can no longer hold open the eyes of our
understandings unto the beholding the Sun of Righteousness shining in his beauty, nor exercise orderly thoughts about this
incomprehensible object, it will retake itself unto that holy admiration which we have spoken unto; and therein it will put itself forth
in pure acts of love and complacency.

The Glory of Christ in his Susception of the Office of a Mediator – First in his
Condescension.
The things whereof we have thus far discoursed, relating immediately unto the person of Christ in itself, may seem to have
somewhat of difficulty in them unto such whose minds are not duly exercised in the contemplation of heavenly things. Unto others
they are evident in their own experience, and instructive unto them that are willing to learn. That which remains will be yet more
plain unto the understanding and capacity of the meanest believer. And this is, the glory of Christ in his office of mediator, and the
discharge thereof.
In our beholding of the glory of Christ herein does the exercise of faith in this life principally consist; so the apostle declares it, Phil. 3:
8, 10, “Y ea doubtless, and I count all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: that I may know him,
and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his death”. This therefore, we
must treat of somewhat more at large.
“There is one God,” saith the apostle, “and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,” 1 Tim. 2: 5. In that great
difference between God and man occasioned by our sin and apostasy from him, which of itself could issue in nothing but the utter
ruin of the whole race of mankind, there was none in heaven or earth, in their original nature and operations, who was meet or able
to make up righteous peace between them. Y et must this be done by a mediator, or cease for ever.
This mediator could not be God himself absolutely considered; for “a mediator is not of one, but God is one,” Gal. 3: 20. Whatever
God might do herein in a way of sovereign grace, yet he could not do it in the way of mediation; which yet was necessary unto his
own glory, as we have at large discoursed elsewhere.
And as for creatures, there was none in heaven or earth that was meet to undertake this office. For “if one man sin against another,
the judge shall judge him; but if a man sin against the LORD, who shall entreat for him?” 1 Sam. 2: 25. There is not “any days-man
betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both,” Job 9:33.
In this state of things the Lord Christ, as the Son of God, said, “Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. Sacrifice and burnt-offerings thou
wouldest not, but a body hast thou prepared me; and, lo, I come to do thy will,” Heb. 10: 5, 9. By the assumption of our nature into
union with himself, in his own divine person he became every way meet for the discharge of this office, and undertakes it accordingly.
That which we inquire after at present, is, the glory of Christ herein, and how we may behold that glory. And there are three things
wherein we may take a prospect of it.
1. In his susception of this office.
2. In his discharge of it.
3. In the event and consequence thereof, or what ensued thereon.
In the susception of this office we may behold the glory of Christ, – I. In his condescension; II. In his love.
I. We may behold this glory in his infinite condescension to take this office on him, and our nature to be his own unto that end. It did
not befall him by lot or chance; – it was not imposed on him against his will; – it belonged not unto him by any necessity of nature or
condition, he stood not in need of it; – it was no addition unto him; but of his own mind and accord he graciously condescended unto
the susception and discharge of it.
So the apostle expresseth it, Phil. 2: 5-8, “Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus: who, being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross.”

It was the mind that was in Jesus Christ which is proposed unto our consideration and imitation, – what he was inclined and disposed
unto from himself and his own mind alone. And that in general which is ascribed unto him is “kenosis”, exinanition, or self-emptying;
he emptied himself. This the ancient church called his “sungkatabasis”, as we do his condescension; an act of which kind in God is
called the “humbling of himself,” Ps. 113: 6.
Wherefore, the susception of our nature for the discharge of the office of mediation therein was an infinite condescension in the Son of
God, wherein he is exceedingly glorious in the eyes of believers.
And I shall do these three things: – 1. Show in general the greatness of his condescension; 2. Declare the especial nature of it; and, 3.
Take what view we are able of the glory of Christ therein.
1. Such is the transcendent excellency of the divine nature, that it is said of God that he “dwelleth on high,” and “humbleth himself to
behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth,” Ps. 113: 5, 6. He condescends from the prerogative of his excellency to behold,
to look upon, to take notice of, the most glorious things in heaven above, and the greatest things in the earth below. All his respect
unto the creatures, the most glorious of them, is an act of infinite condescension. And it is so on two accounts.
(1.) Because of the infinite distance that is between his essence, nature, or being, and that of the creatures. Hence all nations before
him “are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of the balance;” yea, that they “are as nothing, that they are
counted unto him less than nothing, and vanity.” All being is essentially in him, and in comparison thereunto all other things are as
nothing. And there are no measures, there is no proportion between infinite being and nothing, – nothing that should induce a regard
from the one unto the other. Wherefore, the infinite, essential greatness of the nature of God, with his infinite distance from the
nature of all creatures thereby, causeth all his dealings with them to be in the way of condescension or humbling himself. So it is
expressed, Isa. 57: 15, “Thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.” He is so the high
and lofty one, and so inhabiteth eternity, or existeth in his own eternal being, that it is an act of mere grace in him to take notice of
things below; and therefore he does it in an especial manner of those whom the world does most despise.
(2.) It ariseth from his infinite self-sufficiency unto all the acts and ends of his own eternal blessedness. What we have a regard unto,
what we respect and desire, it is that it may add unto our satisfaction. So it is, so it must be, with every creature; no creature is selfsufficient unto its own blessedness. The human nature of Christ himself in heaven is not so; it lives in God, and God in it, in a full
dependence on God, and in receiving blessed and glorious communications from him. No rational creature, angel or man, can do,
think, act any thing, but it is all to add to their perfection and satisfaction; – they are not self-sufficient. God alone wants nothing,
stands in need of nothing; nothing can be added unto him, seeing he “giveth unto all life, and breath, and all things,” Acts 17: 25. The
whole creation, in all its excellency, cannot contribute one mite unto the satisfaction or blessedness of God. He has it all in infinite
perfection from himself and in his own nature. Our goodness extends not unto him. A man cannot profit God, as he may profit his
neighbour. “If thou sinnest, what does thou against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him?” God
loseth nothing of his own self-sufficiency and blessedness therein by all this. And “if thou be righteous, what givest thou him? or what
receiveth he of thine hand?” Job 35: 6, 7. And from hence also it follows that all God’s concernment in the creation is by an act of
condescension.
How glorious, then, is the condescension of the Son of God in his susception of the office of mediation! For if such be the perfection of
the divine nature, and its distance so absolutely infinite from the whole creation, – and if such be his self-sufficiency unto his own
eternal blessedness, as that nothing can be taken from him, nothing added unto him, so that every regard in him unto any of the
creatures is an act of self-humiliation and condescension from the prerogative of his being and state, – what heart can conceive, what
tongue can express, the glory of that condescension in the Son of God, whereby he took our nature upon him, took it to be his own, in
order unto a discharge of the of tics of mediation on our behalf? 2. But, that we may the better behold the glory of Christ herein, we
may briefly consider the especial nature of this condescension, and wherein it does consist.
But whereas not only the denial, but misapprehensions hereof, have pestered the church of God in all ages, we must, in the first place,
reject them, and then declare the truth.
(1.) This condescension of the Son of God did not consist in a laying aside, or parting with, or separation from, the divine nature, so as
that he should cease to be God by being man. The foundation of it lay in this, that he was “in the form of God, and thought it not
robbery to be equal with God,” Phil. 2:6; – that is, being really and essentially God in his divine nature, he professed himself therein to
be equal with God, or the person of the Father. He was in the form of God, – that is, he was God, participant of the Divine nature, for
God has no form but that of his essence and being; and hence he was equal with God, in authority, dignity, and power. Because he
was in the form of God, he must be equal with God; for there is order in the Divine Persons, but no inequality in the Divine Being. So
the Jews understood him, that when he said, “God was his Father, he made himself equal with God.” For in his so saying, he ascribed
unto himself equal power with the Father, as unto all divine operations. “My Father,” saith he, “worketh hitherto, and I work,” John
5: 17, 18. And they by whom his divine nature is denied do cast this condescension of Christ quite out of our religion, as that which has
no reality or substance in it. But we shall speak of them afterward.
Being in this state, it is said that he took on him the form of a servant, and was found in fashion as a man, Phil. 2: 7. This is his
condescension. It is not said that he ceased to be in the form of God; but continuing so to be, he “took upon him the form of a servant”
in our nature: he became what he was not, but he ceased not to be what he was. So he testifieth of himself, John 3: 13, “No man has
ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man which is in heaven.” Although he was then on earth as
the Son of man, yet he ceased not to be God thereby; – in his divine nature he was then also in heaven.
He who is God, can no more be not God, than he who is not God can be God; and our difference with the Socinians herein is, – we
believe that Christ being God, was made man for our sakes; they say, that being only a man, he was made a god for his own sake.
This, then, is the foundation of the glory of Christ in this condescension, the life and soul of all heavenly truth and mysteries, –
namely, that the Son of God becoming in time to be what he was not, the Son of man, ceased not thereby to be what he was, even the
eternal Son of God. Wherefore, – (2.) Much less did this condescension consist in the conversion of the divine nature into the human,