PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 14 of 28
The Holy Spirit in Connection with Our Ministry


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 14. The Holy Spirit in Connection with Our Ministry.

LECTURE XIV
THE HOLY SPIRIT IN CONNECTION WITH OUR
MINISTRY
I have selected a topic upon which it would be difficult to say
anything which has not been often said before; but as the theme is of
the highest importance it is good to dwell upon it frequently, and
even if we bring forth only old things and nothing more, it may be

wise to put you in remembrance of them. Our subject is "THE HOLY
SPIRIT IN CONNECTION WITH OUR MINISTRY," or--the work of
the Holy Ghost in relation to ourselves as ministers of the gospel of
Jesus Christ.
"I BELIEVE IN THE HOLY GHOST." Having pronounced that
sentence as a matter of creed, I hope we can also repeat it as a devout
soliloquy forced to our lips by personal experience. To us the
presence and work of the Holy Spirit are the ground of our
confidence as to the wisdom and hopefulness of our life work. If we
had not believed in the Holy Ghost we should have laid down our
ministry long ere this, for "who is sufficient for these things?" Our
hope of success, and our strength for continuing the service, lie in
our belief that the Spirit of the Lord resteth upon us.
I will for the time being take it for granted that we are all of us
conscious of the existence of the Holy Spirit. We have said we believe
in Him; but in very deed we have advanced beyond faith in this
matter, and have come into the region of consciousness. Time was
when most of us believed in the existence of our present friends, for
we had heard of them by the hearing of the ear, but we have now
seen each other, and returned the fraternal grip, and felt the
influence of happy companionship, and therefore we do not now so
much believe as know. Even so we have felt the Spirit of God
operating upon our hearts, we have known and perceived the power
which He wields over human spirits, and we know Him by frequent,
conscious, personal contact. By the sensitiveness of our spirit we are
as much made conscious of the presence of the Spirit of God as we
are made cognizant of the existence of the souls of our fellow-men by
their action upon our souls, or as we are certified of the existence of
matter by its action upon our senses. We have been raised from the
dull sphere of mere mind and matter into the heavenly radiance of
the spirit-world; and now, as spiritual men, we discern spiritual
things, we feel the forces which are paramount in the spirit-realm,
and we know that there is a Holy Ghost, for we feel Him operating
upon our spirits. If it were not so, we should certainly have no right

to be in the ministry of Christ's church. Should we even dare to
remain in her membership? But, my brethren, we have been
spiritually quickened. We are distinctly conscious of a new life, with
all that comes out of it: we are new creatures in Christ Jesus, and
dwell in a new world. We have been illuminated, and made to behold
the things which eye hath not seen; we have been guided into truth
such as flesh and blood could never have revealed. We have been
comforted of the Spirit: full often have we been lifted up from the
deeps of sorrow to the heights of joy by the sacred Paraclete. We have
also, in a measure, been sanctified by Him; and we are conscious that
the operation of sanctification is going on in us in different forms
and ways. Therefore, because of all these personal experiences, we
know that there is a Holy Ghost, as surely as we know that we
ourselves exist.
I am tempted to linger here, for the point is worthy of longer notice.
Unbelievers ask for phenomena. The old business doctrine of Gradgrind has entered into religion, and the sceptic cries, "What I want is
facts." These are our facts: let us not forget to use them. A sceptic
challenges me with the remark, "I cannot pin my faith to a book or a
history; I want to see present facts." My reply is, "You cannot see
them, because your eyes are blinded; but the facts are there none the
less. Those of us who have eyes see marvellous things, though you do
not." If he ridicules my assertion, I am not at all astonished. I
expected him to do so, and should have been very much surprised if
he had not done so; but I demand respect to my own position as a
witness to facts, and I turn upon the objector with the enquiry-"What right have you to deny my evidence? If I were a blind man,
and were told by you that you possessed a faculty called sight, I
should be unreasonable if I railed at you as a conceited enthusiast.
All you have a right to say is--that you know nothing about it, but you
are not authorized to call us all liars or dupes. You may join with
revilers of old and declare that the spiritual man is mad, but that
does not disprove his statements." Brethren, to me the phenomena
which are produced by the Spirit of God demonstrate the truth of the
Christian religion as clearly as ever the destruction of Pharaoh at the

Red Sea, or the fall of manna in the wilderness, or the water leaping
from the smitten rock, could have proved to Israel the presence of
God in the midst of her tribes.
We will now come to the core of our subject. To us, as ministers, the
Holy Spirit is absolutely essential. Without Him our office is a mere
name. We claim no priesthood over and above that which belongs to
every child of God; but we are the successors of those who, in olden
times, were moved of God to declare His word, to testify against
transgression, and to lead His cause. Unless we have the spirit of the
prophets resting upon us, the mantle which we wear is nothing but a
rough garment to deceive. We ought to be driven forth with
abhorrence from the society of honest men for daring to speak in the
name of the Lord if the Spirit of God rests not upon us. We believe
ourselves to be spokesmen for Jesus Christ, appointed to continue
His witness upon earth; but upon Him and His testimony the Spirit
of God always rested, and if it does not rest upon us, we are evidently
not sent forth into the world as He was. At Pentecost the
commencement of the great work of converting the world was with
flaming tongues and a rushing mighty wind, symbols of the presence
of the spirit; if, therefore, we think to succeed without the Spirit, we
are not after the Pentecostal order. If we have not the Spirit which
Jesus promised, we cannot perform the commission which Jesus
gave.
I need scarcely warn any brother here against falling into the
delusion that we may have the Spirit so as to become inspired. Yet
the members of a certain litigious modern sect need to be warned
against this folly. They hold that their meetings are under "the
presidency of the Holy Spirit": concerning which notion I can only
say that I have been unable to discover in holy Scripture either the
term or the idea. I do find in the New Testament a body of
Corinthians eminently gifted, fond of speaking, and given to party
strifes--true representatives of those to whom I allude, but as Paul
said of them, "I thank God I baptized none of you," so also do I thank
the Lord that few of that school have ever been found in our midst. It

would seem that their assemblies possess a peculiar gift of
inspiration, not quite perhaps amounting to infallibility, but nearly
approximating thereto. If you have mingled in their gatherings, I
greatly question whether you have been more edified by the
prelections produced under celestial presidency, than you have been
by those of ordinary preachers of the Word, who only consider
themselves to be under the influence of the Holy Spirit, as one spirit
is under the influence of another spirit, or one mind under the
influence of another mind. We are not the passive communicators of
infallibility, but the honest teachers of such things as we have
learned, so far as we have been able to grasp them. As our minds are
active, and have a personal existence while the mind of the Spirit is
acting upon them, our infirmities are apparent as well as His
wisdom; and while we reveal what He has made us to know, we are
greatly abased by the fear that our own ignorance and error are in a
measure manifested at the same time, because we have not been
more perfectly subject to the divine power. I do not suspect that you
will go astray in the direction I have hinted at: certainly the results of
previous experiments are not likely to tempt wise men to that folly.
This is our first question. Wherein may we look for the aid of the
Holy Spirit? When we have spoken on this point, we will, very
solemnly, consider a second--How may we lose that assistance? Let
us pray that, by God's blessing, this consideration may help us to
retain it.
Wherein may we look for the aid of the Holy Spirit? I should reply,-in seven or eight ways.
1. First, He is the Spirit of knowledge,--"He shall guide you into all
truth." In this character we need His teaching.
We have urgent need to study, for the teacher of others must himself
be instructed. Habitually to come into the pulpit unprepared is
unpardonable presumption: nothing can more effectually lower
ourselves and our office. After a visitation discourse by the Bishop of

Lichfield upon the necessity of earnestly studying the Word, a certain
vicar told his lordship that he could not believe his doctrine, "for,"
said he, "often when I am in the vestry I do not know what I am
going to talk about; but I go into the pulpit and preach, and think
nothing of it." His lordship replied, "And you are quite right in
thinking nothing of it, for your churchwardens have told me that
they share your opinion." If we are not instructed, how can we
instruct? If we have not thought, how shall we lead others to think?
It is in our study-work, in that blessed labour when we are alone with
the Book before us, that we need the help of the Holy Spirit. He holds
the key of the heavenly treasury, and can enrich us beyond
conception; He has the clue of the most labyrinthine doctrine, and
can lead us in the way of truth. He can break in pieces the gates of
brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron, and give to us the treasures
of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places. If you study the
original, consult the commentaries, and meditate deeply, yet if you
neglect to cry mightily unto the Spirit of God your study will not
profit you; but even if you are debarred the use of helps (which I
trust you will not be), if you wait upon the Holy Ghost in simple
dependence upon His teaching, you will lay hold of very much of the
divine meaning.
The Spirit of God is peculiarly precious to us, because He especially
instructs us as to the person and work of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
that is the main point of our preaching. He takes of the things of
Christ, and shows them unto us. If He had taken of the things of
doctrine or precept, we should have been glad of such gracious
assistance; but since He especially delights in the things of Christ,
and focusses His sacred light upon the cross, we rejoice to see the
centre of our testimony so divinely illuminated, and we are sure that
the light will be diffused over all the rest of our ministry. Let us wait
upon the Spirit of God with this cry--"O Holy Spirit, reveal to us the
Son of God, and thus show us the Father."
As the Spirit of knowledge, He not only instructs us as to the gospel,
but He leads us to see the Lord in all other matters. We are not to

shut our eyes to God in nature, or to God in general history, or to
God in the daily occurrences of providence, or to God in our own
experience; and the blessed Spirit is the interpreter to us of the mind
of God in all these. If we cry, "Teach me what thou wouldst have me
to do; or, show me wherefore thou contendest with me; or, tell me
what is thy mind in this precious providence of mercy, or in that
other dispensation of mingled judgment and grace,"--we shall in
each case be well instructed; for the Spirit is the seven-branched
candlestick of the sanctuary, and by His light all things are rightly
seen. As Goodwin well observes, "There must be light to accompany
the truth if we are to know it. The experience of all gracious men
proves this. What is the reason that you shall see some things in a
chapter at one time, and not at another; some grace in your hearts at
one time, and not at another; have a sight of spiritual things at one
time, and not at another? The eye is the same, but it is the Holy
Ghost that openeth and shutteth this dark lantern, as I may so call it;
as He openeth it wider, or contracts it, or shutteth it narrower, so do
we see more or less: and sometimes He shutteth it wholly, and then
the soul is in darkness, though it have never so good an eye."
Beloved brethren, wait upon Him for this light, or you will abide in
darkness and become blind leaders of the blind.
2. In the second place, the Spirit is called the Spirit of wisdom, and
we greatly need Him in that capacity; for knowledge may be
dangerous if unaccompanied with wisdom, which is the art of rightly
using what we know. Rightly to divide the Word of God is as
important as fully to understand it, for some who have evidently
understood a part of the gospel have given undue prominence to that
one portion of it, and have therefore exhibited a distorted
Christianity, to the injury of those who have received it, since they in
their turn have exhibited a distorted character in consequence
thereof. A man's nose is a prominent feature in his face, but it is
possible to make it so large that eyes and mouth and everything else
are thrown into insignificance, and the drawing is a caricature and
not a portrait: so certain important doctrines of the gospel can be so

proclaimed in excess as to throw the rest of truth into the shade, and
the preaching is no longer the gospel in its natural beauty, but a
caricature of the truth, of which caricature, however, let me say,
some people seem to be mightily fond. The Spirit of God will teach
you the use of the sacrificial knife to divide the offerings; and He will
show you how to use the balances of the sanctuary so as to weigh out
and mix the precious spices in their proper quantities. Every
experienced preacher feels this to be of the utmost moment, and it is
well if he is able to resist all temptation to neglect it. Alas, some of
our hearers do not desire to hear the whole counsel of God. They
have their favourite doctrines, and would have us silent on all
besides. Many are like the Scotchwoman, who, after hearing a
sermon, said, "It was very well if it hadna been for the trash of duties
at the hinner end." There are brethren of that kind; they enjoy the
comforting part--the promises and the doctrines, but practical
holiness must scarcely be touched upon. Faithfulness requires us to
give them a four-square gospel, from which nothing is omitted, and
in which nothing is exaggerated, and for this much wisdom is
requisite. I gravely question whether any of us have so much of this
wisdom as we need. We are probably afflicted by some inexcusable
partialities and unjustifiable leanings; let us search them out and
have done with them. We may be conscious of having passed by
certain texts, not because we do not understand them (which might
be justifiable), but because we do understand them, and hardly like
to say what they have taught us, or because there may be some
imperfection in ourselves, or some prejudice among our hearers
which those texts would reveal too clearly for our comfort. Such
sinful silence must be ended forthwith. To be wise stewards and
bring forth the right portions of meat for our Master's household we
need Thy teaching, O Spirit of the Lord!
Nor is this all, for even if we know how rightly to divide the Word of
God, we want wisdom in the selection of the particular part of truth
which is most applicable to the season and to the people assembled;
and equal discretion in the tone and manner in which the doctrine
shall be presented. I believe that many brethren who preach human

responsibility deliver themselves in so legal a manner as to disgust
all those who love the doctrines of grace. On the other hand, I fear
that many have preached the sovereignty of God in such a way as to
drive all persons who believe in man's free agency entirely away from
the Calvinistic side. We should not hide truth for a moment, but we
should have wisdom so to preach it that there shall be no needless
jarring or offending, but a gradual enlightenment of those who
cannot see it at all, and a leading of weaker brethren into the full
circle of gospel doctrine.
Brethren, we also need wisdom in the way of putting things to
different people. You can cast a man down with the very truth which
was intended to build him up. You can sicken a man with the honey
with which you meant to sweeten his mouth. The great mercy of God
has been preached unguardedly, and has led hundreds into
licentiousness; and, on the other hand, the terrors of the Lord have
been occasionally fulminated with such violence that they have
driven men into despair, and so into a settled defiance of the Most
High. Wisdom is profitable to direct, and He who hath it brings forth
each truth in its season, dressed in its most appropriate garments.
Who can give us this wisdom but the blessed Spirit? O, my brethren,
see to it, that in lowliest reverence you wait for His direction.
3. Thirdly, we need the Spirit in another manner, namely, as the live
coal from off the altar, touching our lips, so that when we have
knowledge and wisdom to select the fitting portion of truth, we may
enjoy freedom of utterance when we come to deliver it. "Lo, this hath
touched thy lips." Oh, how gloriously a man speaks when his lips are
blistered with the live coal from the altar--feeling the burning power
of the truth, not only in his inmost soul, but on the very lip with
which he is speaking! Mark at such times how his very utterance
quivers. Did you not notice in the prayer-meeting just now, in two of
the suppliant brethren, how their tones were tremulous, and their
bodily frames were quivering, because not only were their hearts
touched, as I hope all our hearts were, but their lips were touched,
and their speech was thereby affected. Brethren, we need the Spirit

of God to open our mouths that we may show forth the praises of the
Lord, or else we shall not speak with power.
We need the divine influence to keep us back from saying many
things which, if they actually left our tongue, would mar our
message. Those of us who are endowed with the dangerous gift of
humour have need, sometimes, to stop and take the word out of our
mouth and look at it, and see whether it is quite to edification; and
those whose previous lives have borne them among the coarse and
the rough had need watch with lynx eyes against indelicacy.
Brethren, far be it from, us to utter a syllable which would suggest an
impure thought, or raise a questionable memory. We need the Spirit
of God to put bit and bridle upon us to keep us from saying that
which would take the minds of our hearers away from Christ and
eternal realities, and set them thinking upon the grovelling things of
earth.
Brethren, we require the Holy Spirit also to incite us in our
utterance. I doubt not you are all conscious of different states of
mind in preaching. Some of those states arise from your body being
in different conditions. A bad cold will not only spoil the clearness of
the voice, but freeze the flow of the thoughts. For my own part if I
cannot speak clearly I am unable to think clearly, and the matter
becomes hoarse as well as the voice. The stomach, also, and all the
other organs of the body, affect the mind; but it is not to these things
that I allude. Are you not conscious of changes altogether
independent of the body? When you are in robust health do you not
find yourselves one day as heavy as Pharaoh's chariots with the
wheels taken off, and at another time as much at liberty as "a hind let
loose"? To-day your branch glitters with the dew, yesterday it was
parched with drought. Who knoweth not that the Spirit of God is in
all this? The divine Spirit will sometimes work upon us so as to bear
us completely out of ourselves. From the beginning of the sermon to
the end we might at such times say, "Whether in the body or out of
the body I cannot tell: God knoweth." Everything has been forgotten
but the one all-engrossing subject in hand. If I were forbidden to

enter heaven, but were permitted to select my state for all eternity, I
should choose to be as I sometimes feel in preaching the gospel.
Heaven is foreshadowed in such a state: the mind shut out from all
disturbing influences, adoring the majestic and consciously present
God, every faculty aroused and joyously excited to its utmost
capability, all the thoughts and powers of the soul joyously occupied
in contemplating the glory of the Lord, and extolling to listening
crowds the Beloved of our soul; and all the while the purest
conceivable benevolence towards one's fellow creatures urging the
heart to plead with them on God's behalf--what state of mind can
rival this? Alas, we have reached this ideal, but we cannot always
maintain it, for we know also what it is to preach in chains, or beat
the air. We may not attribute holy and happy changes in our ministry
to anything less than the action of the Holy Spirit upon our souls. I
am sure the Spirit does so work. Often and often, when I have had
doubts suggested by the infidel, I have been able to fling them to the
winds with utter scorn, because I am distinctly conscious of a power
working upon me when I am speaking in the name of the Lord,
infinitely transcending any personal power of fluency, and far
surpassing any energy derived from excitement such as I have felt
when delivering a secular lecture or making a speech--so utterly
distinct from such power that I am quite certain it is not of the same
order or class as the enthusiasm of the politician or the glow of the
orator. May we full often feel the divine energy, and speak with
power.
4. But then, fourthly, the Spirit of God acts also as an anointing oil,
and this relates to the entire delivery-not to the utterance merely
from the mouth, but to the whole delivery of the discourse. He can
make you feel your subject till it thrills you, and you become
depressed by it so as to be crushed into the earth, or elevated by it so
as to be borne upon its eagle wings; making you feel, besides your
subject, your object, till you yearn for the conversion of men, and for
the uplifting of Christians to something nobler than they have known
as yet. At the same time, another feeling is with you, namely, an
intense desire that God may be glorified through the truth which you

are delivering. You are conscious of a deep sympathy with the people
to whom you are speaking, making you mourn over some of them
because they know so little, and over others because they have
known much, but have rejected it. You look into some faces, and your
heart silently says, "The dew is dropping there;" and, turning to
others, you sorrowfully perceive that they are as Gilboa's dewless
mountain. All this will be going on during the discourse. We cannot
tell how many thoughts can traverse the mind at once. I once
counted eight sets of thoughts which were going on in my brain
simultaneously, or at least within the space of the same second. I was
preaching the gospel with all my might, but could not help feeling for
a lady who was evidently about to faint, and also looking out for our
brother who opens the windows that he might give us more air. I was
thinking of that illustration which I had omitted under the first head,
casting the form of the second division, wondering if A felt my
rebuke, and praying that B might get comfort from the consoling
observation, and at the same time praising God for my own personal
enjoyment of the truth I was proclaiming. Some interpreters
consider the cherubim with their four faces to be emblems of
ministers, and assuredly I see no difficulty in the quadruple form, for
the sacred Spirit can multiply our mental states, and make us many
times the men we are by nature. How much He can make of us, and
how grandly He can elevate us, I will not dare to surmise: certainly,
He can do exceeding abundantly above what we ask or even think.
Especially is it the Holy Spirit's work to maintain in us a devotional
frame of mind whilst we are discoursing. This is a condition to be
greatly coveted--to continue praying while you are occupied with
preaching; to do the Lord's commandments, hearkening unto the
voice of His word; to keep the eye on the throne, and the wing in
perpetual motion. I hope we know what this means; I am sure we
know, or may soon experience, its opposite, namely, the evil of
preaching in an un-devotional spirit. What can be worse than to
speak under the influence of a proud or angry spirit? What more
weakening than to preach in an unbelieving spirit? But, oh, to burn

in our secret heart while we blaze before the eyes of others! This is
the work of the Spirit of God. Work it in us, O adorable Comforter!
In our pulpits we need the spirit of dependence to be mixed with that
of devotion, so that all along, from the first word to the last syllable,
we may be looking up to the strong for strength. It is well to feel that
though you have continued up to the present point, yet if the Holy
Spirit were to leave you, you would play the fool ere the sermon
closed. Looking to the hills whence cometh your help all the sermon
through, with absolute dependence upon God, you will preach in a
brave confident spirit all the while. Perhaps I was wrong to say
"brave," for it is not a brave thing to trust God: to true believers it is a
simple matter of sweet necessity--how can they help trusting Him?
Wherefore should they doubt their ever faithful Friend? I told my
people the other morning, when preaching from the text, "My grace
is sufficient for thee," that for the first time in my life I experienced
what Abraham felt when he fell upon his face and laughed. I was
riding home, very weary with a long week's work, when there came to
my mind this text: "My grace is sufficient for thee"; but it came with
the emphasis laid upon two words. "My grace is sufficient for thee."
My soul said, "Doubtless it is. Surely the grace of the infinite God is
more than sufficient for such a mere insect as I am," and I laughed,
and laughed again, to think how far the supply exceeded all my
needs. It seemed to me as though I were a little fish in the sea, and in
my thirst I said, "Alas, I shall drink up the ocean." Then the Father of
the waters lifted up His head sublimed and smilingly replied, "Little
fish, the boundless main is sufficient for thee." The thought made
unbelief appear supremely ridiculous, as indeed it is. Oh, brethren
we ought to preach feeling that God means to bless the word, for we
have His promise for it; and when we have done preaching we should
look out for the people who have received a blessing. Do you ever
say, "I am overwhelmed with astonishment to find that the Lord has
converted souls through my poor ministry"? Mock humility! Your
ministry is poor enough. Everybody knows that, and you ought to
know it most of all: but, at the same time, is it any wonder that God,
who said "My word shall not return unto me void," has kept His

promise? Is the meat to lose its nourishment because the dish is a
poor platter? Is divine grace to be overcome by our infirmity? No,
but we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power may be of God and not of us.
We need the Spirit of God, then, all through the sermon to keep our
hearts and minds in a proper condition, for if we have not the right
spirit we shall lose the tone which persuades and prevails, and our
people will discover that Samson's strength has departed from him.
Some speak scoldingly, and so betray their bad temper; others
preach themselves, and so reveal their pride. Some discourse as
though it were a condescension on their part to occupy the pulpit,
while others preach as though they apologised for their existence. To
avoid errors of manners and tone, we must be led of the Holy Spirit,
who alone teacheth us to profit.
5. Fifthly, we depend entirely upon the Spirit of God to produce
actual effect from the gospel, and at this effect we must always aim.
We do not stand up in our pulpits to display our skill in spiritual
sword play, but we come to actual fighting: our object is to drive the
sword of the Spirit through men's hearts. If preaching can ever in any
sense be viewed as a public exhibition, it should be like the exhibition
of a ploughing match, which consists in actual ploughing. The
competition does not lie in the appearance of the ploughs, but in the
work done; so let ministers be judged by the way in which they drive
the gospel plough, and cut the furrow from end to end of the field.
Always aim at effect. "Oh," says one, "I thought you would have said,
'Never do that.'" I do also say, never aim at effect, in the unhappy
sense of that expression. Never aim at effect after the manner of the
climax makers, poetry quoters, handkerchief manipulators, and
bombast blowers. Far better for a man that he had never been born
than that he should degrade a pulpit into a show box to exhibit
himself in. Aim at the right sort of effect; the inspiring of saints to
nobler things, the leading of Christians closer to their Master, the
comforting of doubters till they rise out of their terrors, the
repentance of sinners, and their exercise of immediate faith in Christ.

Without these signs following, what is the use of our sermons? It
would be a miserable thing to have to say with a certain archbishop,
"I have passed through many places of honour and trust, both in
Church and State, more than any of my order in England, for seventy
years before; but were I assured that by my preaching I had but
converted one soul to God, I should herein take more comfort than in
all the honoured offices that have been bestowed upon me." Miracles
of grace must be the seals of our ministry; who can bestow them but
the Spirit of God? Convert a soul without the Spirit of God! Why, you
cannot even make a fly, much less create a new heart and a right
spirit. Lead the children of God to a higher life without the Holy
Ghost! You are inexpressibly more likely to conduct them into carnal
security, if you attempt their elevation, by any method of your own.
Our ends can never be gained if we miss the co-operation of the
Spirit of the Lord. Therefore, with strong crying and tears, wait upon
Him from day to day.
The lack of distinctly recognizing the power of the Holy Ghost lies at
the root of many useless ministries. The forcible words of Robert
Hall are as true now as when he poured them forth like molten lava
upon a semi-socinian generation. "On the one hand it deserves
attention, that the most eminent and successful preachers of the
gospel in different communities; a Brainerd, a Baxter, and a
Schwartz, have been the most conspicuous for simple dependence on
spiritual aid; and on the other that no success whatever has attended
the ministrations of those by whom this doctrine has been either
neglected or denied. They have met with such a rebuke of their
presumption, in the total failure of their efforts, that none will
contend for the reality of Divine interposition, as far as they are
concerned; for when has the arm of the Lord been revealed to those
pretended teachers of Christianity, who believe there is no such arm?
We must leave them to labour in a field respecting which God has
commanded the clouds not to rain upon it. As if conscious of this, of
late they have turned their efforts into a new channel, and despairing
of the conversion of sinners, have confined themselves to the
seduction of the faithful; in which, it must be confessed, they have

acted in a manner perfectly consistent with their principles; the
propagation of heresy requiring, at least, no divine assistance."
6. Next we need the Spirit of God as the Spirit of supplications, who
maketh intercession for the saints according to the will of God. A
very important part of our lives consists in praying in the Holy
Ghost, and that minister who does not think so had better escape
from his ministry. Abundant prayer must go with earnest preaching.
We cannot be always on the knees of the body, but the soul should
never leave the posture of devotion. The habit of prayer is good, but
the spirit of prayer is better. Regular retirement is to be maintained,
but continued communion with God is to be our aim. As a rule, we
ministers ought never to be many minutes without actually lifting up
our hearts in prayer. Some of us could honestly say that we are
seldom a quarter of an hour without speaking to God, and that not as
a duty but as an instinct, a habit of the new nature for which we
claim no more credit than a babe does for crying after its mother.
How could we do otherwise? Now, if we are to be much in the spirit
of prayer, we need secret oil to be poured upon the sacred fire of our
heart's devotion; we want to be again and again visited by the Spirit
of grace and of supplications.
As to our prayers in public, let it never be truthfully said that they are
official, formal, and cold; yet they will be so if the supply of the Spirit
be scant. Those who use a liturgy I judge not; but to those who are
accustomed to free prayer I say,--you cannot pray acceptably in
public year after year without the Spirit of God; dead praying will
become offensive to the people long before that time. What then?
Whence shall our help come? Certain weaklings have said, "Let us
have a liturgy!" Rather than seek divine aid they will go down to
Egypt for help. Rather than be dependent upon the Spirit of God,
they will pray by a book! For my part, if I cannot pray, I would rather
know it, and groan over my soul's barrenness till the Lord shall again
visit me with fruitfulness of devotion. If you are filled with the Spirit,
you will be glad to throw off all formal fetters, that you may commit
yourself to the sacred current, to be borne along till you find waters

to swim in. Sometimes you will enjoy closer fellowship with God in
prayer in the pulpit than you have known anywhere else. To me my
greatest secrecy in prayer has often been in public; my truest
loneliness with God has occurred to me while pleading in the midst
of thousands. I have opened my eyes at the close of a prayer and
come back to the assembly with a sort of a shock at finding myself
upon earth and among men. Such seasons are not at our command,
neither can we raise ourselves into such conditions by any
preparations or efforts. How blessed they are both to the minister
and his people no tongue can tell! How full of power and blessing
habitual prayerfulness must also be I cannot here pause to declare,
but for it all we must look to the Holy Spirit, and blessed be God we
shall not look in vain, for it is especially said of Him that He helped
our infirmities in prayer.
7. Furthermore, it is important that we be under the influence of the
Holy Ghost, as He is the Spirit of Holiness; for a very considerable
and essential part of Christian ministry lies in example. Our people
take much note of what we say out of the pulpit, and what we do in
the social circle and elsewhere. Do you find it easy, my brethren, to
be saints?--such saints that others may regard you as examples? We
ought to be such husbands that every husband in the parish may
safely be such as we are. Is it so? We ought to be the best of fathers.
Alas! some ministers, to my knowledge, are far from this, for as to
their families, they have kept the vineyards of others, but their own
vineyards they have not kept. Their children are neglected, and do
not grow up as a godly seed. Is it so with yours? In our converse with
our fellow men are we blameless and harmless, the sons of God
without rebuke? Such we ought to be. I admire Mr. Whitfield's
reasons for always having his linen scrupulously clean. "No, no," he
would say, "these are not trifles; a minister must be without spot,
even in his garments, if he can." Purity cannot be carried too far in a
minister. You have known an unhappy brother bespatter himself,
and you have affectionately aided in removing the spots, but you
have felt that it would have been better had the garments been
always white. O to keep ourselves unspotted from the world! How

can this be in such a scene of temptation, and with such besetting
sins unless we are preserved by superior power? If you are to walk in
all holiness and purity, as becometh ministers of the gospel, you
must be daily baptized into the Spirit of God.
8. Once again, we need the Spirit as a Spirit of discernment, for He
knows the minds of men as He knows the mind of God, and we need
this very much in dealing with difficult characters. There are in this
world some persons who might possibly be allowed to preach, but
they should never be suffered to become pastors. They have a mental
or spiritual disqualification. In the church of San Zeno, at Verona, I
saw the statue of that saint in a sitting posture, and the artist has
given him knees so short that he has no lap whatever, so that he
could not have been a nursing father. I fear there are many others
who labour under a similar disability: they cannot bring their minds
to enter heartily into the pastoral care. They can dogmatize upon a
doctrine, and controvert upon an ordinance, but as to sympathizing
with an experience, it is far from them. Cold comfort can such render
to afflicted consciences; their advice will be equally valuable with
that of the highlander who is reported to have seen an Englishman
sinking in a bog on Ben Nevis. "I am sinking!" cried the traveller.
"Can you tell me how to get out?" The highlander calmly replied, "I
think it is likely you never will," and walked away. We have known
ministers of that kind, puzzled, and almost annoyed with sinners
struggling in the slough of despond. If you and I untrained in the
shepherd's art, were placed among the ewes and young lambs in the
early spring, what should we do with them? In some such perplexity
are those found who have never been taught of the Holy Spirit how to
care for the souls of men. May His instructions save us from such
wretched incompetence.
Moreover, brethren, whatever our tenderness of heart, or loving
anxiety, we shall not know how to deal with the vast variety of cases
unless the Spirit of God shall direct us, for no two individuals are
alike; and even the same case will require different treatment at
different times. At one period it may be best to console, at another to

rebuke; and the person with whom you sympathized even to tears today may need that you confront him with a frown to-morrow, for
trifling with the consolation which you presented. Those who bind up
the broken-hearted, and set free the captives, must have the Spirit of
the Lord upon them.
In the oversight and guidance of a church the Spirit's aid is needed.
At bottom the chief reason for secession from our denomination has
been the difficulty arising out of our church government. It is said to
"tend to the unrest of the ministry." Doubtless, it is very trying to
those who crave for the dignity of officialism, and must need be Sir
Oracles, before whom not a dog must bark. Those who are no more
capable of ruling than mere babes are the very persons who have the
greatest thirst for authority, and, finding little of it awarded to them
in these parts, they seek other regions. If you cannot rule yourself, if
you are not manly and independent, if you are not superior in moral
weight, if you have not more gift and more grace than your ordinary
bearers, you may put on a gown and claim to be the ruling person in
the church; but it will not be in a church of the Baptist or New
Testament order. For my part I should loathe to be the pastor of a
people who have nothing to say, or who, if they do say anything,
might as well be quiet, for the pastor is Lord Paramount, and they
are mere laymen and nobodies. I would sooner be the leader of six
free men, whose enthusiastic love is my only power over them, than
play the dictator to a score of enslaved nations. What position is
nobler than that of a spiritual father who claims no authority and yet
is universally esteemed, whose word is given only as tender advice,
but is allowed to operate with the force of law? Consulting the wishes
of others he finds that they first desire to know what he would
recommend, and deferring always to the desires of others, he finds
that they are glad to defer to him. Lovingly firm and graciously
gentle, he is the chief of all because he is the servant of all. Does not
this need wisdom from above? What can require it more? David
when established on the throne said, "It is He that subdueth my
people under me," and so may every happy pastor say when he sees
so many brethren of differing temperaments all happily willing to be

under discipline, and to accept his leadership in the work of the
Lord. If the Lord were not among us how soon there would be
confusion. Ministers, deacons, and elders may all be wise, but if the
sacred Dove departs, and the spirit of strife enters, it is all over with
us. Brethren, our system will not work without the Spirit of God, and
I am glad it will not, for its stoppages and breakages call our
attention to the fact of His absence. Our system was never intended
to promote the glory of priests and pastors, but it is calculated to
educate manly Christians, who will not take their faith at secondhand. What am I, and what are you, that we should be lords over
God's heritage? Dare any of us say with the French king, "L'état, c'est
moi"--"the state is myself,"--! am the most important person in the
church? If so, the Holy Spirit is not likely to use such unsuitable
instruments; but if we know our places and desire to keep them with
all humility, He will help us, and the churches will flourish beneath
our care.
I have given you a lengthened catalogue of matters wherein the Holy
Spirit is absolutely necessary to us, and yet the list is very far from
complete. I have intentionally left it imperfect, because if I attempted
its completion all our time would have expired before we were able to
answer the question, HOW MAY WE LOSE THIS NEEDFUL
ASSISTANCE? Let none of us ever try the experiment, but it is
certain that ministers may lose the aid of the Holy Ghost. Each man
here may lose it. You shall not perish as believers, for everlasting life
is in you; but you may perish as ministers, and be no more heard of
as witnesses for the Lord. Should this happen it will not be without a
cause. The Spirit claims a sovereignty like that of the wind which
bloweth where it listeth; but let us never dream that sovereignty and
capriciousness are the same thing. The blessed Spirit acts as He wills,
but He always acts justly, wisely, and with motive and reason. At
times He gives or withholds His blessing, for reasons connected with
ourselves. Mark the course of a river like the Thames; how it winds
and twists according to its own sweet will: yet there is a reason for
every bend and curve: the geologist studying the soil and marking
the conformation of the rock, sees a reason why the river's bed

diverges to the right or to the left: and so, though the Spirit of God
blesses one preacher more than another, and the reason cannot be
such that any man could congratulate himself upon his own
goodness, yet there are certain things about Christian ministers
which God blesses, and certain other things which hinder success.
The Spirit of God falls like the dew, in mystery and power, but it is in
the spiritual world as in the natural: certain substances are wet with
the celestial moisture while others are always dry. Is there not a
cause? The wind blows where it lists; but if we desire to feel a stiff
breeze we must go out to sea, or climb the hills. The Spirit of God has
His favoured places for displaying His might. He is typified by a
dove, and the dove has its chosen haunts: to the rivers of waters, to
the peaceful and quiet places, the dove resorts; we meet it not upon
the battlefield, neither does it alight on carrion. There are things
congruous to the Spirit and things contrary to His mind. The Spirit of
God is compared to light, and light can shine where it wills, but some
bodies are opaque, while others are transparent; and so there are
men through whom God the Holy Ghost can shine, and there are
others through whom His brightness never appears. Thus, then, it
can be shown that the Holy Ghost, though He be the "free Spirit" of
God, is by no means capricious in His operations.
But, dear brethren, the Spirit of God may be grieved and vexed, and
even resisted: to deny this is to oppose the constant testimony of
Scripture. Worst of all, we may do despite to Him, and so insult Him
that He will speak no more by us, but leave us as He left King Saul of
old. Alas, that there should be men in the Christian ministry to
whom this has happened; but I am afraid there are.
Brethren, what are those evils which will grieve the Spirit? I answer,
anything that would have disqualified you as an ordinary Christian
for communion with God also disqualifies you for feeling the
extraordinary power of the Holy Spirit as a minister: but, apart from
that, there are special hindrances.

Among the first we must mention a want of sensitiveness, or that
unfeeling condition which arises from disobeying the Spirit's
influences. We should be delicately sensitive to His faintest
movement, and then we may expect His abiding presence, but if we
are as the horse and as the mule, which have no understanding, we
shall feel the whip, but we shall not enjoy the tender influences of the
Comforter.
Another grieving fault is a want of truthfulness. When a great
musician takes a guitar, or touches a harp, and finds that the notes
are false, he stays his hand. Some men's souls are not honest; they
are sophistical and double-minded. Christ's Spirit will not be an
accomplice with men in the wretched business of shuffling and
deceiving. Does it really come to this--that you preach certain
doctrines, not because you believe them, but because your
congregation expects you to do so? Are you biding your time till you
can, without risk, renounce your present creed and tell out what your
dastardly mind really holds to be true? Then are you fallen indeed,
and are baser than the meanest slaves. God deliver us from
treacherous men, and if they enter our ranks, may they speedily be
drummed out to the tune of the Rogue's March. If we feel an
abhorrence of them, how much more must the Spirit of truth detest
them!
You can greatly grieve the Holy Spirit by a general scantiness of
grace. The phrase is awkward, but it describes certain persons better
than any other which occurs to me. The Scanty-grace family usually
have one of the brothers in the ministry. I know the man. He is not
dishonest, nor immoral, he is not bad tempered, nor self-indulgent,
but there is a something wanting: it would not be easy to prove its
absence by any overt offence, but it is wanting in the whole man, and
its absence spoils everything. He wants the one thing needful. He is
not spiritual, he has no savour of Christ, his heart never burns within
him, his soul is not alive, he wants grace. We cannot expect the Spirit
of God to bless a ministry which never ought to have been exercised,
and certainly a graceless ministry is of that character.

Another evil which drives away the divine Spirit is pride. The way to
be very great is to be very little. To be very noteworthy in your own
esteem is to be unnoticed of God. If you must needs dwell upon the
high places of the earth, you shall find the mountain summits cold
and barren: the Lord dwells with the lowly, but He knows the proud
afar off.
The Holy Ghost is also vexed by laziness. I cannot imagine the Spirit
waiting at the door of a sluggard, and supplying the deficiencies
created by indolence. Sloth in the cause of the Redeemer is a vice for
which no excuse can be invented. We ourselves feel our flesh creep
when we see the dilatory movements of sluggards, and we may be
sure that the active Spirit is equally vexed with those who trifle in the
work of the Lord.
Neglect of private prayer and many other evils will produce the same
unhappy result, but there is no need to enlarge, for your own
consciences will tell you, brethren, what it is that grieves the Holy
One of Israel.
And now, let me entreat you, listen to this word: Do you know what
may happen if the Spirit of God be greatly grieved and depart from
us? There are two suppositions. The first is that we never were God's
true servants at all, but were only temporarily used by him, as
Balaam was, and even the ass on which he rode. Suppose, brethren,
that you and I go on comfortably preaching a while, and are neither
suspected by ourselves nor others to be destitute of the Spirit of God:
our ministry may all come to an end on a sudden, and we may come
to an end with it; we may be smitten down in our prime, as were
Nadab and Abidu, no more to be seen ministering before the Lord, or
removed in riper years, like Hophni and Phineas, no longer to serve
in the tabernacle of the congregation. We have no inspired annalist
to record for us the sudden cutting off of promising men, but if we
had, it may be we should read with terror--of zeal sustained by
strong drink, of public Phariseeism associated with secret
defilement, of avowed orthodoxy concealing absolute infidelity, or of

some other form of strange fire presented upon the altar till the Lord
would endure it no more, and cut off the offenders with a sudden
stroke. Shall this terrible doom happen to any one of us?
Alas, I have seen some deserted by the Holy Spirit, as Saul was. It is
written that the Spirit of God came upon Saul, but he was faithless to
the divine influence, and it departed, and an evil spirit occupied its
place. See how the deserted preacher moodily plays the cynic,
criticises all others, and hurls the javelin of detraction at a better
man than himself. Saul was once among the prophets, but he was
more at home among the persecutors. The disappointed preacher
worries the true evangelist, resorts to the witchcraft of philosophy,
and seeks help from dead heresies; but his power is gone, and the
Philistines will soon find him among the slain. "Tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Askelon! ye daughters of Israel weep
over Saul! How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle!"
Some, too, deserted by the Spirit of God, have become like the sons
of one Sceva, a Jew. These pretenders tried to cast out devils in the
name of Jesus, whom Paul preached, but the devils leaped upon
them and overcame them; thus while certain preachers have
declaimed against sin, the very vices which they denounced have
overthrown them. The Sons of Sceva have been among us in
England: the devils of drunkenness have prevailed over the very man
who denounced the bewitching cup, and the demon of unchastity has
leaped upon the preacher who applauded purity. If the Holy Ghost be
absent, ours is of all positions the most perilous; therefore let us
beware.
Alas, some ministers become like Balaam. He was a prophet, was he
not? Did he not speak in the name of the Lord? Is he not called "the
man whose eyes are opened, which saw the vision of the Almighty?"
Yet Balaam fought against Israel, and cunningly devised a scheme by
which the chosen people might be overthrown. Ministers of the
gospel have become Papists, infidels, and freethinkers, and plotted
the destruction of what they once professed to prize. We may be

apostles, and yet, like Judas, turn out to be sons of perdition. Woe
unto us if this be the case!
Brethren, I will assume that we really are the children of God, and
what then? Why, even then, if the Spirit of God depart from us, we
may be taken away on a sudden as the deceived prophet was who
failed to obey the command of the Lord in the days of Jeroboam. He
was no doubt a man of God, and the death of his body was no
evidence of the loss of his soul, but he broke away from what he knew
to be the command of God given specially to himself, and his
ministry ended there and then, for a lion met him by the way and
slew him. May the Holy Spirit preserve us from deceivers, and keep
us true to the voice of God.
Worse still, we may reproduce the life of Samson, upon whom the
Spirit of God came in the camps of Dan; but in Delilah's lap he lost
his strength, and in the dungeon he lost his eyes. He bravely finished
his life-work, blind as he was, but who among us wishes to tempt
such a fate?
Or--and this last has saddened me beyond all expression, because it
is much more likely than any of the rest--we may be left by the Spirit
of God, in a painful degree, to mar the close of our life-work as Moses
did. Not to lose our souls, nay, not even to lose our crowns in heaven,
or even our reputations on earth; but, still, to be under a cloud in our
last days through once speaking unadvisedly with our lips. I have
lately studied the later days of the great prophet of Horeb, and I have
not yet recovered from the deep gloom of spirit which it cast over me.
What was the sin of Moses? You need not enquire. It was not gross
like the transgression of David, nor startling like the failure of Peter,
nor weak and foolish like the grave fault of his brother Aaron;
indeed, it seems an infinitesimal offence as weighed in the balances
of ordinary judgment. But then, you see, it was the sin of Moses, of a
man favoured of God beyond all others, of a leader of the people, of a
representative of the divine King. The Lord could have overlooked it
in anyone else, but not, in Moses: Moses must be chastened by being

forbidden to lead the people into the promised land. Truly, he had a
glorious view from the top of Pisgah, and everything else which could
mitigate the rigour of the sentence, but it was a great disappointment
never to enter the land of Israel's inheritance, and that for once
speaking unadvisedly. I would not shun my Master's service, but I
tremble in His presence. Who can be faultless when even Moses
erred? It is a dreadful thing to be beloved of God. "Who among us
shall dwell with devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with
everlasting burnings? He that walketh righteously and speaketh
uprightly"--he alone can face that sin-consuming flame of love.
Brethren, I beseech you, crave Moses's place, but tremble as you take
it. Fear and tremble for all the good that God shall make to pass
before you. When you are fullest of the fruits of the Spirit bow lowest
before the throne, and serve the Lord with fear. "The Lord our God is
a jealous God." Remember that God has come unto us, not to exalt
us, but to exalt Himself, and we must see to it that His glory is the
one sole object of all that we do. "He must increase, and I must
decrease." Oh, may God bring us to this, and make us walk very
carefully and humbly before Him. God will search us and try us, for
judgment begins at His house, and in that house it begins with His
ministers. Will any of us be found wanting? Shall the pit of hell draw
a portion of its wretched inhabitants from among our band of
pastors? Terrible will be the doom of a fallen preacher: his
condemnation will astonish common transgressors. "Hell from
beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming." All they shall
speak and say unto thee, "Art thou also become weak as we? Art thou
become like unto us?" O for the Spirit of God to make and keep us
alive unto God, faithful to our office, and useful to our generation,
and clear of the blood of men's souls. Amen.
