PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 13
Of Assurance


OF ASSURANCE
QUEST. XXXVI. WHAT are the benefits which flow from
sanctification?
ANS. Assurance of God's love, peace of conscience, joy in the Holy
Ghost, increase of grace, and perseverance therein to the end.
The first benefit flowing from sanctification, is assurance of God's
love.
2 Pet. 1:10., "Give diligence to make your calling and election sure."
Sanctification is the seed, assurance is the flower which grows out of
it: assurance is a consequent of sanctification, the saints of old had it,
1 John 2:3., "We know that we know him," 2 Tim. 1:12, "I know
whom I have believed,"—here was sensus fides,—the reflex act of
faith; and Gal. 2:20., "Christ hath loved me,"—here was faith
flourishing into assurance. Æcolampadias, when he was sick, pointed
to his heart, saying, Hic sat lucis,—'Here I have light enough,'
meaning comfort and assurance.
QUEST. 1. Have all sanctified persons assurance?
Ans. They have a right to it, and I do incline to believe that all have it
in some degree before their last expiring; though their comfort may
not be so strong, and their vital spirits so weak, that they cannot
express what they feel. But I dare not positively affirm that all have
assurance in the first moment of their sanctification; a letter may be
written, when it is not sealed,—so grace may be written in the heart,
yet the Spirit may not set the seal of assurance to it. God is a free

agent, and may give or suspend assurance pro licito as he pleases.
Where there is the sanctifying work of the Spirit, he may withhold
the sealing work, partly to keep the soul humble, partly to punish our
careless walking; we neglect our spiritual watch, grow remiss in duty,
and then walk under a cloud; we quench the graces of the Spirit, and
God withholds the comforts: and partly to put a difference between
earth and heaven. This I the rather speak, to bear up the hearts of
God's people who are dejected because they have no assurance; you
may have the water of the Spirit poured on you in sanctification,
though not the oil of gladness in assurance; there may be faith of
adherence, and not of evidence; there may be life in the root, when
there is no fruit in the branches to be seen; so faith in the heart,
when no fruit of assurance.
QUEST. 2. What, is assurance?
Ans. It is not vocal, any audible voice, or brought to us by the help of
an angel or revelation. Assurance consists of a practical syllogism,
where the word of God makes the major,—conscience the minor,—
the Spirit of God the conclusion. The word saith, 'He that fears and
loves God, is loved of God;' there is the major proposition; then
conscience makes the minor, 'but I fear and love God;' then the Spirit
makes the conclusion, 'therefore thou art loved of God,' and this is
that which the apostle calls, "The witnessing of the Spirit with our
spirits, that we are his children," Rom. 8:16.
QUEST. 3. Whether hath a sanctified soul such an assurance as
excludes all doubtings?
Ans. He hath that which bears up his heart from sinking,—he hath
such an earnest of the Spirit, that he would not part with it for the
richest prize,—but his assurance, though it be infallible, it is not
perfect. There will be sometimes a trepidation or trembling; he is

safe, yet not without fears and doubts: as a ship lies safe at anchor,
yet may be a little shaken by the wind. If a Christian had no
doubtings, there would be no unbelief in him; had he no doubtings
there would be no difference between grace militant and grace
triumphant. Had not David his ebbings sometimes as well as
flowings? Like the mariner, who sometimes cries out, stellam video,
—'I see a star:' sometimes the star is out of sight. Sometimes we hear
David say, "Thy loving-kindness is before mine eyes," Ps. 26:3.; but
at another time he was at a loss, Ps. 89:49., "Lord, where are thy
former loving-kindnesses?" And there may fall out an eclipse in a
Christian's assurance, to put him upon longing after heaven,—then
there shall not be the least doubting,—then the banner of God's love
shall be always displayed upon the soul,—then the light of God's face
shall be without clouds, and have no sun-setting,—then the saints
shall have an uninterrupted assurance, and be ever with the Lord.
QUEST. 4. What are the differences between true assurance and
presumption?
Ans. 1. They differ in the method or manner of working: divine
assurance flows from humiliation for sin, I speak not of the measure
of humiliation, but the truth. There are in Palermo, reeds growing, in
which there is a sugared juice: a soul humbled for sin is the bruised
reed, in which grows this sweet assurance. God's Spirit is a spirit of
bondage, before it be a spirit of adoption; but presumption ariseth
without any humbling word of the Spirit: 'How camest thou by the
venison so soon.' The plough goes before the seed be sown; the heart
must be plowed up by humiliation and repentance, before God sow
the seed of assurance.
A. 2. He who hath a real assurance, will take heed of that which will
weaken and darken his assurance; he is fearful of the forbidden fruit;

he knows, though he cannot sin away his soul, yet he may sin away
his assurance; but he who hath the ignis fatuus of presumption, doth
not fear defiling his garments, he is bold in sin, Jer. 3:4, 5., "Wilt
thou not cry unto me, my Father? Behold, Thou hast done evil things
as thou couldst!" Balaam said, My God, yet was a sorcerer. It is a sign
he hath no money about him, who fears not to travel all hours in the
night; 'tis a sign he hath not the jewel of assurance, who fears not the
works of darkness.
A. 3. True assurance is built upon a scripture basis; the word saith,
"The effect of righteousness shall be quietness and assurance for
ever," Isa. 32:17. A Christian's assurance is built upon this scripture;
God hath sown the seed of righteousness in his soul, and this seed
hath brought forth the harvest of assurance; but presumption is a
spurious thing, it hath not scripture to shew for its warrant,—it is like
a will without seal and witnesses, which is null and void in law,—
presumption wants both the witness of the word, and the seal of the
Spirit.
A. 4. Assurance flowing from sanctification always keeps the heart in
a lowly posture: 'Lord,' saith the soul, 'what am I, that, passing by so
many, the golden beams of thy love should shine upon me?' St. Paul
had assurance: is he proud of this jewel? No, Eph. 3:8., "To me who
am less than the least of all saints." The more love a Christian
receives from God, the more he sees himself a debtor to free grace,
and the sense of his debt keeps his heart humble; but presumption is
bred of pride. He who presumes, disdains; he thinks himself better
than others, Luke 18:11., "God, I thank thee, I am not as other men
are, nor as this Publican." Feathers fly up, but gold descends; he who
hath this golden assurance, his heart descends in humility.
QUEST. 5. What is it may excite us to look after assurance?

Ans. To consider how sweet it is, and the noble and excellent effects
it produceth:
1. How sweet it is. This is the manna in the golden pot,—the white
stone,—the wine of paradise which cheers the heart How comfortable
is God's smile! The sun is more refreshing when it shines out, than
when it is hid in a cloud,—it is a prælibation and a foretaste of glory,
—it puts a man in heaven before his time; none can know how
delicious and ravishing it is, but such as have felt it, as none can
know how sweet honey is, but they who have tasted it.
2. The noble and excellent effects it produceth: 1. Assurance will
make us love God, and praise him: (1.) Love him. Love is the soul of
religion,—the fat of the sacrifice,—and who can love God so, as he
who hath assurance? The sun reflecting its beams on a burning-glass,
makes the glass burn that which is near to it: so assurance (which is
the reflection of God's love upon the soul) makes it burn in love to
God. St. Paul was assured of Christ's love to him, Gal. 2:20., "Who
loved me:" and how was his heart fired with love? he valued and
admired nothing but Christ, Phil. 3:8. As Christ was fastened to the
cross, so he was fastened to Paul's heart. (2.) Praise him. Praise is the
quit-rent we pay to the crown of heaven. Who but he who hath
assurance of his justification, can bless God, and give him the glory
of what he hath done for him! Can a man in a swoon or apoplexy,
praise God that he is alive? Can a Christian, staggering with fears
about his spiritual condition, praise God that he is elected and
justified? No: "The living, the living, he shall praise thee," Isa. 38:19.
Such as are enlivened with assurance, they are the fittest persons to
sound forth God's praise.
Effect 2. Assurance would drop sweetness into all our creatureenjoyments; it would be as sugar to wine, an earnest of more; it gives

a blessing with the venison; as guilt embitters our comforts, it is like
drinking out of a wormwood cup, so assurance would indulcerate
and sweeten all health, and the assurances of God's love are sweet
riches, and with the assurance of a kingdom are delectable, nay, a
dinner of green herbs, with the assurance of God's love, is princely
fare.
Effect 3. Assurance would make us active and lively in God's service;
it would excite prayer, quicken obedience. As diligence begets
assurance, so assurance begets diligence. Assurance will not (as the
Papists say) breed security in the soul, but industry; doubting does
discourage us in God's service, but the assurance of his favour breeds
joy, "For the joy of the Lord is your strength," Neh. 8:10. Assurance
makes us mount up to heaven, as eagles, in holy duties; it is like the
Spirit in Ezekiel's wheels, that moved them, and lifted them up. Faith
would make us walk, but assurance would make us run: we should
never think we could do enough for God. Assurance would be as
wings to the bird,—as weights to the clock, to set all the wheels of
obedience a-running.
Effect 4. Assurance would be a golden shield to beat back
temptation: assurance triumphs over temptation. There are two sorts
of temptations Satan useth: 1. He tempts to draw us to sin; now the
being assured of our justification would make this temptation vanish.
'What, Satan? shall I sin against him who hath loved me, and washed
me in his blood! Shall I return to folly after God hath spoken peace?
Shall I weaken my assurance, wound my conscience, grieve my
Comforter? Avoid, Satan, tempt no more!' 2. Satan would make us
question our interest in God; he tells us we are hypocrites, and God
doth not love us. Now there is no such shield against this temptation
as assurance. What, Satan? Have I a real work of grace in my heart,
and the seal of the Spirit to witness it, and dost thou tell me God doth

not love me? Now I know thou art an impostor, who goest about to
disprove what I sensibly feel. If faith resists the devil, assurance
would put him to flight.
Effect 5. Assurance would make us contented though we have but a
little in the world; he who hath enough is content; he who hath sunlight is content though he want torch-light. A man that hath
assurance, hath enough, in uno salvatore omnes florent gummæ ad
salutem. He hath the riches of Christ's merit,—a pledge of his love,—
an earnest of his glory; he is filled with the fulness of God,—here is
enough, and having enough he is content, Ps. 16:5., "The Lord is the
portion of my inheritance;" "the lines are fallen to me in pleasant
places, and I have a goodly heritage." Assurance will rock the heart
quiet; the reason of discontent, is either because men have no
interest in God, or do not know their interest. St. Paul saith, "I know
whom I have believed," 2 Tim. 1:12. There was the assurance of his
interest. And, 2 Cor. 6:10., "As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing," &c.
There was his contentment. Get but assurance, and you will be out of
the weekly bill of murmurers, you will be discontented no more.
Nothing can come amiss to him that hath assurance? God is his.
Hath he lost a friend? his father lives. Hath he lost his only child?
God hath given him his only Son. Hath he scarcity of bread? God
hath given him the finest of the wheat, the bread of life. Are his
comforts gone? he hath the Comforter. Doth he meet with storms on
the sea? he knows where to put in for harbour,—God is his portion,
and heaven is his haven. This assurance gives sweet contentment in
every condition.
Effect 6. Assurance would bear up the heart in sufferings, it would
make a Christian endure troubles with patience and cheerfulness.
With patience, Heb. 10:36., "Ye have need of patience." There are
some meats (we say) are hard of digestion, and only a good stomach

will concoct them; affliction is a meat hard of digestion, but patience
(like a good stomach) will be able to digest it; and whence come
patience but from assurance? Rom. 5:3., "Tribulation worketh
patience," 5:5., because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,"
with cheerfulness. Assurance is like the mariner's lantern on the
deck, which gives light in a dark night. Assurance gives the light of
comfort in affliction, Heb. 10:34., Ye "took joyfully the spoiling of
your goods, knowing in yourselves," &c. there was assurance. He that
hath assurance, can rejoice in tribulation; he can gather grapes of
thorns, and honey out of the lion's carcase. Latimer said, "When I sit
alone, and can have a settled assurance of the state of my soul, and
know that God is mine, I can laugh at all troubles, and nothing can
daunt me."
Effect 7. Assurance would pacify a troubled conscience: he who hath
a disturbed vexatious conscience, carries an hell about him, Eheu
quis intus scorpia! but assurance cures the agony, and allays the fury
of conscience; conscience, that before was turned into a serpent, now
is like a bee that hath honey in its mouth,—it speaks peace,—
tranquillus Deus, tranquillat omnia, TERTUL. When God is pacified
toward us, then conscience is pacified. If the heavens are quiet, and
there are no winds stirring thence, the sea is quiet and calm; so if
there be no anger in God's heart,—if the tempest of his wrath do not
blow,—conscience is quiet and serene.
Effect 8. Assurance would strengthen us against the fears of death.
Such as want it, cannot die with comfort; they are in æquillibrio,—
they hang in a doubtful suspense what should become of them after
death,—but he who hath assurance hath an happy and joyful passage
out of the world, he knows he is passed from death to life, he is
carried full sail to heaven! Though he cannot resist death, yet he
overcomes it

QUEST. 6. What shall they do that want assurance?
Ans 1st. Such as want assurance, let them labour to find grace. When
the sun denies light to the earth, it may give forth its influence; when
God denies the light of his countenance, he may give the influence of
his grace.
QUEST. How shall we know we have a real work of grace, and so
have a right to assurance?
Ans. If we can resolve two queries, 1. Have we high appreciations of
Jesus Christ? 1 Pet. 2:7., "To you that believe he is precious." Christ is
all made up of beauties and delights; our praises fall short of his
worth, and is like spreading canvas upon cloth of gold. How precious
is his blood and incense! The one pacifies our conscience, the other
perfumes our prayers. Can we say we have endearing thoughts of
Christ? Do we esteem him our pearl of price, our bright morningstar? Do we count all our earthly enjoyments but as dung in
comparison of Christ? Phil. 3:8. Do we prefer the worst things of
Christ, before the best things of the world; the reproaches of Christ
before the world's embraces? Heb. 11:26.—Query 2. Have we the
indwelling of the Spirit? 2 Tim. 1:14., "The Holy Ghost which
dwelleth in us."
QUEST. How may we know that we have the indwelling presence of
the Spirit?
Ans. Not by having sometimes good motions stirred up in us by the
Spirit, he may work in us yet not dwell, but by the sanctifying power
of the Spirit in our heart; the Spirit infuseth divinum indolem,—a
divine nature,—it stamps its own impress and effigies on the soul,
making the complexion of it holy. The Spirit ennobles and raiseth the
heart above the world. When Nebuchadnezzar had his understanding

given him, he grazed no longer among the beasts, but returned to his
throne, and minded the affairs of his kingdom: when the Spirit of
God dwells in a man, it carries his heart above the visible orbs, it
makes him superna anhelare,—thirst after Christ and glory. If we can
find this, then we have grace, and so have a right to assurance
Ans 2d. If you want assurance, wait for it. If the figures are graven on
the dial, it is but waiting a while, and the sun shines; when grace is
engraven in the heart, it is but waiting a while and we shall have the
sunshine of assurance, "He that believeth shall not make haste," Isa.
28:16. He will stay God's leisure. Say not, God hath forsaken you, he
will never lift up the light of his countenance; but rather say as the
church, Isa. 8:17., "I will wait upon the Lord, that hideth his face
from the house of Jacob."—1. Hath God waited for your conversion
and will not you wait for his consolation! How long did he come a
wooing to you by his Spirit? He waited till his head was filled with
dew: he cried, as Jer. 13:27., "Wilt thou not be made clean? when
shall it once be?" O! Christian, did God wait for thy love, and canst
thou not wait for his?—2. Assurance is so sweet and precious, that it
is worth waiting for; the price of it is above rubies, it cannot be
valued with the gold of Ophir. Assurance of God's love is a pledge of
election, it is the angel's banquet: what other joy have they! as Micah
said, Judg. 18:24., "What have I more;" so, when God assures the
soul of his eternal purposes of love, what hath he more to give?
Whom God kisseth he crowns. Assurance is the first fruits of
paradise: one smile of God's face, one glance of his eye, one crumb of
the hidden manna is so sweet and delicious, that it deserves our
waiting.—3. God hath given a promise that we should not wait in
vain, Isa. 49:23., "They shall not be ashamed that wait for me."
Perhaps God reserves this cordial of assurance for a fainting time; he
keeps sometimes his best wine till last. Assurance shall be reserved
as an ingredient to sweeten the bitter cup of death.

QUEST. 7. How may deserted souls be comforted who are cast down
for want of assurance? They have the day-star of grace risen in their
souls; but as Job complains, "I went mourning without the sun," Job
30:28. They go mourning for want of the sun-light of God's face;
their joy is eclipsed, they walk in darkness, and see no light, Isa.
60:19. How shall we comfort such as lie bleeding in desertion, and
are cast down for want of assurance?
Ans. 1. Want of assurance shall not hinder the success of the saint's
prayers. Sin lived in, doth put a bar to our prayer; but want of
assurance doth not hinder prayer; we may go to God still in a
humble, fiducial manner. A Christian perhaps may think, because he
doth not see God's smiling face, therefore God will not hear him; this
is a mistake, Ps. 31:22., "I said in my haste, I am cut off from before
thine eyes, nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplication."
If we pour out sighs to heaven, God hears every groan; though he
doth not shew us his face, he may lend us his ear.
A. 2. Faith may be strongest when assurance is weakest; the woman
of Canaan had no assurance but a glorious faith: "O woman, great is
thy faith!" Mat. 15:28. 'Rachel was more fair, but Leah was more
fruitful.' Assurance is more fair and lovely to look upon, but a fruitful
faith God seeth it better for us, John 20:28., "Blessed are they that
believe and feel not."
A. 3. When God is out of sight, yet he is not out of covenant, Ps.
89:28., "My covenant shall stand fast." Though a wife doth not see
her husband's face in many years, yet the marriage-relation holds,
and he will come again to her after a long voyage. God may be gone
from the soul in desertion, but the covenant stands fast, Isa. 54:10.,
"The covenant of my peace shall not be removed."—Quer. But this
promise was made to the Jews, and doth not belong to us, Yes, v. 17.,

"This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord." This is made to all
the servants of God, those who are now living, as well as those who
lived in the time of the Jews.
QUEST. 8. What should we do to get assurance?
Ans. 1. Keep a pure conscience; let no guilt lie upon the conscience
unrepented of: God seals no pardons before repentance. God will not
pour in the wine of assurance into a foul vessel, Heb. 10:22., "Let us
draw near in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from
an evil conscience!" Guilt clips the wings of comfort; he who is
conscious to himself of secret sins, cannot draw near to God in full
assurance,—he cannot call God father, but judge; keep conscience as
clear as your eye, that no dust of sin fall into it.
A. 2. If you would have assurance, be much in the actings of grace, 1
Tim. 4:7., "Excercise thyself rather unto godliness." Men grow rich by
trading; by trading in grace we grow rich in assurance, 2 Pet. 1:10.,
"Make your election sure." How? "Add to your faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge." Keep grace upon the wing, it is the lively faith
flourisheth into assurance. No man will set up a great sail into a
small boat, but in a large vessel: God sets up the sail of assurance in
an heart enlarged with grace.
A. 3. If you would have assurance, cherish the Holy Spirit of God.
When David would have assurance, he prays, "take not thy Holy
Spirit from me," Ps. 51:11. He knew that it was the Spirit only that
could make him hear the voice of joy: the Spirit is the Comforter, he
seals up assurance, 2 Cor. 1:22. Therefore make much of the Spirit,
do not grieve it: as Noah opened the ark to receive the dove, so
should we open our hearts to receive the Spirit, this is the blessed
dove which brings an olive branch of assurance in its mouth.

A. 4. Let us lie at the pool of the ordinances, frequent the word and
sacrament, Cant. 2:2., "He brought me to the banqueting-house, and
his banner over me was love." The blessed ordinances are the
banqueting-house where God displays the banner of assurance. The
sacrament is a sealing ordinance; Christ made himself known to his
disciples in the breaking of bread: so, in the holy supper, in the
breaking of bread God makes himself known to us, to be our God and
portion.
QUEST. 9. How should they carry themselves who have assurance?
Ans. 1. If you have assurance of your justification, do not abuse
assurance: 1. It is an abusing of assurance, when we grow more
remiss in duty; as the musician, having money thrown him, leaves off
playing By remissness, or intermitting the exercises of religion, we
grieve the Spirit, and that is the way to have an embargo laid upon
our spiritual comforts.—2. We abuse assurance, when we grow
presumptuous and less fearful of sin. What! because a father gives
his son an assurance of his love, and tells him he will entail his land
upon him, shall the son therefore be wanton and dissolute? This
were the way to lose his father's affection, and make him cut off the
entail; it was an aggravation of Solomon's sin, "his heart was turned
away from the Lord, after he had appeared to him twice," 1 Kings
11:9. It is bad to sin when one wants assurance, but it is worse to sin
when one hath it. Hath the Lord sealed his love with a kiss? Hath he
left a pledge of heaven in your hand, and do you thus requite the
Lord? Will you sin with manna in your mouth? Doth God give you
the sweet clusters of assurance to feed on, and will you return him
wild grapes? It much pleaseth Satan, either to see us want assurance,
or abuse it: this is to abuse assurance, when the pulse of our soul
beats faster in sin, and slower in duty.

A. 2. If you have assurance, admire this stupendous mercy. You
deserved that God should give you gall and vinegar to drink, and
hath he made the honey-comb of his love to drop upon you? O fall
down and adore his goodness! Say, Lord, how is it that thou
shouldest manifest thyself to me, and not to other believers! those
whom thou lovest as the apple of thine eye, yet thou boldest them in
suspense, and givest them no assurance of thy love; though thou hast
given them the new name, yet not the white stone; though they have
the seed of grace, yet not the oil of gladness; though they have the
Holy Ghost, the sanctifier, yet not the Holy Ghost, the comforter!
Lord, whence is it that thou shouldest manifest thyself to me, and
make my golden beams of assurance shine upon my soul? O admire
God! this will be the work of heaven.
A. 3. Let your hearts be endeared in love to God. If God gives his
people correction, they must love him; much more when he gives
them assurance, Ps. 31:23., "O love the Lord, ye his saints." Hath God
brought you to the borders of Canaan,—given you a bunch of grapes,
—crowned you with loving-kindness,—confirmed your pardon under
the broad seal of heaven? How can you be frozen at such a fire? How
can you choose but be turned into seraphims burning in divine love!
Say as St. Austin, animam meam in odio haberem,—'I would hate my
own soul,' if I did not find it loving God. Give God the cream and
quintessence of your love, and shew your love by being willing to lose
all for his sake.
A. 4. If you have assurance, improve it for God's glory, several ways:
1. By encouraging such as are yet unconverted; tell them how sweet
this hidden manna is; tell them what a good master you serve, what
gales you have had; tell them God hath carried you to the hill of
myrrh, to the mountains of spices, he hath given you not only a
prospect of heaven, but an earnest. O persuade sinners, by all the

love and mercy of God, that they would enrol their names in his
family, and cast themselves upon him for salvation! Tell them, God
hath met with you, and unlocked the secrets of free grace, and
assured you of a land flowing with those infinite delights which eye
hath not seen. Thus, by telling others what God hath done for your
soul, you may make them in love with the ways of God, and cause
them to turn proselytes to religion.—2. Improve assurance, by
comforting such as want it: Be as the good Samaritan, pour wine and
oil into their wounds. You who have assurance, are gotten, as it were
to the haven, you are sure of your happiness: but do you not see
others who are struggling with the waves of temptation and
desertion, and are ready to sink? O now sympathize with them, and
do what you can to comfort them when they are in this deep ocean! 2
Cor. 1:6., "Whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation." The
comfortable experience of one Christian, being communicated to
another doth much revive and bear up his fainting heart: "Our
comfort," saith the apostle, "is for your consolation."—3. Improve
assurance by walking more heavenly. You should scorn these things
below; you who have an earnest of heaven, should not be too earnest
for the earth: you have angels' food, and it becomes not you with the
serpent to lick the dust. The wicked are all for corn, wine, and oil, but
you have that which is better: God hath lifted up the light of his
countenance; will you hanker after the world, when you have been
feeding upon the grapes and pomegranates of the holy land? Do you
now lust after the garlic and onions of Egypt? When you are clothed
with the sun, will you set the moon and stars above you? O! let them
scramble for the world, who have nothing else but husks to feed on,
have you assurance of heaven, and is not that enough? Will not a
kingdom satisfy you? Such as are high in assurance, should be in the
altitudes, live above the world.—4. Improve assurance by a cheerful
walking. It is for condemned persons to go hanging down their
heads: but hast thou thy absolution? Doth thy God smile on thee?

Cheer up, 2 Sam. 13:4., "Why art thou, being the king's son, lean?"
Art thou the king's son,—hath God assured thee of thy adoption, and
art thou sad? Assurance should be an antidote against all trouble.
What though the world hate thee, yet thou art assured that thou art
one of God's favourites. What though there is but little oil in the
cruse, and thou art low in the world, yet thou art high in assurance. O
then rejoice! How musical is the bird,—how doth it chirp and sing,
that knows not where to pick up the next crumb! and shall they be
sad and discontented, who have God's bond to assure them of their
daily bread, and his love to assure them of heaven? But certainly
those who have assurance, cannot but be of a sanguine complexion.
A. 5. If you have an assurance of salvation, let this make you long
after a glorified state. He who hath an earnest in his hand, desires
the whole sum to he paid; that soul who hath tasted how sweet the
Lord is, should long for a fuller enjoyment of him in heaven. Hath
Christ put this ring of assurance on thy hand, and so espoused thee
to himself; how shouldest thou long for the marriage-supper of the
Lamb? Rev. 19:9. O Christian, think with thyself, if a glimpse of
heaven, a smile of God's face be so sweet, what will it be, to be ever
sunning thyself in the light of God's countenance! Certainly, you who
have an assurance of your title to heaven, cannot but desire
possession. Be content to live, but willing to die.
A. 6. If you have assurance, be careful you do not lose it; keep it, for
it is your life, viz. Bene esse,—the comfort of your life. Keep
assurance, 1st, By prayer, Ps 36:10., "O continue thy lovingkindness:" Lord, continue assurance; do not take away this privy seal
from me. 2dly, Keep assurance by humility; pride estrangeth God
from the soul; when you are high in assurance, be low in humility. St.
Paul had assurance, and he baptizeth himself with this name, "Chief

of sinners," 1 Tim. 1:15. The jewel of assurance is best kept in the
cabinet of an humble heart.

OF PEACE
1 PET. 1:2. Grace unto you and peace be multiplied.
Having spoken of the first fruit of sanctification, assurance, I proceed
to the second, viz. Peace, "Peace be multiplied."
QUEST. What are the several species or kinds of Peace?
Ans. Peace, in scripture, is compared to a river, Isa. 66:12., this river
parts itself into two silver streams.
1st. There is an external peace, and that is, 1. Œconomical, peace in a
family. 2. Political, peace in the state. Peace is the nurse of plenty, Ps.
147:14., "He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat." How pleasant is it when the waters of blood
begin to assuage, and we can see the windows of our ark open, and
the dove returning with an olive branch of peace! 3. Ecclesiastical,
peace in the church. Unity in Trinity is the greatest mystery in
heaven, and Unity in verity the greatest mercy on earth. Peace
ecclesiastical stands in opposition to schism and persecution.
2dly, A spiritual peace, which is twofold,—peace above us, or peace
with God,—and peace within us, or peace with conscience. This is
superlative; other peace may be lasting, but this is everlasting.
QUEST. 2. Whence comes this peace?

Ans. This peace hath the whole Trinity for its author, 1. God the
Father is "the God of peace," 1 Thess. 5:23. 2. God the Son is the
"Prince of peace," Isa. 9:6. 3. Peace is said to be the "fruit of the
Spirit," Gal. 5:22.
1. God the Father is the God of peace. As he is the God of order, 1
Cor. 14:33., so the God of peace, Phil. 4:9. This was the form of the
priest's blessing the people, Numb. 6:26., "The Lord give thee peace."
2. God the Son is the purchaser of peace. He had made peace by his
blood, Col. 1:20., "Having made peace through the blood of his
cross." The atonement Aaron made for the people when he entered
into the holy of holies with blood, was a type of Christ our high
priest, who hath by his sacrifice pacified his angry Father, and made
atonement for us. Christ purchased our peace upon hard terms; his
soul was in an agony, while he was travailing to bring forth peace to
the world.
3. Peace is a fruit of the Spirit. He seals up peace to the conscience.
The Spirit clears up the work of grace in the heart from whence
ariseth peace. There was a well of water near Hagar, but she did not
see it, therefore wept: a Christian hath grace, but doth not see it,
therefore weeps. Now the Spirit discovers this well of water, it
enables conscience to witness to a man that hath the real work of
grace, and so peace flows into the soul. Thus you see whence this
peace comes: the Father decrees it, the Son purchaseth it, the Holy
Ghost applies it.
QUEST. 3. Whether such as are destitute of grace may have peace?
Ans. No. Peace flows from sanctification, but they being
unregenerate, have nothing to do with peace, Isa. 57:21., "There is no
peace, saith my God, to the wicked." They may have a truce, but no

peace. God may forbear the wicked a while, and stop the roaring of
his cannon; but though there be a truce, yet no peace. The wicked
may have something which looks like peace, but it is not. They may
be fearless and stupid; but there is a great difference between a
stupified conscience, and a pacified conscience, Luke 11:21., "When a
strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace." This is
the devil's peace; he rocks men in the cradle of security; he cries,
'peace! peace!' when men are on the precipice of hell. The seeming
peace a sinner hath, is not from the knowledge of his happiness, but
the ignorance of his danger.
QUEST. 4. What are the signs of a false peace?
Ans. 1. A false peace hath much confidence in it, but this confidence
is conceit. The sinner doth not doubt of God's mercy; from which
presumptuous confidence ariseth some kind of quiet in the mind.
The same word in the Hebrew (cassal) signifies both confidence and
folly. Indeed a sinner's confidence is folly; how confident were the
foolish virgins?
A. 2. False peace separates those things which God hath joined
together: God joins holiness and peace, but he who hath a false
peace, separates these two. He lays claim to peace, but banisheth
holiness, Deut. 29:19., "I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst." The wicked
are loose and vain, and yet thank God that they have peace,—a
delusion. You may as well suck health out of poison, as peace out of
sin.
A. 3. False peace is not willing to be tried; a sign they are bad wares
which will not endure the light; a sign a man hath stolen goods, when
he will not have his house searched. A false peace cannot endure to
be tried by the word. The word speaks of an humbling and refining

work upon the soul before peace; false peace cannot endure to hear
of this; the least trouble will shake this peace, it will end in despair.
In a false peace, conscience is asleep; but, when this lion of
conscience shall be awakened at death, then it will roar upon a man,
he will be a terror to himself, and be ready to lay violent hands upon
himself.
QUEST. 5. How shall we know that ours is a true peace?
Ans. 1. True peace flows from union with Christ. Communio fundatur
in unione. The graft or scion must first be innoculated into the tree
before it can receive sap or nourishment from it; so we must first be
ingrafted into Christ, before we can receive peace from him. Have we
faith? By holiness we are made like Christ; by believing we are made
one with Christ, and being in Christ we have peace, John 16:33.
A. 2. True peace flows from subjection to Christ; where Christ gives
peace, there he sets up his government in the heart, Isa. 9:7., "Of his
government and peace there shall be no end." Christ is called "a
priest upon his throne," Zech. 6:13. Christ as a priest makes peace;
but he will be a priest upon his throne, he brings the heart in
subjection to him. If Christ be our peace, he is our prince, Isa. 9:6.
Whenever Christ pacifies the conscience, he subdues the lust.
A. 3. True peace is after trouble. First, God lets loose a spirit of
bondage, he convinceth and humbleth the soul; then he speaks
peace. Many say they have peace, but is this peace before a storm, or
after it? True peace is after trouble. First there was the earthquake,
and then the fire, and then the still small voice, 1 Kings 19:11. Thou
who never hadst any legal bruisings, mayest suspect thy peace; God
pours the golden oil of peace into broken hearts.
QUEST. 6. Whether have all sanctified persons this peace?

Ans. They have a title to it; they have the ground of it; grace is the
seed of peace, and it will in time turn to peace, as the blossoms of a
tree to fruit, milk to cream. They have a promise of it, Ps. 29:11. "The
Lord will bless his people with peace." They may have peace with
God, though not peace in their own conscience; they have the initials
and beginnings of peace. There is a secret peace the heart hath in
serving God; such meltings and enlargements in duty as do revive
the soul, and bear it up from sinking.
QUEST. 7. But why have not all believers the full enjoyment and
possession of peace? Why is not this flower of peace fully ripe and
blown?
Ans. Some of the godly may not have so full a degree of peace. 1.
Through the fury of temptation. The devil, if he cannot destroy us, he
will disturb us. Satan disputes against our adoption; he would make
us question the work of grace in our hearts, and so troubles the
waters of our peace: Satan is like a subtle cheater, who, if he cannot
make a man's title to his land void, yet he will put him to many
troublesome suits in law. If Satan cannot make us ungodly, he will
make us unquiet: violent winds make the sea rough and stormy; the
winds of temptation blowing, disturb peace of spirit, and put the soul
into a commotion.—2. The godly may not enjoy peace, through
mistake and misapprehension about sin. They find so much
corruption, that sure, if there were grace, there would not be such
strong working of corruption: whereas this should be so far from
discouraging Christians, and hindering their peace, that it is an
argument for them. Let me ask, Whence is it that you feel sin? No
man can feel sin, but by grace. A wicked man is insensible; lay an
hundred weight upon a dead man, he doth not complain, but the
being sensible of corruption argues a gracious principle, Rom. 7:21.
Again, Whence is it that there is a combat with sin, but from the life

of grace? Gal. 5:17. Dead things cannot combat. Whence is it that the
saints weep for sin? what are these tears but seeds of faith? The not
understanding of this, hinders a Christian's peace.—3. The godly may
not enjoy peace, through remissness in duty; they leave their first
love. When Christians abate their fervency, God abates their peace; if
you slacken the strings of a viol, the music is spoiled, if Christians
slack in duty, they spoil the sweet music of peace in their souls. As
the fire decays, so the cold increaseth; as fervency in duty abates, so
our peace cools.
Use 1st. Labour for this blessed peace,—peace with God and
conscience. Peace with neighbour-nations is sweet, Pax una
triumphis inumeris melior. The Hebrew word schalom, 'peace,'
comprehends all blessings, it is the glory of a kingdom; a prince's
crown is more beautiful when it is hung with the white lily of peace,
than when it is set with the red roses of a bloody war. O then, how
sweet is peace of conscience! It is a bulwark against the enemy, Phil.
4:7., it shall keep you as in a garrison; you may throw out the
gauntlet and bid defiance to the enemies; it is the golden pot and the
manna; it is the first fruits of paradise. It is still music; for want of
this a Christian is in continual fear, he doth not take that comfort in
ordinances. Hannah went up to the feast at Jerusalem, but "she wept
and did not eat," 1 Sam. 1:7. So, a poor dejected soul goes to an
ordinance, but doth not eat of the feast; he weeps and doth not eat.
He cannot take that comfort in worldly blessings, health, estate,
relations; he wants that inward peace, which should be a sauce to
sweeten his comforts. O therefore labour for this blessed peace!
Consider the noble and excellent effects of it: 1. It gives boldness at
the throne of grace; guilt of conscience clips the wings of prayer,—it
makes the face blush, and the heart faint,—but when a Christian hath
some lively apprehensions of God's love, and the Spirit whispering
peace, then he goes to God with boldness, as a child to his father, Ps.

25:1., "Unto thee, O Lord, I lift up my soul." Time was when David's
soul was bowed down, Ps. 38:6., "I am bowed down greatly;" but now
the case is altered, he will lift up his soul to God in a way of triumph,
whence was this? God hath spoken peace to his soul, Ps. 26:3., "Thy
loving-kindness is before mine eyes."—2. This divine peace fires the
heart with love to Christ. Peace is the result of pardon; he who hath a
pardon sealed cannot choose but love his prince. How endeared is
Christ to the soul! Now Christ is precious indeed. 'O, saith the soul,
how sweet is this rose of Sharon! Hath Christ waded through a sea of
blood and wrath, to purchase my peace? Hath he not only made
peace, but spoke peace to me? How should my heart ascend in a fiery
chariot of love! How willing should I be to do and suffer for Christ!'—
3. This peace quiets the heart in trouble, Mic. 5:5., "This man shall be
the peace, when the Assyrian shall come into our land, and tread in
our palaces." The enemy may invade our palaces, but not our peace;
this man Christ shall be the peace. When the head aches, the heart
may be well; when worldly troubles assault a Christian, his mind may
he in peace and quiet, Ps. 4:8., "I will lay me down in peace, and
sleep." 'Twas now a sad time with David, he was fleeing for his life
from Absalom; it was no small affliction to think that his own son
should seek to take away his Father's life and crown; David wept and
covered his face, 2 Sam. 15:30., yet at this time, saith he, "I will lay
me down in peace and sleep." He had trouble from his son, but peace
from his conscience; David could sleep upon the soft pillow of a good
conscience; this is a peace worth getting.
QUEST. 8. What shall we do to attain this blessed peace?
Ans. 1. Let us ask it of God. He is the God of peace, he beats back the
roaring lion, he stills the raging of conscience; if we could call all the
angels out of heaven, they could not speak peace without God. The
stars cannot make day without the sun; none can make day in a dark

deserted soul, but the Sun of Righteousness. As the wilderness
cannot water itself, but remains dry and parched till the clouds drop
their moisture: so our hearts cannot have peace till he infuse it, and
drop it upon us by his Spirit. Therefore pray, "Lord, thou who art the
God of peace, create peace; thou who art the Prince of peace,
command it. Give me that peace which may sweeten trouble, yea, the
bitter cup of death."
A. 2. If you would have peace, make war with sin. Sin is the Achan
that troubles us,—the Trojan horse,—2 Kings 9:22., "When Joram
saw Jehu, he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace,
so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts
are so many?" What peace, so long as sin remains unmortified? If
you would have peace with God, break the league with sin,—give
battle to sin, it is a most just war, God hath proclaimed it, nay, he
hath promised us victory, "Sin shall not have dominion," Rom. 6:14.
No way to peace, but by maintaining a war with sin. Pax nostra
bellum contra dæmonem, TERT. When Samson had slain the lion,
there came honey out of the lion: by slaying sin, we get this honey of
peace.
A. 3. Go to Christ's blood for peace. Some go to fetch their peace from
their own righteousness, not Christ's; they go for peace to their holy
life, not Christ's death; if conscience be troubled, they strive to quiet
it with their duties. This is not the right way to peace; duties must
not be neglected, nor yet idolized. Look up to the blood of sprinkling,
Heb. 12:24. That blood of Christ which pacified God, must pacify
conscience; Christ's blood being sucked in by faith, gives peace, Rom.
5:1., "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God." No balm to
cure a wounded conscience, but the blood of Christ.

A. 4. Walk closely with God. Peace flows from purity, Gal. 6:16., "As
many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them." In the text,
grace and peace are put together; grace is the root, and peace is the
flower. As balm-water drops from the limbec, so divine peace comes
out of the limbec of a gracious heart. Walk very holily: God's Spirit is
first a refiner before a comforter.
Use 2d. You who have this peace,—peace above,—peace within,—
labour to keep it; it is a precious jewel, do not lose it; it is sad to have
the league of national peace broken, but it is worse to have the peace
of conscience broken: Oh preserve this peace! First, take heed of
relapses. Hath God spoken peace? do not turn again to folly, Ps.
85:8. Besides the ingratitude, there's folly in relapses. It was long ere
God was reconciled and the breach made up, and will you again
eclipse and forfeit your peace? Hath God healed the wound of
conscience, and will you tear it open again? Will you break another
vein? Will you cut a new artery? this is returning indeed to folly.
What madness is it to meddle again with that sin, which will breed
the worm of conscience! Secondly, Make up your spiritual accounts
daily; see how matters stand between God and your souls, Ps. 77:6.,
"I commune with my own heart." Often reckonings keep God and
conscience friends; do with your hearts as you do with your watches,
wind them up every morning by prayer, and at night examine
whether your hearts have gone true all that day, whether the wheels
of your affections have moved swiftly toward heaven. Oh call
yourselves often to account; keep your reckonings even, and that is
the way to keep your peace.

OF JOY

GAL. 5:22. The fruit of the Spirit is joy.
The third fruit of justification, adoption, and sanctification, is joy in
the Holy Ghost. Joy is the setting the soul upon the top of a pinnacle,
'tis the cream of the sincere milk of the word.
QUEST. What is this joy?
Ans. Spiritual joy is a sweet and delightful passion, arising from the
apprehension and feeling of some good, whereby the soul is
supported under present troubles, and fenced against future fear.
1. It is a delighful passion. So it is contrary to sorrow, which is a
perturbation of mind, whereby the heart is perplexed and cast down.
Joy is a sweet and pleasant affection, which eases the mind,
exhilarates and comforts the spirits.
2. It ariseth from the feeling of some good. Joy is not a fancy, or bred
of conceit; but is rational, and ariseth from the feeling of some good,
viz. the sense of God's love and favour. Joy is so real a thing that it
makes a sudden change in a person; it turns mourning into melody.
As in the spring-time, when the sun comes to our horizon, it makes a
sudden alteration in the face of the universe,—the birds sing,—the
flowers appear,—the fig-tree puts forth her green figs,—every thing
seems to rejoice and put off its mourning, as being revived with the
sweet influence of the sun: so, when the Sun of Righteousness ariseth
on the soul, it makes a sudden alteration, and the soul is infinitely
rejoiced with the golden beams of God's love.
3. By it the soul is supported under present troubles. Joy stupifies
and swallows up troubles; it carries the heart above them, as the oil
swims above the water.

4. The heart is fenced against future fear. Joy is both a cordial and an
antidote; it is a cordial which gives present relief to the spirits when
they are sad; and an antidote, it fenceth off fear of approaching
danger, Ps. 23:4., "I will fear no evil; for thou art with me, thy rod
and thy staff comfort me."
QUEST. How is this joy wrought?
Ans. 1. It ariseth partly from the promise; as the bee lies at the breast
of the flower, and sucks out the sweetness from it, so faith lies at the
breast of a promise and sucks out the quintessence of joy, Ps. 94:19.,
"Thy comforts delight my soul;" that is, the comforts which distil
from the limbeck of the promises.
A. 2. The Spirit of God (who is called the 'Comforter,' John 14:26.)
doth sometimes drop in this golden oil of joy into the soul; the Spirit
whispers to a believer the remission of his sin, and sheds God's love
abroad into the heart, Rom. 5:5., whence flows infinite joy and
delight.
QUEST. What are the seasons when God doth usually give his people
these divine joys?
Ans. Five seasons: 1st Season. Sometimes at the blessed supper; the
soul oft comes weeping after Christ in the sacrament, and God sends
it away weeping for joy. The Jews had a custom at their feasts, they
poured ointment on their guests, and kissed them: in the Eucharist,
God often pours the oil of gladness on the saints, and kisseth them
with the kisses of his lips. There are two grand ends of the
sacrament, the strengthening of faith, and the flourishing of joy.
Here in this ordinance, God displays the banner of his love; here
believers taste not only sacramental bread, but hidden manna.
Caution, not that God always meets the soul with joy. He may give

increase of grace, when not increase of joy; but oftentimes he pours
in the oil of gladness, and gives the soul a privy seal of his love, as
Christ made himself known in the breaking of bread.
2d Season. Before God calls his people to suffering, Acts 23:11., "Be
of good cheer, Paul." When God was about to give Paul a cup of blood
to drink, he spiced it with joy, 2 Cor. 1:5., "As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth:" this made the
martyrs' flames beds of roses, when Stephen was stoning, he saw
heaven open, and the Sun of Righteousness shined in his face. God
candies our wormwood with sugar.
3d Season. After sore conflicts with Satan. Satan is the red dragon
who troubleth the waters; he puts the soul into frights, makes it
believe that it hath no grace, and that God doth not love it; though
Satan cannot blot out a Christian's evidence, yet he may cast such a
mist before his eyes, that he cannot read it. Now, when the soul hath
been bruised with temptations, God will comfort this bruised reed:
he now gives joy, ad corroborandum titulum,—to confirm a
Christian's title to heaven. After Satan's fiery darts, comes the white
stone; no better balm to heal a tempted soul, than the oil of gladness:
as after Christ was tempted, then came an angel to comfort him.
4th Season. After desertion: desertion is a poisoned arrow which
shoots to the heart, Job 6:4. God is called a fire and a light: the
deserted soul feels the fire, but doth not see the light; it cries out, as
Asaph, Ps. 77:8., "Is his mercy clean gone?" Now, when the soul is in
this case, and ready to faint away in despair, God shines upon the
soul, and gives it some apprehension of his favour, and turns the
shadow of death into the light of the morning. God keeps his cordials
for a time of fainting. Joy after desertion is like a resurrection from
the dead.

5th Season. At the hour of death, such as have had no joy in their
lifetime, God puts in this sugar in the bottom of the cup, to make
their death sweet. Now, at the last hour, when all other comforts are
gone, God sends the Comforter: and when their appetite to meat
fails, God feeds them with hidden manna. Sure, as the wicked, before
they die, have some apprehensions of hell and wrath in their
conscience; so the godly have some foretastes of God's everlasting
favour, though sometimes their diseases may be such, and their
animal spirits so oppressed, that they cannot express what they feel.
Jacob laid himself to sleep on a stone, where he saw a vision, a
ladder, and the angels ascending and descending: so, when the saints
lay themselves down to sleep the sleep of death, they have often a
vision; they see the light of God's face, and have the evidences of his
love sealed up to them for ever.
QUEST. 4. What are the differences between wordly joys and
spiritual?
Ans. The gleanings of the one are better than the vintage of the other.
1. Spiritual joys help to make us better, worldly joys do often make us
worse, Jer. 22:21., "I spake unto thee in thy prosperity, but thou
saidst, I will not hear." Pride and luxury are the two worms bred of
wordly pleasures, Hos. 4:11., "Wine takes away the heart;" it is
fomentum libidinis, 'the inflamer of lust.' AUG. As Satan entered in
the sop, so often in the cup! but spiritual joy makes one better; it is
like cordial water, which (as physicians say) doth not only cheer the
heart, but purges out the noxious humours; so divine joy is a cordial
water, which doth not only comfort but cleanse; it makes a Christian
more holy,—it causeth an antipathy against sin,—it infuseth strength
to do and suffer, Neh. 8:10., "The joy of the Lord is your strength." As
some colours do not only delight the eye, but strengthen the sight: so

the joys of God do not only refresh the soul, but strengthen it. "The
joy of the Lord is your strength."
A. 2. Spiritual joys are inward,—they are heart joys, John 16:22.,
"Your heart shall rejoice." Seneca saith, true joy latet in profundo,—it
is hidden within; worldly joy is in superficie,—it lies on the outside,
like the dew that wets the leaf, 2 Cor. 5:12., who "glory in
appearance," (in the Greek) in the face. It goes no farther than the
face,—it is not within,—in 'laughter the heart is sad.' Like a house
which hath a gilded frontispiece, but all the rooms within are hung in
mourning. But spiritual joy lies most within, 'Your heart shall
rejoice.' Divine joy is like a spring of water which runs under ground:
a Christian, others can see his sufferings, but they see not his joy,
Prov. 14:10., "A stranger intermeddleth not with his joy." This joy is
hidden manna, hid from the eye of the world: he hath still music
which others hear not; the marrow lies within, the best joy is within
the heart.
A. 3. Spiritual joys are sweeter than others, better than wine, Cant.
1:2. They are a Christian's festival; they are the golden pot and the
manna; they are so sweet, that they make every thing else sweet,—
sweeten health, estate, as sweet water poured on flowers make them
more fragrant and aromatical. Divine joys are so delicious and
ravishing, that they do very much put our mouth out of taste to
earthly delights; as he who hath been drinking spirits of alkermes,
tastes little sweetness in water. St. Paul had tasted these divine joys,
and his mouth was out of taste to worldly things: the world was
crucified to him, Gal. 6:14. It was like a dead thing, he could find no
sweetness in it.
A. 4. Spiritual joys are more pure, they are not tempered with any
bitter ingredients; a sinner's joy is mixed with dregs, it is imbittered

with fear and guilt; the wolf feeds in the breasts of his joy, he drinks
wormwood wine, but spiritual joy is not muddied with guilt, but like
a crystal stream, runs pure; it is all spirits and quintessence,—it is joy
and nothing but joy,—it is a rose without prickles,—it is honey
without the wax.
A. 5. These are satisfying and filling joys, John 16:24., "Ask that your
joy may be full." Worldly joys can no more fill the heart, than a drop
can fill a cistern; they may please the palate or fancy, (Plato calls
them 'pictures of joy') not satisfy the soul, Eccl. 1:8, "The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing;" but the joys of God
satisfy, Ps. 94:19., "Thy comforts delight my soul." There is as much
difference between spiritual joys and earthly, as between a banquet
that is eaten, and one that is painted on the wall.
A. 6. These are stronger joys than worldly, Heb. 6:18., "Strong
consolation." They are strong indeed, that can bear up a Christian's
heart in trials and afflictions, 1 Thess. 1:6., "Having received the word
in much affliction, with joy." These are roses that grow in winter,
these joys can sweeten the waters of Marah, he that hath these can
gather grapes of thorns, and fetch honey out of the carcass of a lion, 2
Cor. 6:10., "As sorrowing, yet always rejoicing." At the end of the rod
a Christian tastes honey.
A. 7. These are unwearied joys: other joys, when in excess, oft cause a
loathing,—we are apt to surfeit on them,—too much honey nauseates,
—one may be tired with pleasure as well as labour,—Xerxes offered a
reward to him that could find out a new pleasure: but the joys of
God, though they satisfy, yet they never surfeit; a drop of joy is sweet,
but the more of this wine the better; such as drink of the joys of
heaven are never cloyed; the satiety is without loathing, because they
still desire the joy wherewith they are satiated.

A. 8. These are more abiding joys. Worldly joys are soon gone; such
as crown themselves with rose-buds, and bathe in the perfumed
waters of pleasure, yet these joys which seem to be sweet are swift,
like meteors, they give a bright and sudden flash, and then
disappear; but the joys which believers have are abiding; they are a
blossom of eternity, a pledge and earnest of those rivers of pleasure
which run at God's right hand for evermore.
QUEST. 5. Why is this joy to he laboured for?
Ans. 1. Because this joy is self-existent,—it can subsist in the want of
all other carnal joy. This joy depends not upon outward things. As
the philosophers once said, when the musicians came to them,
"philosophers can be merry without music;" he that hath this joy can
be cheerful in the deficiency of carnal joys; he can rejoice in God, in
sure hope of glory, "though the fig-tree doth not flourish," Hab. 3:17.
Spiritual joy can go without silver crutches to support it. Spiritual joy
is higher built than upon creatures, it is built on the love of God; on
the promises; on the blood of Christ.
A. 2. Because spiritual joy carries the soul through duty cheerfully;
the sabbath is a delight, religion is a recreation. Fear and sorrow
hinder us in the discharge of duty; but a Christian serves God with
activity, when he serves him with joy. The oil of joy makes the wheels
of obedience move faster. How fervently did they pray whom God
made joyful in the house of prayer? Isa. 56:7.
A. 3. It is called the kingdom of God, Rom. 14:17., because it is a taste
of that which the saints have in the kingdom of God. What is the
heaven of the angels but the smiles of God's face,—the sensible
perception and feeling of those joys which are infinitely ravishing
and, full of glory? And to encourage and quicken us in seeking after
them, consider, that Christ died to purchase this joy for his saints: he

was a man of sorrows, that we may be full of joy, he prays that the
saints may have this divine joy, John 17:13., "And now I come to
thee, that they may have my joy fulfilled in themselves." And this
prayer he now prays over in heaven; he knows we never love him so
as when we feel his love: which may encourage us to seek after this
joy; we pray for that which Christ himself is praying for, that his joy
may be fulfilled in us.
QUEST. 6. What shall we do to obtain this spiritual joy?
Ans. Walk accurately and heavenly; God gives it after a long and
close walking with him. 1. Observe your hours; set time every day
apart for God. 2. Mourn for sin: mourning is the seed (as Basil saith)
out of which the flower of spiritual joy grows, Isa. 57:18., "I'll restore
comfort to his mourners." 3. Keep the book of conscience fair
written: do not by presumptuous sins blur your evidences: a good
conscience is the ark where God puts the hidden manna. 4. Be often
upon your knees, pray with life and fervency. The same Spirit that
fills the heart with sighs, fills it with joys. The same Spirit that indites
the prayer seals it. When Hannah had prayed, her countenance was
no more sad, 1 Sam. 1:18. Praying Christians have much intercourse
with God, and none are so like to have the secrets of his love
imparted, as those who hold correspondence with him; by a close
walking with God, we get these bunches of grapes by the way, which
are an earnest of future happiness.
QUEST. 7. How shall we comfort them that want joy?
Ans. Such as walk in close communion with God have more than
others.
1. Initial joy, joy in semine,—in the seed, Ps. 97:11., "Light (a
metaphor for joy) is sown for the righteous." Grace in the heart is a

seed of joy; though a Christian wants the sun, he hath a daystar in his
heart.
2. A believer hath real, though not royal comforts; he hath, as
Aquinas saith, gaudium in Deo, though not a Deo,—joy 'in God,'
though not 'from God.' Joy in God is the delight and complacency the
soul takes in God, Ps. 104:34., "I will be glad in the Lord." He that is
truly gracious, is so far joyful as to take comfort in God; though he
cannot say, God rejoiceth in him, yet he can say, he rejoiceth in God.
3. He hath supporting, though not transporting comforts; he hath so
much, that keeps him from sinking, Ps. 138:3., "Thou strengthenedst
me with strength in my soul." If a Christian hath not God's arm to
embrace him, yet to uphold him: thus a Christian, who walks with
God, hath something that bears up his heart from sinking, and it is
but waiting a while, and he is sure of those joys which are
unspeakable, and full of glory.
Use 1st. Then see that religion is no melancholy thing; it brings joy;
the fruit of the Spirit is joy,—Mutatur non tolitur. A poor Christian
that feeds on bread and water may have purer joy than the greatest
monarch; though he fares hard, he feeds high; he hath a table spread
from heaven,—angels' food,—hidden manna; he hath sometimes
those sweet raptures of joy, as a cause of jubilation of spirit, 2 Cor.
12:3., he hath that which is better felt than can be expressed.
Use 2. If God gives his people such joy in this life: O then what
glorious joy will he give them in heaven! Mat. 25:21., "Enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord." Here joy begins to enter into us, there we
shall enter into joy; God keeps his best wine till last. Heliogabalus
bathed himself in sweet perfumed waters: what joy when the soul
shall for ever bathe itself in the pure and pleasant fountain of God's
love? What joy to see the orient brightness of Christ's face, and have

the kisses of those lips which drop sweet smelling myrrh? Lætabitur
sponsa in amplexibus Domini, AUG. O! if a cluster of grapes here be
so sweet, what will the full vintage be? How may this set us all a
longing for that place where sorrow cannot live, and where joy
cannot die!
