PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 28
Our Public Prayer


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 4. Our Public Prayer.

LECTURE IV
OUR PUBLIC PRAYER
IT has sometimes been the boast of Episcopalians that Churchmen
go to their churches to pray and worship God, but that Dissenters
merely assemble to hear sermons. Our reply to this is, that albeit
there may be some professors who are guilty of this evil, it is not true
of the people of God among us, and these are the only persons who
ever will in any church really enjoy devotion. Our congregations
gather together to worship God, and we assert, and feel no hesitation
in so asserting, that there is as much true and acceptable prayer

offered in our ordinary Nonconformist services as in the best and
most pompous performances of the Church of England.
Moreover, if the observation be meant to imply that the hearing of
sermons is not worshipping God, it is founded on a gross mistake, for
rightly to listen to the gospel is one of the noblest parts of the
adoration of the Most High. It is a mental exercise, when rightly
performed, in which all the faculties of the spiritual man are called
into devotional action. Reverently hearing the word exercises our
humility, instructs our faith, irradiates us with joy, inflames us with
love, inspires us with zeal, and lifts us up towards heaven. Many a
time a sermon has been a kind of Jacob's ladder upon which we have
seen the angels of God ascending and descending, and the covenant
God himself at the top thereof. We have often felt when God has
spoken through his servants into our souls, "This is none other than
the house of God, and the very gate of heaven." We have magnified
the name of the Lord and praised him with all our heart while he has
spoken to us by his Spirit which he has given unto men. Hence there
is not the wide distinction to be drawn between preaching and prayer
that some would have us admit; for the one part of the service softly
blends into the other, and the sermon frequently inspires the prayer
and the hymn. True preaching is an acceptable adoration of God by
the manifestation of his gracious attributes: the testimony of his
gospel, which pre-eminently glorifies him, and the obedient hearing
of revealed truth, are an acceptable form of worship to the Most
High, and perhaps one of the most spiritual in which the human
mind can be engaged. Nevertheless, as the old Roman poet tells us, it
is right to learn from our enemies, and therefore it may be possible
that our liturgical opponents have pointed out to us what is in some
instances a weak place in our public services. It is to be feared that
our exercises are not in every case moulded into the best form, or
presented in the most commendable fashion. There are meetinghouses in which the supplications are neither so devout nor so
earnest as we desire; in other places the earnestness is so allied with
ignorance, and the devotion so marred with rant, that no intelligent
believer can enter into the service with pleasure. Praying in the Holy

Ghost is not universal among us, neither do all pray with the
understanding as well as with the heart. There is room for
improvement, and in some quarters there is an imperative demand
for it. Let me, therefore, very earnestly caution you, beloved
brethren, against spoiling your services by your prayers: make it your
solemn resolve that all the engagements of the sanctuary shall be of
the best kind.
Be assured that free prayer is the most scriptural, and should be the
most excellent form of public supplication. If you lose faith in what
you are doing you will never do it well; settle it in your minds
therefore, that before the Lord you are worshipping in a manner
which is warranted by the word of God, and accepted of the Lord.
The expression, "reading prayers," to which we are now so
accustomed, is not to be found in Holy Scripture, rich as it is in
words for conveying religious thought; and the phrase is not there
because the thing itself had no existence. Where in the writings of the
apostles meet we with the bare idea of a liturgy? Prayer in the
assemblies of the early Christians was unrestricted to any form of
words. Tertullian writes, "we pray without a prompter because from
the heart."1 Justin Martyr describes the presiding minister as
praying "according to his ability."2 It would be difficult to discover
when and where liturgies began; their introduction was gradual, and
as we believe, co-extensive with the decline of purity in the church;
the introduction of them among Nonconformists would mark the era
of our decline and fall. The subject tempts me to linger, but it is not
the point in hand, and therefore I pass on, only remarking that you
will find the matter of liturgies ably handled by Dr. John Owen,
whom you will do well to consult.3
Be it ours to prove the superiority of extempore prayer by making it
more spiritual and earnest than liturgical devotion. It is a great pity
when the observation is forced from the hearer, our minister
preaches far better than he prays: this is not after the model of our
Lord; he spake as never man spake--and as for his prayers, they so
impressed his disciples that they said, "Lord, teach us to pray." All

our faculties should concentrate their energy, and the whole man
should be elevated to his highest point of vigour while in public
prayer, the Holy Ghost meanwhile baptizing soul and spirit with his
sacred influence; but slovenly, careless, lifeless talk in the guise of
prayer, made to fill up a certain space in the service, is a weariness to
man, and an abomination to God. Had free prayer been universally
of a higher order a liturgy would never have been thought of, and today forms of prayer have no better apology than the feebleness of
extemporaneous devotions. The secret is that we are not so really
devout at heart as we should be. Habitual communion with God
must be maintained, or our public prayers will be vapid or formal. If
there be no melting of the glacier high up in the ravines of the
mountain, there will be no descending rivulets to cheer the plain.
Private prayer is the drill ground for our more public exercises,
neither can we long neglect it without being out of order when before
the people.
Our prayers must never grovel, they must soar and mount. We need
a heavenly frame of mind. Our addresses to the throne of grace must
be solemn and humble, not flippant and loud, or formal and careless.
The colloquial form of speech is out of place before the Lord; we
must bow reverently and with deepest awe. We may speak boldly
with God, but still he is in heaven and we are upon earth, and we are
to avoid presumption. In supplication we are peculiarly before the
throne of the Infinite, and as the courtier in the king's palace puts on
another mien and another manner than that which he exhibits to his
fellow courtiers, so should it be with us. We have noticed in the
churches of Holland, that as soon as the minister begins to preach
every man puts his hat on, but the instant he turns to pray everybody
takes his hat off: this was the custom in the older Puritanic
congregations of England, and it lingered long among the Baptists;
they wore their caps during those parts of the service which they
conceived were not direct worship, but put them off as soon as there
was a direct approach to God, either in song or in prayer. I think the
practice unseemly, and the reason for it erroneous. I have urged that
the distinction between prayer and hearing is not great, and I feel

sure no one would propose to return to the old custom or the opinion
of which it was the index; but still there is a difference, and inasmuch
as in prayer we are more directly talking with God rather than
seeking the edification of our fellow men, we must put our shoes
from off our feet, for the place whereon we stand is holy ground.
Let the Lord alone be the object of your prayers. Beware of having
an eye to the auditors; beware of becoming rhetorical, to please the
listeners. Prayer must not he transformed into "an oblique sermon."
It is little short of blasphemy to make devotion an occasion for
display. Fine prayers are generally very wicked prayers. In the
presence of the Lord of hosts it ill becomes a sinner to parade the
feathers and finery of tawdry speech with the view of winning
applause from his fellow mortals. Hypocrites who dare to do this
have their reward, but it is one to be dreaded. A heavy sentence of
condemnation was passed upon a minister when it was flatteringly
said that his prayer was the most eloquent ever offered to a Boston
congregation. We may aim at exciting the yearnings and aspirations
of those who hear us in prayer; but every word and thought must be
Godward, and only so far touching upon the people as may be
needful to bring them and their wants before the Lord. Remember
the people in your prayers, but do not mould your supplications to
win their esteem: look up, look up with both eyes.
Avoid all vulgarities in prayer. I must acknowledge to having heard
some, but it would be unprofitable to recount them; the more
especially as they become less frequent every day. We seldom now
meet with the vulgarities of prayer which were once so common in
Methodist, prayer-meetings, much commoner probably, by report
than in reality. Uneducated people must, when in earnest, pray in
their own way, and their language will frequently shock the
fastidious if not the devout; but for this allowance must be made, and
if the spirit is evidently sincere we may forgive uncomely
expressions. I once, at a prayer-meeting, heard a poor man pray
thus: "Lord, watch over these young people during the feast time, for
thou knowest, Lord, how their enemies watch for them as a cat

watches for mice." Some ridiculed the expression, but it appeared to
me to be natural and expressive, considering the person using it. A
little gentle instruction and a hint or two will usually prevent a
repetition of anything objectionable in such cases, but we, who
occupy the pulpit, must be careful to be quite clear ourselves. The
biographer of that remarkable American Methodist preacher, Jacob
Gruber, mentions as an instance of his ready wit, that after having
heard a young Calvinistic minister violently attack his creed, he was
asked to conclude with prayer, and among other petitions, prayed
that the Lord would bless the young man who had been preaching,
and grant him much grace, "that his heart might become as soft as
his head." To say nothing of the bad taste of such public
animadversion upon a fellow minister, every right-minded man will
see that the throne of the Most High is not the place for uttering such
vulgar witticisms. Most probably the young orator deserved a
castigation for his offence against charity, but the older one sinned
ten times more in his want of reverence. Choice words are for the
King of kings, not such as ribald tongues have defiled.
Another fault equally to be avoided in prayer is an unhallowed and
sickening superabundance of endearing words. When "Dear Lord"
and "Blessed Lord" and "Sweet Lord" come over and over again as
vain repetitions, they are among the worst of blots. I must confess I
should feel no revulsion in my mind to the words, "Dear Jesus," if
they fell from the lips of a Rutherford, or a Hawker, or a Herbert; but
when I hear fond and familiar expressions hackneyed by persons not
at all remarkable for spirituality, I am inclined to wish that they
could, in some way or other, come to a better understanding of the
true relation existing between man and God. The word "dear" has
come from daily use to be so common, and so small, and in some
cases so silly and affected a monosyllable, that interlarding one's
prayers with it is not to edification.
The strongest objection exists to the constant repetition of the word
"Lord," which occurs in the early prayers of young converts, and even
among students. The words, "O Lord! O Lord! O Lord!" grieve us

when we hear them so perpetually repeated. "Thou shalt not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain," is a great commandment, and
although the law may be broken unwittingly, yet its breach is still a
sin and a very solemn one. God's name is not to be a stop-gap to
make up for our want of words. Take care to use most reverently the
name of the infinite Jehovah. The Jews in their sacred writings either
leave a space for the word "Jehovah," or else write the word,
"Adonai," because they conceive that holy name to be too sacred for
common use: we need not be so superstitious, but it were well to be
scrupulously reverent. A profusion of "ohs!" and other interjections
may be well dispensed with; young speakers are often at fault here.
Avoid that kind of prayer which may be called--though the subject
is one on which language has not given us many terms--a sort of
peremptory demanding of God. It is delightful to hear a man wrestle
with God, and say, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me," but
that must be said softly, and not in a hectoring spirit, as though we
could command and exact blessings from the Lord of all. Remember,
it is still a man wrestling, even though permitted to wrestle with the
eternal I AM. Jacob halted on his thigh after that night's holy
conflict, to let him see that God is terrible, and that his prevailing
power did not lie in himself. We are taught to say, "Our Father," but
still it is, "Our Father who art in heaven." Familiarity there may be,
but holy familiarity; boldness, but the boldness which springs from
grace and is the work of the Spirit; not the boldness of the rebel who
carries a brazen front in the presence of his offended king, but the
boldness of the child who fears because he loves, and loves because
he fears. Never fall into a vainglorious style of impertinent address to
God; he is not to be assailed as an antagonist, but entreated with as
our Lord and God. Humble and lowly let us be in spirit, and so let us
pray.
Pray when you profess to pray, and don't talk about it. Business
men say, "A place for everything and everything in its place;" preach
in the sermon and pray in the prayer. Disquisitions upon our need of
help in prayer are not prayer. Why do not men go at once to prayer--

why stand beating about the bush; instead of saying what they ought
to do and want to do, why not set to work in God's name and do it?
In downright earnestness, address yourself to intercession, and set
your face towards the Lord. Plead for the supply of the great and
constant needs of the church, and do not fail to urge, with devout
fervour, the special requirements of the present time and audience.
Let the sick, the poor, the dying, the heathen, the Jew, and all
forgotten classes of people, be mentioned as they press upon your
heart. Pray for your people as saints and sinners--not as if they were
all saints. Mention the young and the aged; the impressed and the
careless; the devout and the backsliding. Never turn to the right hand
or to the left, but plough on in the furrow of real prayer. Let your
confessions of sin and your thanksgivings be truthful and to the
point; and let your petitions be presented as if you believed in God
and had no doubt as to the efficacy of prayer: I say this, because so
many pray in such a formal manner as to lead observers to conclude
that they thought it a very decent thing to pray, but, after all, a very
poor and doubtful business as to any practical result. Pray as one
who has tried and proved his God, and therefore comes with
undoubting confidence to renew his pleadings: and do remember to
pray to God right through the prayer, and never fall to talking or
preaching--much less, as some do, to scolding and grumbling.
As a rule, if called upon to preach, conduct the prayer yourself; and
if you should be highly esteemed in the ministry, as I trust you may
be, make a point, with great courtesy, but equal firmness, to resist
the practice of choosing men to pray with the idea of honouring them
by giving them something to do. Our public devotions ought never to
be degraded into opportunities for compliment. I have heard prayer
and singing, now and then called "the preliminary services," as if
they were but a preface to the sermon; this is rare I hope among us-if it were common it would be to our deep disgrace. I endeavour
invariably to take all the service myself for my own sake, and I think
also for the people's. I do not believe that "anybody will do for the
praying." No,sirs, it is my solemn conviction that the prayer is one of
the most weighty, useful, and honourable parts of the service, and

that it ought to be even more considered than the sermon. There
must be no putting up of anybodies and nobodies to pray, and then
the selection of the abler man to preach. It may happen through
weakness, or upon a special occasion, that it may be a relief to the
minister to have some one to offer prayer for him; but if the Lord has
made you love your work you will not often or readily fulfil this part
of it by proxy. If you delegate the service at all, let it be to one in
whose spirituality and present preparedness you have the fullest
confidence; but to pitch on a giftless brother unawares, and put him
forward to get through the devotions is shameful.
"Shall we serve heaven with less respect
Than we do minister to our gross selves?"
Appoint the ablest man to pray, and let the sermon be slurred sooner
than the approach to heaven. Let the Infinite Jehovah be served with
our best; let prayer addressed to the Divine Majesty be carefully
weighed, and presented with all the powers of an awakened heart
and a spiritual understanding. He who has been by communion with
God prepared to minister to the people, is usually of all men present
the most fit to engage in prayer; to lay out a programme which puts
up another brother in his place, is to mar the harmony of the service,
to rob the preacher of an exercise which would brace him for his
sermon, and in many instances to suggest comparisons between one
part of the service and the other which ought never to be tolerated. If
unprepared brethren are to be sent into the pulpit to do my praying
for me when I am engaged to preach, I do not see why I might not be
allowed to pray, and then retire to let these brethren do the
sermonizing. I am not able to see any reason for depriving me of the
holiest, sweetest and most profitable exercise which my Lord has
allotted me; if I may have my choice, I will sooner yield up the
sermon than the prayer. Thus much I have said in order to impress
upon you that you must highly esteem public prayer, and seek of the
Lord for the gifts and graces necessary to its right discharge.

Those who despise all extempore prayer will probably catch at these
remarks and use them against it, but I can assure them that the faults
adverted to are not common among us, and are indeed almost
extinct; while the scandal caused by them never was, at the worst, so
great as that caused by the way in which the liturgical service is often
performed. Far too often is the church service hurried through in a
manner as indevout as if it were a ballad-singer's ditty. The words
are parroted without the slightest appreciation of their meaning; not
sometimes, but very frequently, in the places set apart for Episcopal
worship, you may see the eyes of the people, and the eyes of the
choristers, and the eyes of the parson himself, wandering about in all
directions, while evidently from the very tone of the reading there is
no feeling of sympathy with what is being read.4 I have been at
funerals when the burial service of the church of England has been
galloped through so indecorously that it has taken all the grace I had
to prevent my throwing a hassock at the creature's head. I have felt
so indignant that I have not known what to do, to hear, in the
presence of mourners whose hearts were bleeding, a man rattling
through the service as if he were paid by the piece, and had more
work to follow, and therefore desired to get it through as quickly as
possible. What effect he could think he was producing, or what good
result could come from words jerked forth and hurled out with
vengeance and vehemence, I cannot imagine. It is really shocking to
think of how that very wonderful burial service is murdered, and
made into an abomination by the mode in which it is frequently read.
I merely mention this because, if they criticise our prayers too
severely, we can bring a formidable countercharge to silence them.
Better far, however, for us to amend our own blunders than find fault
with others.
In order to make our public prayer what it should be, the first
necessary is, that it must be a matter of the heart. A man must be
really in earnest in supplication. It must be true prayer, and if it be
such, it will, like love; cover a multitude of sins. You can pardon a
man's familiarities and his vulgarities too, when you clearly see that
his inmost heart is speaking to his Maker, and that it is only the

man's defects of education which create his faults, and not any moral
or spiritual vices of his heart. The pleader in public must be in
earnest; for a sleepy prayer---what can be a worse preparation for a
sermon? A sleepy prayer---what can make people more dislike going
up to the house of God at all? Cast your whole soul into the exercise.
If ever your whole manhood was engaged in anything, let it be in
drawing near unto God in public. So pray, that by a divine attraction,
you draw the whole congregation with you up to the throne of God.
So pray, that by the power of the Holy Spirit resting on you, you
express the desires and thoughts of everyone present, and stand as
the one voice for the hundreds of beating hearts which are glowing
with fervour before the throne of God.
Next to this, our prayers must be appropriate. I do not say go into
every minute detail of the circumstances of the congregation. As I
have said before, there is no need to make the public prayer a gazette
of the week's events, or a register of the births, deaths, and marriages
of your people, but the general movements that have taken place in
the congregation should be noted by the minister's careful heart. He
should bring the joys and sorrows of his people alike before the
throne of grace, and ask that the divine benediction may rest upon
his flock in all their movements, their exercises, engagements, and
holy enterprises, and that the forgiveness of God may be extended to
their shortcomings and innumerable sins.
Then, by way of negative canon, I should say, do not let your prayer
be long. I think it was John Macdonald who used to say, "If you are
in the spirit of prayer, do not be long, because other people will not
be able to keep pace with you in such unusual spirituality; and if you
are not in the spirit of prayer, do not be long, because you will then
be sure to weary the listeners." Livingstone says of Robert Bruce, of
Edinburgh, the famous co-temporary of Andrew Melville, "No man
in his time spoke with such evidence and power of the Spirit. No man
had so many seals of conversion; yea, many of his hearers thought no
man, since the apostles, spake with such power. He was very short in
prayer when others were present, but every sentence was like a

strong bolt shot up to heaven. I have heard him say that he wearied
when others were long in prayer; but, being alone, he spent much
time in wrestling and prayer." A man may, on special occasions, if he
be unusually moved and carried out of himself, pray for twenty
minutes in the long morning prayer, but this should not often
happen. My friend, Dr. Charles Brown, of Edinburgh, lays it down, as
a result of his deliberate judgment, that ten minutes is the limit to
which public prayer ought to be prolonged. Our Puritanic forefathers
used to pray for three-quarters of an hour, or more, but then you
must recollect that they did not know that they would ever have the
opportunity of praying again before an assembly, and therefore, took
their fill of it; and besides, people were not inclined in those days to
quarrel with the length of prayers or of sermons so much as they do
nowadays. You cannot pray too long in private. We do not limit you
to ten minutes there, or ten hours, or ten weeks if you like. The more
you are on your knees alone the better. We are now speaking of those
public prayers which come before or after the sermon, and for these
ten minutes is a better limit than fifteen. Only one in a thousand
would complain of you for being too short, while scores will murmur
at your being wearisome in length. "He prayed me into a good frame
of mind," George Whitfield once said of a certain preacher, "and if he
had stopped there, it would have been very well; but he prayed me
out of it again by keeping on." The abundant long suffering of God
has been exemplified in his sparing some preachers, who have been
great sinners in this direction; they have done much injury to the
piety of God's people by their long-winded orations, and yet God, in
his mercy, has permitted them still to officiate in the sanctuary. Alas!
for those who have to listen to pastors who pray in public for fiveand-twenty minutes, and then ask God to forgive their
"shortcomings"! Do not be too long, for several reasons. First,
because you weary yourselves and the people; and secondly, because
being too long in prayer, puts your people out of heart for hearing the
sermon. All those dry, dull, prolix talkifications in prayer, do but
blunt the attention, and the ear gets, as it were, choked up. Nobody
would think of blocking up Ear-gate with mud or stones when he
meant to storm the gate. No, let the portal be cleared that the

battering-ram of the gospel may tell upon it when the time comes to
use it. Long prayers either consist of repetitions, or else of
unnecessary explanations which God does not require; or else they
degenerate into downright preachings, so that there is no difference
between the praying and the preaching, except that in the one the
minister has his eyes shut, and in the other he keeps them open. It is
not necessary in prayer to rehearse the Westminster Assembly's
Catechism. It is not necessary in prayer to relate the experience of all
the people who are present, or even your own. It is not necessary in
prayer to string a selection of texts of Scripture together, and quote
David, and Daniel, and Job, and Paul, and Peter, and every other
body, under the title of "thy servant of old." It is necessary in prayer
to draw near unto God, but it is not required of you to prolong your
speech till everyone is longing to hear the word "Amen."
One little hint I cannot withhold--never appear to be closing, and
then start off again for another five minutes. When friends make up
their minds that you are about to conclude, they cannot with a jerk
proceed again in a devout spirit. I have known men tantalize us with
the hope that they were drawing to a close, and then take a fresh
lease two or three times; this is most unwise and unpleasant.
Another canon is--do not use cant phrases. My brethren, have done
with those vile things altogether; they have had their day, and let
them die. These pieces of spiritual fustian cannot be too much
reprobated. Some of them are pure inventions; others are passages
taken from the Apocrypha; others are texts fathered upon Scripture,
but which have been fearfully mangled since they came from the
Author of the Bible. In the Baptist Magazine for 1861 I made the
following remarks upon the common vulgarities of prayer-meetings.
"Cant phrases are a great evil. Who can justify such expressions as
the following? 'We would not rush into thy presence as the
unthinking (!!) horse into the battle.' As if horses ever did think, and
as if it were not better to exhibit the spirit and energy of the horse
than the sluggishness and stupidity of the ass! As the verse from
which we imagine this fine sentence to be derived has more to do

with sinning than with praying, we are glad that the phrase is on its
last legs. 'Go from heart to heart, as oil from vessel to vessel,' is
probably a quotation from the nursery romance of 'Ali Baba, and the
Forty Thieves,' but as destitute of sense, Scripture, and poetry, as
ever sentence could be conceived to be. We are not aware that oil
runs from one vessel to another in any very mysterious or wonderful
manner; it is true it is rather slow in coming out, and is therefore an
apt symbol of some people's earnestness; but surely it would be
better to have the grace direct from heaven than to have it out of
another vessel---a Popish idea which the metaphor seems to
insinuate, if indeed it has any meaning at all. 'Thy poor unworthy
dust,' an epithet generally applied to themselves by the proudest men
in the congregation, and not seldom by the most moneyed and
grovelling, in which case the last two words are not so very
inappropriate. We have heard of a good man who, in pleading for his
children and grandchildren, was so completely beclouded in the
blinding influence of this expression, that he exclaimed, 'O Lord,
save thy dust, and thy dust's dust, and thy dust's dust's dust.' When
Abraham said, 'I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which
am but dust and ashes,' the utterance was forcible and expressive;
but in its misquoted, perverted, and abused form, the sooner it is
consigned to its own element the better. A miserable conglomeration
of perversions of Scripture, uncouth similes, and ridiculous
metaphors, constitute a sort of spiritual slang, the offspring of
unholy ignorance, unmanly imitation, or graceless hypocrisy; they
are at once a dishonour to those who constantly repeat them, and an
intolerable nuisance to those whose ears are jaded with them."
Dr. Charles Brown, of Edinburgh, in an admirable address at a
meeting of the New College Missionary Association, gives instances
of current misquotations indigenous to Scotland, which sometimes,
however, find their way across the Tweed. By his permission, I shall
quote at length. "There is what might be called an unhappy,
sometimes, quite grotesque, mingling of Scripture texts. Who is not
familiar with the following words addressed to God in prayer, 'Thou
art the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, and the praises

thereof'! which is but a jumble of two glorious texts, each glorious
taken by itself--both marred, and one altogether lost indeed, when
thus combined and mingled. The one is Isaiah lvii. 15, 'Thus saith the
high and lofty One, that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is Holy.'
The other is, Psalm xxii. 3, 'Thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the
praises of Israel.' The inhabiting of the praises of eternity, to say the
least, is meagre; there were no praises in the past eternity to inhabit.
But what a glory is there in God's condescending to inhabit, take up
his very abode, in the praises of Israel, of the ransomed church. Then
there is an example nothing less than grotesque under this head, and
yet one in such frequent use that I suspect it is very generally
regarded as having the sanction or Scripture. Here it is, 'We would
put our hand on our mouth, and our mouth in the dust, and cry out,
Unclean, unclean; God be merciful to us sinners.' This is no fewer
than four texts joined, each beautiful by itself. First, Job xl. 4,
'Behold, I am vile; what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon
my mouth.' Second, Lamentations iii. 29, 'He putteth his mouth in
the dust; if so be there may be hope.' Third, Leviticus xiii. 45, where
the leper is directed to put a covering upon his upper lip, and to cry,
Unclean, unclean. And fourth, the publican's prayer. But how
incongruous a man's first putting his hand on his mouth, then
putting his mouth in the dust, and, last of all, crying out, etc.! The
only other example I give is an expression nearly universal among us,
and, I suspect, almost universally thought to be in Scripture, 'In thy
favour is life, and thy lovingkindness is better than life.' The fact is,
that this also is just an unhappy combination of two passages, in
which, the term life is used in altogether different, and even
incompatible senses, namely, Psalm lxiii. 3, 'Thy lovingkindness is
better than life,' where, evidently, life means the present temporal
life.
"A second class may be described as unhappy alterations of Scripture
language. Need I say that the 130th Psalm, 'Out of the depths,' etc., is
one of the most precious in the whole book of the Psalms? Why must
we have the words of David and of the Holy Ghost thus given in
public prayer, and so constantly that our pious people come all to

adopt it into their social and family prayers, 'There is forgiveness
with thee, that thou mayest be feared, and plenteous redemption
that thou mayest be sought after,' or 'unto'? How precious the
simple words as they stand in the Psalm (verse 4), 'There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared' (verses 7, 8); 'With
the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption; and
he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities!' Again, in this blessed
Psalm, the words of the third verse, 'If thou, Lord, shouldest mark
iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand?' too seldom are left us in their
naked simplicity, but must undergo the following change, 'If thou
wert strict to mark iniquity,' etc. I remember in my old college days,
We used to have it in a much more offensive shape, 'If thou wert
strict to mark and rigorous to punish!' Another favourite change is
the following, 'Thou art in heaven, and we upon earth; therefore let
our words be few and well ordered.' Solomon's simple and sublime
utterance (full of instruction, surely, on the whole theme I am
dealing with) is, 'God is in heaven, and thou upon earth; therefore let
thy words be few.' Eccles. v. 2. For another example under this class
see how Habakkuk's sublime words are tortured, 'Thou art of purer
eyes than to behold evil, and canst not look on sin without
abhorrence.' The words of the Holy Ghost are (Heb. i. 13), 'Thou art
of purer eyes than to behold evil. and canst not look on iniquity.'
Need I say that the power of the figure, 'canst not look on iniquity' is
nearly lost when you add that God can look on it, only not without
abhorrence!
"A third class is made up of meaningless pleonasms, vulgar,
common-place redundancies of expression, in quoting from the
Scriptures. One of these has become so universal, that I venture to
say you seldom miss it, when the passage referred to comes up at all.
'Be in the midst of us' (or, as some prefer to express it, somewhat
unfortunately, as I think, 'in our midst'), 'to bless us, and to do us
good.' What additional idea is there in the last expression, 'and to do
us good'? The passage referred to is Exodus xx. 24, 'In all places
where I record my name, I will come unto you, and I will bless you.'
Such is the simplicity of Scripture. Our addition is, 'Bless us, and do

us good.' In Daniel iv. 35, we read the noble words, 'None can stay
his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?' The favourite change is,
'None can stay thy hand from working.' 'Eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither have entered into the heart of man the things which
God hath prepared for them that love him!' This is changed, 'Neither
hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things.'
Constantly we hear God addressed as 'the hearer and answerer of
prayer,' a mere vulgar and useless pleonasm, for the Scripture idea of
God's hearing prayer is just his answering it--'O thou that hearest
prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come;' "Hear my prayer O Lord;' , I
love the Lord because he hath heard my voice and my supplications.'
Whence, again, that common-place of public prayer, 'Thy
consolations are neither few nor small'? The reference, I suppose, is
to those words of Job, 'Are the consolations of God small with thee?'
So one scarce ever hears that prayer of the seventy-fourth Psalm,
'Have respect to the covenant, for the dark places of the earth are full
of the habitations of cruelty,' without the addition, 'horrid cruelty;'
nor the call to prayer in Isaiah, 'Keep not silence, and give him no
rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth,' without the addition, 'the whole earth;' nor that appeal of the
Psalmist, 'Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none upon
earth that I desire beside thee,' without the addition, 'none in all the
earth.' These last may seem small matters, indeed. And so they are,
nor were worth finding fault with, did they occur but occasionally.
But viewed as stereotyped common-places, weak enough in
themselves, and occurring so often as to give an impression of their
having Scripture authority. I humbly think they ought to be
discountenanced and discarded--banished wholly from our
Presbyterian worship. It will, perhaps surprise you to learn that the
only Scripture authority for that favourite, and somewhat peculiar
expression, about the 'wicked rolling sin as a sweet morsel under
their tongue,' is the following words in the book of Job (xx. 12),
'Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under
his tongue.'"

But enough of this. I am only sorry to have felt bound in conscience
to be so long upon so unhappy a subject. I cannot, however, leave the
point without urging upon you literal accuracy in all quotations from
the word of God.
It ought to be a point of honour among ministers always to quote
Scripture correctly. It is difficult to be always correct, and because it
is difficult, it should be all the more the object of our care. In the
halls of Oxford or Cambridge it would be considered almost treason
or felony for a fellow to misquote Tacitus, or Virgil, or Homer; but
for a preacher to misquote Paul, or Moses, or David, is a far more
serious matter, and quite as worthy of the severest censure. Mark, I
said a "fellow," not a freshman, and from a pastor we expect, at least,
equal accuracy in his own department as from the holder of a
fellowship. You who so unwaveringly believe in the verbalinspiration theory (to my intense satisfaction), ought never to quote
at all until you can give the precise words, because, according to your
own showing, by the alteration of a single word you may miss
altogether God's sense of the passage. If you cannot make extracts
from Scripture correctly, why quote it at all in your petitions? Make
use of an expression fresh from your own mind, and it will be quite
as acceptable to God as a scriptural phrase defaced or clipped.
Vehemently strive against garblings and perversions of Scripture,
and renounce for ever all cant phrases, for they are the disfigurement
of free prayer.
I have noticed a habit among some--I hope you have not fallen into
it--of praying with their eyes open. It is unnatural, unbecoming, and
disgusting. Occasionally the opened eye uplifted to heaven may be
suitable and impressive, but to be gazing about while professing to
address the unseen God is detestable. In the earliest ages of the
church the fathers denounced this unseemly practice. Action in
prayer should be very little used, if at all. It is scarcely comely to lift
and move the arm, as if in preaching; the outstretched arms
however, or the clasped hands, are natural and suggestive when
under strong holy excitement. The voice should accord with the

matter, and should never be boisterous, or self-asserting: humble
and reverent let those tones be in which man talketh with his God.
Doth not even nature itself teach you this? If grace does not I
despair.
With special regard to your prayers in the Sabbath services, a few
sentences may be useful. In order to prevent custom and routine
from being enthroned among us, it will be well to vary the order of
service as much as possible. Whatever the free Spirit moves us to do,
that let us do at once. I was not till lately aware of the extent to which
the control of deacons has been allowed to intrude itself upon
ministers in certain benighted churches. I have always been
accustomed to conduct religious services in the way I have thought
most suitable and edifying, and I never have heard so much as a
word of objection, although I trust I can say I live on the dearest
intimacy with my officers; but a brother minister told me this
morning, that on one occasion, he prayed in the morning service at
the commencement instead of giving out a hymn, and when he
retired into the vestry, after service, the deacons informed him that
they would have no innovations. We hitherto understood that Baptist
churches are not under bondage to traditions and fixed rules as to
modes of worship, and yet these poor creatures, these would-be
lords, who cry out loudly enough against a liturgy, would bind their
minister with rubrics made by custom. It is time that such nonsense
were forever silenced. We claim to conduct service as the Holy Spirit
moves us, and as we judge best. We will not be bound to sing here
and pray there, but will vary the order of service to prevent
monotony. Mr. Hinton, I have heard, once preached the sermon at
the commencement of the service, so that those who came late might
at any rate have an opportunity to pray. And why not? Irregularities
would do good, monotony works weariness. It will frequently be a
most profitable thing to let the people sit quite still in profound
silence for two or five minutes. Solemn silence makes noble worship.
True prayer is not the noisy sound
That clamorous lips repeat,

But the deep silence of a soul
That clasps Jehovah's feet.
Vary the order of your prayers, then, for the sake of maintaining
attention, and preventing people going through the whole thing as a
clock runs on till the weights are down.
Vary the length, of your public prayers. Do you not think it would be
much better if sometimes instead of giving three minutes to the first
prayer and fifteen minutes to the second, you gave nine minutes to
each? Would it not be better sometimes to be longer in the first, and
not so long in the second prayer? Would not two prayers of tolerable
length he better than one extremely long and one extremely short?
Would it not be as well to have a hymn after reading the chapter, or a
verse or two before the prayer? Why not sing four times,
occasionally? Why not be content with two hymns, or only one,
occasionally? Why sing after sermon? Why, on the other hand, do
some never sing at the close of the service? Is a prayer after sermon
always, or even often, advisable? Is it not sometimes most
impressive? Would not the Holy Spirit's guidance secure us a variety
at present unknown? Let us have anything so that our people do not
come to regard any form of service as being appointed, and so
relapse into the superstition from which they have escaped.
Vary the current of your prayers in intercession. There are many
topics which require your attention; the church in its weakness, its
backslidings, its sorrows, and its comforts; the outside world, the
neighbourhood, unconverted hearers, the young people, the nation.
Do not pray for all these every time, or otherwise your prayers will be
long and probably uninteresting. Whatever topic shall come
uppermost to your heart, let that be uppermost in your supplications,
There is a way of taking a line of prayer, if the Ho]y Spirit shall guide
you therein, which will make the service all of a piece, and harmonize
with the hymns and discourse. It is very useful to maintain unity in
the service where you can; not slavishly, but wisely, so that the effect
is one. Certain brethren do not even manage to keep unity in the

sermon, but wander from Britain to Japan, and bring in all
imaginable subjects; but you who have attained to the preservation
of unity in the sermon might go a little farther, and exhibit a degree
of unity in the service, being careful in both the hymn, and the
prayer, and the chapter, to keep the same subject prominent. Hardly
commendable is the practice, common with some preachers, of
rehearsing the sermon in the last prayer. It may be instructive to the
audience, but that is an object altogether foreign to prayer. It is
stilted, scholastic, and unsuitable; do not imitate the practice.
As you would avoid a viper, keep from all attempts to work up
spurious fervour in public devotion. Do not labour to seem earnest.
Pray as your heart dictates, under the leading of the Spirit of God,
and if you are dull and heavy tell the Lord so. It will be no ill thing to
confess your deadness, and bewail it, and cry for quickening; it will
be real and acceptable prayer; but simulated ardour is a shameful
form of lying. Never imitate those who are earnest. You know a good
man who groans, and another whose voice grows shrill when he is
carried away with zeal, but do not therefore moan or squeak in order
to appear as zealous as they are. Just be natural the whole way
through, and ask of God to be guided in it all.
Lastly--this is a word I utter in confidence to yourselves--prepare
your prayer. You say with astonishment, "Whatever can you mean
by that?" Well, I mean what some do not mean. The question was
once discussed in a society of ministers, "Was it right for the minister
to prepare his prayer beforehand? It was earnestly asserted by Borne
that it was wrong; and very properly so. It was with equal
earnestness maintained by others that it was right; and they were not
to be gainsayed. I believe both parties to have been right. The first
brethren understood by preparing the prayer, the studying of
expressions, and the putting together of a train of thought, which
they all said was altogether opposed to spiritual worship, in which we
ought to leave ourselves in the hand of God's Spirit to be taught of
him both as to matter and words. In these remarks we altogether
agree; for if a man writes his prayers and studies his petitions, let

him use a liturgy at once. But the brethren in opposition, meant by
preparation quite another thing, not the preparation of the head, but
of the heart, which consists in the solemn consideration beforehand
of the importance of prayer, meditation upon the needs of men's
souls, and a remembrance of the promises which we are to plead;
and thus coming before the Lord with a petition written upon the
fleshy tables of the heart. This is surely better than coming to God at
random, rushing before the throne at haphazard, without a definite
errand or desire. "I never am tired of praying," said one man,
"because I always have a definite errand when I pray." Brethren, are
your prayers of this sort? Do you strive to be in a fit frame to lead the
supplications of your people? Do you order your cause in coming
before the Lord? I feel, my brethren, that we ought to prepare
ourselves by private prayer for public praying. By living near to God
we ought to maintain prayerfulness of spirit, and then we shall not
fail in our vocal pleadings. If anything beyond this is to be tolerated,
it would be the commitment to memory of the Psalms and parts of
Scripture containing promises, supplications, praises, and
confessions, such as may be helpful in the act of prayer. It is said of
Chrysostom, that he had learned his Bible by heart, so as to be able
to repeat it at his pleasure: no wonder that he was called goldenmouthed. Now, in our converse with God, no speech can be more
appropriate than the words of the Holy Ghost--"Do as thou hast
said," will always prevail with the Most High. We counsel, therefore,
the committing to memory of the inspired devotional exercises of the
word of truth, and then your continued reading of the Scriptures will
keep you always furnished with fresh supplications, which will be as
ointment poured forth, filling the whole house of God with its
fragrance, when you present your petitions in public before the Lord.
Seeds of prayer thus sown in the memory will yield a constant golden
harvest, as the Spirit shall warm your soul with, hallowed fire in the
hour of congregational prayer. As David used the sword of Goliath
for after victories, so may we at times employ a petition already
answered, and find ourselves able to say with the son of Jesse, "There
is none like unto it," as God shall yet again fulfil it in our experience.

Let your prayers be earnest, full of fire, vehemence, prevalence. I
pray the Holy Ghost to instruct every student of this College so to
offer public prayer, that God shall always be served of his best. Let
your petitions be plain and heart-felt; and while your people may
sometimes feel that the sermon was below the mark, may they also
feel that the prayer compensated for all.
Much more might be said, perhaps should be said, but time and
strength both fail us, and so we draw to a close.

1 "Denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus." Tertulliani
Apologet. C. 30.
2 Justin Martyr, Apol. I, c. 68, p. 270. Ed Otto.
3 A Discourse concerning Liturgies and their Imposition. Vo. XV,
Owen's Works, Goold's Edition.
4 It is but fair to admit, and we do so with pleasure, that of late years
this fault has grown more and more rare.
