PURITAN GOLD -- The Reformed Pastor by Richard Baxter: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 10
Application: Motives from the Difficulties of the Work


Having stated to you the first class of reasons, drawn from the benefits of
the work, I come to the second sort, which are taken from the difficulties. If
these, indeed, were taken alone, I confess they might be rather
discouragements than motives; but taking them with those that go before
and follow, the case is far otherwise: for difficulties must excite to greater
diligence in a necessary work.
And difficulties we shall find many, both in ourselves and in our people; but
because they are things so obvious, that your experience will leave you no
room to doubt of them, I shall pass them over in a few words.
1. Let me notice the difficulties in ourselves.
(1) In ourselves there is much dulness and laziness, so that it will not be
easy to get us to be faithful in so hard a work. Like a sluggard in bed, that
knows he should rise, and yet delayeth and would lie as long as he can, so
do we by duties to which our corrupt natures are averse. This will put us to
the use of all our powers. Mere sloth will tie the hands of many.
(2) We have a base man-pleasing disposition, which will make us let men
perish lest we lose their love, and let them go quietly to hell, lest we should
make them angry with us for seeking their salvation: and we are ready to
venture on the displeasure of God, and risk the everlasting misery of our
people, rather than draw on ourselves their ill-will. This distemper must be
diligently resisted.
(3) Many of us have also a foolish bashfulness, which makes us backward
to begin with them, and to speak plainly to them. We are so modest,
forsooth, that we blush to speak for Christ, or to contradict the devil, or to

save a soul, while, at the same time, we are less ashamed of shameful
works.
(4) We are so carnal that we are drawn by our fleshly interests to be
unfaithful in the work of Christ, lest we should lessen our income, or bring
trouble upon ourselves, or set people against us, or such like. All these
things require diligence in order to resist them.
(5) We are so weak in the faith, that this is the greatest impediment of all.
Hence it is, that when we should set upon a man for his conversion with all
our might, if there be not the stirrings of unbelief within us, whether there
be a heaven and a hell, yet at least the belief of them is so feeble, that it will
hardly excite in us a kindly, resolute, constant zeal, so that our whole
motion will be but weak, because the spring of faith is so weak. O what
need, therefore, have ministers for themselves and their work, to look well
to their faith, especially that their assent to the truth of Scripture, about the
joys and torments of the life to come, be sound and lively.
(6) Lastly, We have commonly a great deal of unskilfulness and unfitness
for this work. Alas! how few know how to deal with an ignorant, worldly
man, for his conversion! To get within him and win upon him; to suit our
speech to his condition and temper; to choose the meetest subjects, and
follow them with a holy mixture of seriousness, and terror, and love, and
meekness, and evangelical allurements – oh! who is fit for such a thing? I
profess seriously, it seems to me, by experience, as hard a matter to confer
aright with such a carnal person, in order to his change, as to preach such
sermons as ordinarily we do, if not much more. All these difficulties in
ourselves should awaken us to holy resolution, preparation, and diligence,
that we may not be overcome by them, and hindered from or in the work.
2. Having noticed these difficulties in ourselves, I shall now mention some
which we shall meet with in our people.
(1) Many of them will be obstinately unwilling to be taught; and scorn to
come to us, as being too good to be catechized, or too old to learn, unless
we deal wisely with them in public and private, and study, by the force of
reason, and the power of love, to conquer their perverseness.

(2) Many that are willing are so dull, that they can scarcely learn a leaf of a
catechism in a long time, and therefore they will keep away, as ashamed of
their ignorance, unless we are wise and diligent to encourage them.
(3) And when they do come, so great is the ignorance and
unapprehensiveness of many, that you will find it a very hard matter to get
them to understand you; so that if you have not the happy art of making
things plain, you will leave them as ignorant as before.
(4) And yet harder will you find it to work things upon their hearts, and to
set them so home to their consciences, as to produce that saving change,
which is our grand aim, and without which our labor is lost. Oh what a
block, what a rock, is a hardened, carnal heart! How strongly will it resist
the most powerful persuasions, and hear of everlasting life or death, as a
thing of nought! If, therefore, you have not great seriousness, and fervency,
and powerful matter, and fitness of expression, what good can you expect.
And when you have done all, the Spirit of grace must do the work. But as
God and men usually choose instruments suitable to the nature of the work
or end, so the Spirit of wisdom, life, and holiness doth not usually work by
foolish, dead, carnal instruments, but by such persuasions of light and life
and purity as are likest to itself, and to the work that is to be wrought
thereby.
(5) Lastly, When you have made some desirable impressions on their hearts,
if you look not after them, and have a special care of them, their hearts will
soon return to their former hardness, and their old companions and
temptations will destroy all again. In short, all the difficulties of the work of
conversion, which you use to acquaint your people with, are before us in
our present work.
ARTICLE 3
MOTIVES FROM THE NECESSITY OF THE WORK
The third sort of motives are drawn from the necessity of the work. For if it
were not necessary, the slothful might be discouraged rather than excited by
the difficulties now mentioned. But because I have already been longer than

I intended, I shall give you only a brief hint of some of the general grounds
of this necessity.
1. This duty is necessary for the glory of God. As every Christian liveth to
the glory of God, as his end, so will he gladly take that course which will
most effectually promote it. For what man would not attain his ends? O
brethren, if we could set this work on foot in all the parishes of England,
and get our people to submit to it, and then prosecute it skilfully and
zealously ourselves, what a glory would it put upon the face of the nation,
and what glory would, by means of it, redound to God! If our common
ignorance were thus banished, and our vanity and idleness turned into the
study of the way of life, and every shop and every house were busied in
learning the Scriptures and catechisms, and speaking of the Word and works
of God, what pleasure would God take in our cities and country! He would
even dwell in our habitations, and make them his delight. It is the glory of
Christ that shineth in his saints, and all their glory is his glory. That,
therefore, which honoureth them, in number or excellency, honoureth him.
Will not the glory of Christ be wonderfully displayed in the New Jerusalem,
when it shall descend from heaven in all that splendor and magnificence
with which it is described in the Book of Revelation? If, therefore, we can
increase the number or strength of the saints, we shall thereby increase the
glory of the King of saints; for he will have service and praise where before
he had disobedience and dishonor. Christ will also be honored in the fruits
of his blood shed, and the Spirit of grace in the fruit of his operations. And
do not such important ends as these require that we use the means with
diligence?
Every Christian is obliged to do all he can for the salvation of others; but
every minister is doubly obliged, because he is separated to the gospel of
Christ, and is to give up himself wholly to that work. It is needless to make
any further question of our obligation, when we know that this work is
needful to our people’s conversion and salvation, and that we are in general
commanded to do all that is needful to these ends, as far as we are able.
Whether the unconverted have need of conversion, I hope is not doubted
among us. And whether this be a means, and a most needful means,
experience may put beyond a doubt, if we had no more. Let them that have
taken most pains in public, examine their people, and try whether many of

them are not nearly as ignorant and careless as if’ they had never heard the
gospel. For my part, I study to speak as plainly and movingly as I can, (and
next to my study to speak truly, these are my chief studies,) and yet I
frequently meet with those that have been my hearers eight or ten years,
who know not whether Christ be God or man, and wonder when I tell them
the history of his birth and life and death, as if they had never heard it
before. And of those who know the history of the gospel, how few are there
who know the nature of that faith, repentance, and holiness which it
requireth, or, at least, who know their own hearts? But most of them have
an ungrounded trust in Christ, hoping that he will pardon, justify, and save
them, while the world hath their hearts, and they live to the flesh. And this
trust they take for justifying faith. I have found by experience, that some
ignorant persons, who have been so long unprofitable hearers, have got
more knowledge and remorse of conscience in half an hour’s close
discourse, than they did from ten years’ public preaching.
I know that preaching the gospel publicly is the most excellent means,
because we speak to many at once. But it is usually far more effectual to
preach it privately to a particular sinner, as to himself: for the plainest man
that is, can scarcely speak plain enough in public for them to understand;
but in private we may do it much more. In public we may not use such
homely expressions, or repetitions, as their dulness requires, but in private
we may. In public our speeches are long, and we quite over-run their
understandings and memories, and they are confounded and at a loss, and
not able to follow us, and one thing drives out another, and so they know
not what we said. But in private we can take our work gradatim, and take
our hearers along with us; and, by our questions, and their answers, we can
see how far they understand us, and what we have next to do. In public, by
length and speaking alone we lose their attention; but when they are
interlocutors, we can easily cause them to attend. Besides, we can better
answer their objections, and engage them by promises before we leave
them, which in public we cannot do. I conclude, therefore, that public
preaching will not be sufficient: for though it may be an effectual means to
convert many, yet not so many, as experience, and God’s appointment of
further means, may assure us. Long may you study and preach to little
purpose, if you neglect this duty.

2. This duty is necessary to the welfare of our people. Brethren, can you
look believingly on your miserable people, and not perceive them calling to
you for help? There is not a sinner whose case you should not so far
compassionate, as to be willing to relieve them at a much dearer rate than
this comes to. Can you see them, as the wounded man by the way, and
unmercifully pass by? Can you hear them cry to you, as the man of
Macedonia to Paul, in vision, ‘Come and help us,” and yet refuse your help?
Are you intrusted with the charge of an hospital, where one languisheth in
one corner, and another groaneth in another, and crieth out, ‘Oh, help me,
pity me for the Lord’s sake!’ and where a third is raging mad, and would
destroy himself and you; and yet will you sit idle and refuse your help If it
may be said of him that relieveth not men’s bodies, how much more of him
that relieveth not men’s souls, ‘If he see his brother have need, and shut up
his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?’
You are not such monsters, such hardhearted men, but you will pity a leper;
you will pity the naked, the imprisoned, or the desolate; you will pity him
that is tormented with grievous pain or sickness; and will you not pity an
ignorant, hard-hearted sinner will you not pity one that must be shut out
from the presence of the Lord, and lie under his remediless wrath, if
thorough repentance speedily prevent it not? Oh what a heart is it that will
not pity such a one! What shall I call the heart of such a man? A heart of
stone, a very rock or adamant; the heart of a tiger; or rather the heart of an
infidel: for surely if he believed the misery of the impenitent, it is not
possible but he should take pity on him. Can you tell men in the pulpit that
they shall certainly be damned, except they repent, and yet have no pity on
them when you have proclaimed to them such a danger And if you pity
them, will you not do this much for their salvation?
How many around you are blindly hastening to perdition, while your voice
is appointed to be the means of arousing and reclaiming them! The
physician hath no excuse who is doubly bound to relieve the sick, when
even every neighbor is bound to help them. Brethren, what if you heard
sinners cry after you in the streets, ‘O sir, have pity on me, and afford me
your advice! I am afraid of the everlasting wrath of God. I know I must
shortly leave this world, and I am afraid lest I shall be miserable in the
next.’ Could you deny your help to such poor sinners? What if they came to
your study-door, and cried for help, and would not go away till you had told

them how to escape the wrath of God? Could you find in your hearts to
drive them away without advice? I am confident you could not. Why, alas!
such persons are less miserable than they who will not cry for help. It is the
hardened sinner who cares not for your help, that most needs it: and he that
hath not so much life as to feel that he is dead, nor so much light as to see
his danger, nor so much sense left as to pity himself – this is the man that is
most to be pitied. Look upon your neighbors around you, and think how
many of them need your help in no less a case than the apparent danger of
damnation. Suppose that you heard every impenitent person whom you see
and know about you crying to you for help, As ever you pitied poor
wretches, pity us, lest we should be tormented in the flames of hell: if you
have the hearts of men, pity us.’ Now, do that for them that you would do if
they followed you with such expostulations. Oh how can you walk, and
talk, and be merry with such people, when you know their case? Methinks,
when you look them in the face, and think how they must suffer everlasting
misery, you should break forth into tears (as the prophet did when he looked
upon Hazael), and then fall on with the most importunate exhortations.
When you visit them in their sickness, will it not wound your hearts to see
them ready to depart into misery, before you have ever dealt seriously with
them for their conversion? Oh, then, for the Lord’s sake, and for the sake of
poor souls, have pity on them, and bestir yourselves, and spare no pains that
may conduce to their salvation.
3. This duty is necessary to your own welfare, as well as to your people’s.
This is your work, according to which, among others, you shall be judged.
You can no more be saved without ministerial diligence and fidelity, than
they or you can be saved without Christian diligence and fidelity. If,
therefore, you care not for others, care at least for yourselves. Oh what a
dreadful thing is it to answer for the neglect of such a charge! and what sin
more heinous than the betraying of souls? Doth not that threatening make
you tremble – ‘If thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that
wicked man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy
hand?’ I am afraid, nay, I have no doubt, that the day is near when
unfaithful ministers will wish that they had never known the charge of
souls; but that they had rather been colliers, or sweeps, or tinkers, than
pastors of Christ’s flock, when, besides all the rest of their sins, they shall
have the blood of so many souls to answer for. O brethren, our death, as

well as our people’s, is at hand, and it is as terrible to an unfaithful pastor as
to any. When we see that die we must, and that there is no remedy; that no
wit, nor learning, nor popular applause, can avert the stroke, or delay the
time; but, willing or unwilling, our souls must be gone, and that into a
world which we never saw, where our persons and our worldly interest will
not be respected; oh, then for a clear conscience, that can say, ‘I lived not to
myself but to Christ; I spared not my pains; I hid not my talents; I concealed
not men’s misery, nor the way of their recovery.’ O sirs, let us therefore take
time while we have it, and work while it is day; ‘for the night cometh, when
no man can work.’ This is our day too; and by doing good to others, we
must do good to ourselves. If you would prepare for a comfortable death,
and a great and glorious reward, the harvest is before you. Gird up the loins
of your minds, and quit yourselves like men, that you may end your days
with these triumphant words: ‘I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown
of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give unto me in
that day.’ If you would be blessed with those that die in the Lord, labor now,
that you may rest from your labors then, and do such works as you would
wish should follow you, and not such as will prove your terror in the
review.
ARTICLE 4
APPLICATION OF THESE MOTIVES
Having found so many and so powerful reasons to move us to this work, I
shall now apply them further for our humiliation and excitation.
1. What cause have we to bleed before the Lord this day, that we have
neglected so great and good a work so long; that we have been ministers of
the gospel so many years, and done so little by personal instruction and
conference for the saving of men’s souls! If we had but set about this
business sooner, who knows how many souls might have been brought to
Christ, and how much happier our congregations might have been? And
why might we not have done it sooner as well as now? I confess, there were
many impediments in our way, and so there are still, and will be while there
is a devil to tempt, and a corrupt heart in man to resist the light: but if the
greatest impediment had not been in ourselves, even in our own darkness,

and dulness, and indisposedness to duty, and our dividedness and unaptness
to close for the work of God, I see not but much might have been done
before this. We had the same God to command us, and the same miserable
objects of compassion, and the same liberty from governors as now we
have. We have sinned, and have no just excuse for our sin; and the sin is so
great, because the duty is so great, that we should be afraid of pleading any
excuse. The God of mercy forgive us, and all the ministry of England, and
lay not this or any of our ministerial negligences to our charge! Oh that he
would cover all our unfaithfulness, and, by the blood of the everlasting
covenant, wash away our guilt of the blood of souls; that when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, we may stand before him in peace, and may not be
condemned for the scattering of his flock. And oh that he would put up his
controversy. which he hath against the pastors of his Church, and not deal
the worse with them for our sakes, nor suffer underminers or persecutors to
scatter them, as they have suffered his sheep to be scattered; and that he will
not care as little for us, as we have done for the souls of men; nor think his
salvation too good for us, as we have thought our labor and sufferings too
much for men’s salvation!
As we have had many days of humiliation in England for the sins of the
land, and the judgments that have befallen us, I hope we shall hear that God
will more thoroughly humble the ministry, and cause them to bewail their
own neglects, and to set apart some days through the land to that end, that
they may not think it enough to lament the sins of others, while they
overlook their own; and that God may not abhor our solemn national
humiliations, because they are managed by unhumbled guides; and that we
may first prevail with him for a pardon for ourselves, that we may be the
fitter to beg for the pardon of others.
And oh that we may cast out the dung of our pride, contention, self-seeking,
and idleness; lest God should cast our sacrifices as dung in our faces, and
should cast us out as the dung of the earth, as of late he hath done many
others for a warning to us; and that we may presently resolve in concord to
mend our pace, before we feel a sharper spur than hitherto we have felt.
2. And now, brethren, what have we to do for the time to come, but to deny
our lazy flesh, and rouse up ourselves to the work before us. The harvest is

great, the laborers are few; the loiterers and hinderers are many, the souls of
men are precious, the misery of sinners is great, and the everlasting misery
to which they are near is greater, the joys of heaven are inconceivable, the
comfort of a faithful minister is not small, the joy of extensive success will
be a full reward. To be fellow-workers with God and his Spirit is no little
honor; to subserve the blood-shedding of Christ for men’s salvation is not a
light thing. To lead on the armies of Christ through the thickest of the
enemy; to guide them safely through a dangerous wilderness; to steer the
vessels through such storms and rocks and sands and shelves, and bring it
safe to the harbor of rest, requireth no small skill and diligence. The fields
now seem even white unto harvest; the preparations that have been made
for us are very great; the season of working is more calm than most ages
before us have ever seen. We have carelessly loitered too long already; the
present time is posting away; while we are trifling, men are dying; oh how
fast are they passing into another world! And is there nothing in all this to
awaken us to our duty, nothing to resolve us to speedy and unwearied
diligence? Can we think that a man can be too careful and painful under all
these motives and engagements? Or can that man be a fit instrument for
other men’s illumination, who is himself so blind? or for the quickening of
others, who is himself so senseless? What, sirs! are ye, who are men of
wisdom, as dull as the common people? and do we need to heap up a
multitude of words to persuade you to a known and weighty duty? One
would think it should be enough to set you on work, to show a line in the
Book of God; to prove it to be his will; or to prove to you that the work hath
a tendency to promote men’s salvation. One would think that the very sight
of your miserable neighbors would be motive sufficient to draw out your
most compassionate endeavors for their relief. If a cripple do but unlap his
sores, and show you his disabled limbs, it will move you without words;
and will not the case of souls, that are near to damnation, move you? O
happy church, if the physicians were but healed themselves; and if we had
not too much of that infidelity and stupidity against which we daily preach
in others; and were more soundly persuaded of that of which we persuade
others; and were more deeply affected with the wonderful things wherewith
we would affect them!
Were there but such clear and deep impressions upon our own souls of those
glorious things which we daily preach, oh what a change would it make in

our sermons, and in our private course of life! Oh what a miserable thing it
is to the Church and to themselves, that men must preach of heaven and
hell, before they soundly believe that there are such things, or have felt the
weight of the doctrines which they preach! It would amaze a sensible man
to think what matters we preach and talk of; what it is for the soul to pass
out of this flesh, and appear before a righteous God, and enter upon
unchangeable joy or unchangeable torment! Oh, with what amazing
thoughts do dying men apprehend these things! How should such matters be
preached and discoursed of! Oh the gravity, the seriousness, the incessant
diligence, which these things require! I know not what others think of them;
but for my part, I am ashamed of my stupidity, and wonder at myself that I
deal not with my own and others’ souls, as one that looks for the great day
of the Lord; and that I can have room for almost any other thoughts or
words; and that such astonishing matters do not wholly absorb my mind. I
marvel how I can preach of them slightly and coldly, and how I can let men
alone in their sins, and that I do not go to them, and beseech them, for the
Lord’s sake, to repent, however they may take it, and whatever pains or
trouble it may cost me! I seldom come out of the pulpit, but my conscience
smiteth me that I have been no more serious and fervent in such a case. It
accuseth me not so much for want of ornaments or elegancy, nor for letting
fall an unhandsome word; but it asketh me, ‘How couldst thou speak of life
and death with such a heart? How couldst thou preach of heaven and hell in
such a careless, sleepy manner Dost thou believe what thou sayest? Art thou
in earnest or in jest? How canst thou tell people that sin is such a thing, and
that so much misery is upon them and before them, and be no more affected
with it? Shouldst thou not weep over such a people, and should not thy tears
interrupt thy words? Shouldst not thou cry aloud, and show them their
transgressions, and entreat and beseech them as for life and death?’ Truly,
this is the peal that conscience doth ring in my ears, and yet my drowsy soul
will not be awakened.
Oh what a thing is a senseless, hardened heart! O Lord, save us from the
plague of infidelity and hard-heartedness ourselves, or else how shall we be
fit instruments of saving others from it? Oh, do that on our own souls,
which thou wouldst use us to do on the souls of others! I am even
confounded to think what a difference there is between my sickbed
apprehensions, and my pulpit apprehensions, of the life to come; that ever

that can seem so light a matter to me now, which seemed so great and
astonishing a matter then, and I know will do so again when death looks me
in the face, when yet I daily know and think of that approaching hour; and
yet these forethoughts will not recover such working apprehensions! O sirs,
surely if you had all conversed with neighbor Death as oft as I have done,
and as often received the sentence in yourselves, you would have an unquiet
conscience, if not a reformed life, as to your ministerial diligence and
fidelity; and you would have something within you that would frequently
ask you such questions as these: ‘Is this all thy compassion for lost sinners?
Wilt thou do no more to seek and to save them? Is there not such and such –
oh how many round about thee! – that are yet the visible sons of death?
What hast thou said to them, or done for their conversion? Shall they die
and be in hell before thou wilt speak to them one serious word to prevent it?
shall they there curse thee for ever that didst no more in time to save them?’
Such cries of conscience are daily ringing in mine ears, though, the Lord
knows, I have too little obeyed them. The God of mercy pardon me, and
awaken me, with the rest of his servants that have been thus sinfully
negligent. I confess to my shame that I seldom hear the bell toll for one that
is dead, but conscience asketh me, ‘What hast thou done for the saving of
that soul before it left the body? There is one more gone to judgment; what
didst thou to prepare him for judgment?’ and yet I have been slothful and
backward to help them that survive. How can you choose, when you are
laying a corpse in the grave, but think with yourselves, ‘Here lieth the body;
but where is the soul? and what have I done for it, before it departed? It was
part of my charge; what account can I give of it?’
O sirs, is it a small matter to you to answer such questions as these? It may
seem so now, but the hour is coming when it will not seem so. ‘If our hearts
condemn us, God is greater than our hearts,’ and will condemn us much
more, even with another kind of condemnation than conscience doth. The
voice of conscience is a still voice, and the sentence of conscience is a
gentle sentence, in comparison of the voice and the sentence of God. Alas!
conscience seeth but a very little of our sin and misery, in comparison of
what God seeth. What mountains would these things appear to your souls,
which now seem molehills What beams would these be in your eyes, that
now seem motes, if you did but see them with a clearer light? (I dare not

say, As God seeth them.) We can easily make shift to plead the cause with
conscience, and either bribe it, or bear its sentence; but God is not so easily
dealt with, nor his sentence so easily borne. ‘Wherefore we receiving,’ and
preaching, ‘a kingdom that cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we
may serve God acceptably, with reverence, and godly fear; for our God is a
consuming fire.’ But because you shall not say that I affright you with
bugbears, and tell you of dangers and terrors when there are none, I will
here show you the certainty and sureness of that condemnation that is like
to befall negligent pastors, particularly how many will be ready to rise up
against us and condemn us, if we shall hereafter be wilful neglecters of this
great work.
(1) Our parents, that destined us to the ministry, will condemn us, and say,
‘Lord, we devoted them to thy service, and they made light of it, and served
themselves.’
(2) Our masters that taught us, our tutors that instructed us, the schools and
universities where we lived, and all the years that we spent in study, will
rise up in judgment against us, and condemn us; for why was all this, but
for the work of God
(3) Our learning and knowledge and ministerial gifts will condemn us; for
to what end were we made partakers of these, but for the work of God
(4) Our voluntary undertaking the charge of souls will condemn us; for all
men should be faithful to the trust which they have undertaken.
(5) All the care of God for his Church, and all that Christ hath done and
suffered for it, will rise up in judgment against us, if we be negligent and
unfaithful, and condemn us; because by our neglect we destroyed them for
whom Christ died.
(6) All the precepts and charges of Holy Scripture, all the promises of
assistance and reward, all the threatenings of punishment, will rise up
against us and condemn us; for God did not speak all this in vain.
(7) All the examples of the prophets and apostles, and other preachers
recorded in Scripture, and all the examples of the faithful and diligent

servants of Christ in these latter times, and in the places around us, will rise
up in judgment and condemn us; for all these were for our imitation, and to
provoke us to a holy emulation in fidelity and ministerial diligence.
(8) The Holy Bible that lies open before us, and all the books in our studies
that tell us of our duty, directly or indirectly, will condemn the lazy and
unprofitable servant; for we have not all these helps and furniture in vain.
(9) All the sermons that we preach to persuade our people to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling, to lay violent hands upon the crown of
life, and take the kingdom by force, to strive to enter in at the strait gate,
and so to run as to obtain, will rise up against the unfaithful and condemn
them; for if it so nearly concern them to labor for their salvation, doth it not
concern us who have the charge of them to be also violent, laborious, and
unwearied in striving to help on their salvation? Is it worth their labor, and
patience, and is it not also worth ours?
(10) All the sermons that we preach to them to set forth the evil of sin, the
danger of a natural state, the need of a Savior, the joys of heaven, and the
torments of hell, yea, and the truth of the Christian religion, will rise up in
judgment against the unfaithful, and condemn them. And a sad review it
will be to themselves, when they shall be forced to think, ‘Did I tell them of
such great dangers and hopes in public, and would I do no more, in private,
to help them? What? tell them daily of damnation, and yet let them run into
it so easily? Tell them of such a glory, and scarcely speak a word to them
personally, to help them to it? Were these such great matters with me at
church, and so small matters when I came home?’ Ah! this will be dreadful
self-condemnation.
(11) All the sermons that we have preached to persuade other men to such
duties – as neighbors to exhort one another daily, and parents and masters to
teach their children and servants the way to heaven – will rise up in
judgment against the unfaithful, and condemn them; for will you persuade
others to that which you will not do, as far as you can, yourselves? When
you threaten them for neglecting their duty, how much more do you
threaten your own souls!

(12) All the maintenance which we take for our service, if we be unfaithful
will condemn us; for who is it that will pay a servant to take his pleasure, or
sit idle, or work for himself. If we have the fleece, surely it is that we may
look after the flock; and, by taking the wages, we oblige ourselves to the
work.
(13) All the witness that we have borne against the scandalous, negligent
ministers of this age, and all the endeavors that we have used for their
removal, will condemn the unfaithful; for God is no respecter of persons. If
we succeed them in their sins, we have spoken all that against ourselves;
and, as we condemned them, God and others will condemn us, if we imitate
them. And, though we should not be so bad as they, it will prove sad if we
are even like them.
(14) All the judgments that God hath, in this age, executed on negligent
ministers, before our eyes, will condemn us, if we be unfaithful. Hath he
made the idle shepherds and sensual drones to stink in the nostrils of the
people? And will he honor us, if we be idle and sensual? Hath he
sequestrated them, and cast them out of their habitations, and out of their
pulpits, and laid them by as dead, while they are yet alive, and made them a
hissing and a by-word in the land? And yet dare we imitate them Are not
their sufferings our warnings? and did not all this befall them as an example
to us? If any thing in the world would awaken ministers to self-denial and
diligence, methinks we have seen enough to do it. Would you have imitated
the old world if you had seen the flood that drowned it? Would you have
indulged in the sins of Sodom – idleness, pride, fullness of bread – if you
had stood by, and seen the flames which consumed it ascending up to
heaven? Who would have been a Judas, that had seen him hanged and burst
asunder? And who would have been a lying, sacrilegious hypocrite, that had
seen Ananias and Sapphira die! And who would not have been afraid to
contradict the gospel, that had seen Elymas smitten with blindness And
shall we prove idle, self-seeking ministers, when we have seen God
scourging such out of his temple, and sweeping them away as dirt into the
channels? God forbid! For then how great and how manifold will our
condemnation be”

(15) Lastly, All the days of fasting and prayer, which have, of late years,
been kept in England for a reformation, will rise up in judgment against the
unreformed, who will not be persuaded to the painful part of the work. This,
I confess, is so heavy an aggravation of our sin, that it makes me ready to
tremble to think of it. Was there ever a nation on the face of the earth, which
so long and so solemnly followed God with fasting and prayer, as we have
done? Before the parliament began, bow frequent and fervent were we in
secret! After that, for many years together, we had a monthly fast
commanded by the parliament, besides frequent private and public fasts on
other occasions. And what was all this for? Whatever was, for some time,
the means we looked at, yet still the end of all our prayers was Churchreformation, and, therein, especially these two things, a faithful ministry,
and the exercise of discipline in the Church. And did it once enter then into
the hearts of the people, or even into our own hearts, to imagine, that when
we had all we would have, and the matter was put into our own hands, to be
as painful as we could, and to exercise what discipline we would, that then
we would do nothing but publicly preach? that we would not be at the pains
of catechizing and instructing our people personally, nor exercise any
considerable part of discipline at all? It astonisheth me to think of it. What a
depth of deceit is the heart of man! What? are good men’s hearts so
deceitful Are all men’s hearts so deceitful? I confess, I then told many
soldiers, and other sensual men, that though they had fought for a
reformation, I was confident they would abhor it, and be enemies to it,
when they saw and felt it; thinking that the yoke of discipline would have
pinched their necks, and that, when they were catechized and personally
dealt with, and reproved for their sin, in private and public, and brought to
public confession and repentance, or avoided as impenitent, they would
scorn and spurn at all this, and take the yoke of Christ for tyranny; but little
did I think that the ministers would let all fall, and put almost none of this
upon them; but let them alone for fear of displeasing them, and let all run on
as it did before.
Oh the earnest prayers which I have heard for a painful ministry, and for
discipline! It was as if they had even wrestled for salvation itself. Yea, they
commonly called discipline, ‘the kingdom of Christ, or the exercise of his
kingly office in his church,” and so preached and prayed for it, as if the
setting up of discipline had been the setting up of the kingdom of Christ.

And did I then think that they would refuse to set it up when they might?
What! is the kingdom of Christ now reckoned among things indifferent?
If the God of heaven, who knew our hearts, had, in the midst of our prayers
and cries, on one of our public monthly fasts, returned us this answer, with
his dreadful voice, in the audience of the assembly: ‘You deceitful-hearted
sinners! What hypocrisy is this, to weary me with your cries for that which
you will not have, if I would give it to you; and thus to lift up your voices
for that which your souls abhor! What is reformation, but the instructing
and importunate persuading of sinners to entertain my Christ and grace, as
offered to them, and the governing of my Church according to my word?
Yet these, which are your work, you will not be persuaded to, when you
come to find it troublesome and ungrateful. When I have delivered you, it is
not me, but yourselves, that you will serve; and I must be as earnest to
persuade you to reform the Church, in doing your own duty, as you are
earnest with me to grant you liberty for reformation. And, when all is done,
you will leave it undone, and will be long before you will be persuaded to
my work.’ If the Lord, or any messenger of his, had given us such an
answer, would it not have amazed us? Would it not have seemed incredible
to us, that our hearts should be such as now they prove? And would we not
have said, as Hazael, ‘Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this thing ‘ or
as Peter, ‘Though all men forsake thee, yet will not I?’ Well, brethren, sad
experience hath showed us our frailty. We have refused the troublesome and
costly part of the reformation that we prayed for; but Christ yet turneth
back, and looketh with a merciful eye upon us. Oh that we had yet the
hearts immediately to go out and weep bitterly, and to do no more as we
have done, lest a worse thing come upon us; and now to follow Christ,
whom we have so far forsaken, through labor and suffering, even though it
were to death!
I have thus showed you what will come of it, if you will not set yourselves
faithfully to this work, to which you are under so many obligations and
engagements; and what an inexcusable thing our neglect will be, and how
great and manifold a condemnation it will expose us to. Truly, brethren, if I
did not apprehend the work to be of exceeding great moment to yourselves,
to the people, and to the honor of God, I would not have troubled you with
so many words about it, nor have presumed to speak so sharply as I have

done. But when the question is about life and death, men are apt to forget
their reverence and courtesy and compliments and good manners. For my
own part I apprehend this is one of the best and greatest works I ever in my
life put my hand to; and I verily think, that if your thoughts of it are as
mine, you will not think my words too many or too keen. I can well
remember the time when I was earnest for the reformation of matters of
ceremony; and, if I should be cold in such substantial matter as this, how
disorderly and disproportionable would my zeal appear! Alas! can we think
that the reformation is wrought, when we cast out a few ceremonies, and
changed some vestures, and gestures, and forms! Oh no, sirs’! it is the
converting and saving of souls that is our business. That is the chiefest part
of reformation, that doth most good, and tendeth most to the salvation of the
people.
And now, brethren, the work is before you. In these personal instructions of
all the flock, as well as in public preaching, doth it consist. Others have
done their part, and borne their burden, and now comes in yours. You may
easily see how great a matter lies upon your hands, and how many will be
wronged by your failing of your duty, and how much will be lost by the
sparing of your labor. If your labor be more worth than the souls of men,
and than the blood of Christ, then sit still, and look not after the ignorant or
the ungodly; follow your own pleasure or worldly business, or take your
ease; displease not sinners, nor your own flesh, but let your neighbors sink
or swim; and, if public preaching will not save them, let them perish. But, if
the case be far otherwise, you had best look about you.
PART 2
OBJECTIONS TO THIS DUTY
