PURITAN GOLD -- All of Grace by C.H. Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 14
Just and the Justifier

---

JUST AND THE JUSTIFIER

W

E HAVE SEEN the ungodly justified, and have considered the
great truth, that only God can justify any man; we now come a
step further and make the inquiry — How can a just God justify
guilty men? Here we are met with a full answer in the words of Paul, in
Romans 3:21-26. We will read six verses from the chapter so as to get the
run of the passage:
“But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being
witnessed by the law and the prophets; even the righteousness of God
which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe:
for there is no difference; for all have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God; being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus: whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time his
righteousness; that he might be just, and the justifier of him which
believeth in Jesus.”
Here suffer me to give you a bit of personal experience. When I was under
the hand of the Holy Spirit, under conviction of sin, I had a clear and sharp
sense of the justice of God. Sin, whatever it might be to other people,
became to me an intolerable burden. It was not so much that I feared hell,
but that I feared sin. I knew myself to be so horribly guilty that I
remember feeling that if God did not punish me for sin He ought to do so. I
felt that the Judge of all the earth ought to condemn such sin as mine. I sat
on the judgment seat, and I condemned myself to perish; for I confessed
that had I been God I could have done no other than send such a guilty
creature as I was down to the lowest hell. All the while, I had upon my
mind a deep concern for the honor of God’s name, and the integrity of His
moral government. I felt that it would not satisfy my conscience if I could
be forgiven unjustly. The sin I had committed must be punished. But then
there was the question how God could be just, and yet justify me who had
been so guilty. I asked my heart: “How can He be just and yet the
justifier?” I was worried and wearied with this question; neither could I see

21

any answer to it. Certainly, I could never have invented an answer which
would have satisfied my conscience.
The doctrine of the atonement is to my mind one of the surest proofs of
the divine inspiration of Holy Scripture. Who would or could have thought
of the just Ruler dying for the unjust rebel? This is no teaching of human
mythology, or dream of poetical imagination. This method of expiation is
only known among men because it is a fact; fiction could not have devised
it. God Himself ordained it; it is not a matter which could have been
imagined.
I had heard the plan of salvation by the sacrifice of Jesus from my youth
up; but I did not know any more about it in my innermost soul than if I
had been born and bred a Hottentot. The light was there, but I was blind; it
was of necessity that the Lord himself should make the matter plain to me.
It came to me as a new revelation, as fresh as if I had never read in
Scripture that Jesus was declared to be the propitiation for sins that God
might be just. I believe it will have to come as a revelation to every
newborn child of God whenever he sees it; I mean that glorious doctrine of
the substitution of the Lord Jesus. I came to understand that salvation was
possible through vicarious sacrifice; and that provision had been made in
the first constitution and arrangement of things for such a substitution. I
was made to see that He who is the Son of God, co-equal, and co-eternal
with the Father, had of old been made the covenant Head of a chosen
people that He might in that capacity suffer for them and save them.
Inasmuch as our fall was not at the first a personal one, for we fell in our
federal representative, the first Adam, it became possible for us to be
recovered by a second representative, even by Him who has undertaken to
be the covenant head of His people, so as to be their second Adam. I saw
that ere I actually sinned I had fallen by my first father’s sin; and I rejoiced
that therefore it became possible in point of law for me to rise by a second
head and representative. The fall by Adam left a loophole of escape;
another Adam can undo the ruin made by the first. When I was anxious
about the possibility of a just God pardoning me, I understood and saw by
faith that He who is the Son of God became man, and in His own blessed
person bore my sin in His own body on the tree. I saw the chastisement of
my peace was laid on Him, and that with His stripes I was healed. Dear
friend, have you ever seen that? Have you ever understood how God can

22

be just to the full, not remitting penalty nor blunting the edge of the sword,
and yet can be infinitely merciful, and can justify the ungodly who turn to
Him? It was because the Son of God, supremely glorious in His matchless
person, undertook to vindicate the law by bearing the sentence due to me,
that therefore God is able to pass by my sin. The law of God was more
vindicated by the death of Christ than it would have been had all
transgressors been sent to Hell. For the Son of God to suffer for sin was a
more glorious establishment of the government of God, than for the whole
race to suffer.
Jesus has borne the death penalty on our behalf. Behold the wonder! There
He hangs upon the cross! This is the greatest sight you will ever see. Son
of God and Son of Man, there He hangs, bearing pains unutterable, the just
for the unjust, to bring us to God. Oh, the glory of that sight! The innocent
punished! The Holy One condemned! The Ever-blessed made a curse! The
infinitely glorious put to a shameful death! The more I look at the
sufferings of the Son of God, the more sure I am that they must meet my
case. Why did He suffer, if not to turn aside the penalty from us? If, then,
He turned it aside by His death, it is turned aside, and those who believe in
Him need not fear it. It must be so, that since expiation is made, God is
able to forgive without shaking the basis of His throne, or in the least
degree blotting the statute book. Conscience gets a full answer to her
tremendous question. The wrath of God against iniquity, whatever that
may be, must be beyond all conception terrible. Well did Moses say,
“Who knoweth the power of thine anger?” Yet when we hear the Lord of
glory cry, “Why hast thou forsaken me?” and see Him yielding up the
ghost, we feel that the justice of God has received abundant vindication by
obedience so perfect and death so terrible, rendered by so divine a person.
If God himself bows before His own law, what more can be done? There is
more in the atonement by way of merit, than there is in all human sin by
way of demerit.
The great gulf of Jesus’ loving self-sacrifice can swallow up the mountains
of our sins, all of them. For the sake of the infinite good of this one
representative man, the Lord may well look with favor upon other men,
however unworthy they may be in and of themselves. It was a miracle of
miracles that the Lord Jesus Christ should stand in our stead and

23
Bear that we might never bear
His Father’s righteous ire.

But he has done so. “It is finished.” God will spare the sinner because He
did not spare His Son. God can pass by your transgressions because He
laid those transgressions upon His only begotten Son nearly two thousand
years ago. If you believe in Jesus (that is the point), then your sins were
carried away by Him who was the scapegoat for His people.
What is it to believe in Him? It is not merely to say, “He is God and the
Savior,” but to trust Him wholly and entirely, and take Him for all your
salvation from this time forth and forever — your Lord, your Master,
your all. If you will have Jesus, He has you already. If you believe on
Him, I tell you cannot go to hell; for that were to make the sacrifice of
Christ of none effect. It cannot be that a sacrifice should be accepted, and
yet the soul should die for whom that sacrifice has been received. If the
believing soul could be condemned, then why a sacrifice? If Jesus died in
my stead, why should I die also? Every believer can claim that the sacrifice
was actually made for him: by faith he has laid his hands on it, and made it
his own, and therefore he may rest assured that he can never perish. The
Lord would not receive this offering on our behalf, and then condemn us to
die. The Lord cannot read our pardon written in the blood of His own Son,
and then smite us. That were impossible. Oh that you may have grace
given you at once to look away to Jesus and to begin at the beginning, even
at Jesus, who is the Fountain-head of mercy to guilty man!
“He justifieth the ungodly.” “It is God that justifieth,” therefore, and for
that reason only it can be done, and He does it through the atoning sacrifice
of His divine Son. Therefore it can be justly done — so justly done that
none will ever question it — so thoroughly done that in the last
tremendous day, when heaven and earth shall pass away, there shall be
none that shall deny the validity of the justification. “Who is he that
condemneth? It is Christ that died. Who shall lay anything to the charge of
God’s elect? It is God that justifieth.”
Now, poor soul! will you come into this lifeboat, just as you are? Here is
safety from the wreck! Accept the sure deliverance. “I have nothing with
me,” say you. You are not asked to bring anything with you. Men who

24

escape for their lives will leave even their clothes behind. Leap for it, just
as you are.
I will tell you this thing about myself to encourage you. My sole hope for
heaven lies in the full atonement made upon Calvary’s cross for the
ungodly. On that I firmly rely. I have not the shadow of a hope anywhere
else. You are in the same condition as I am; for we neither of us have
anything of our own worth as a ground of trust. Let us join hands and
stand together at the foot of the cross, and trust our souls once for all to
Him who shed His blood for the guilty. We will be saved by one and the
same Savior. If you perish trusting Him, I must perish too. What can I do
more to prove my own confidence in the gospel which I set before you?

25

CONCERNING DELIVERANCE
FROM SINNING

I

N THIS PLACE I would say a plain word or two to those who
understand the method of justification by faith which is in Christ
Jesus, but whose trouble is that they cannot cease from sin. We can
never be happy, restful, or spiritually healthy till we become holy. We
must be rid of sin; but how is the riddance to be wrought? This is the
life-or-death question of many. The old nature is very strong, and they
have tried to curb and tame it; but it will not be subdued, and they find
themselves, though anxious to be better, if anything growing worse than
before. The heart is so hard, the will is so obstinate, the passions are so
furious, the thoughts are so volatile, the imagination is so ungovernable, the
desires are so wild, that the man feels that he has a den of wild beasts
within him, which will eat him up sooner than be ruled by him. We may
say of our fallen nature what the Lord said to Job concerning Leviathan:
“Wilt thou play with him as with a bird? or wilt thou bind him for thy
maidens?” A man might as well hope to hold the north wind in the hollow
of his hand as expect to control by his own strength those boisterous
powers which dwell within his fallen nature. This is a greater feat than any
of the fabled labors of Hercules: God is wanted here.
“I could believe that Jesus would forgive sin,” says one, “but then my
trouble is that I sin again, and that I feel such awful tendencies to evil
within me. As surely as a stone, if it be flung up into the air, soon comes
down again to the ground, so do I, though I am sent up to heaven by
earnest preaching, return again to my insensible state. Alas! I am easily
fascinated with the basilisk eyes of sin, and am thus held as under a spell,
so that I cannot escape from my own folly.”
Dear friend, salvation would be a sadly incomplete affair if it did not deal
with this part of our ruined estate. We want to be purified as well as
pardoned. Justification without sanctification would not be salvation at all.
It would call the leper clean, and leave him to die of his disease; if would
forgive the rebellion and allow the rebel to remain an enemy to his king. It
would remove the consequences but overlook the cause, and this would

26

leave an endless and hopeless task before us. It would stop the stream for
a time, but leave an open fountain of defilement, which would sooner or
later break forth with increased power. Remember that the Lord Jesus
came to take away sin in three ways; He came to remove the penalty of sin,
the power of sin, and, at last, the presence of sin. At once you may reach
to the second part — the power of sin may immediately be broken; and so
you will be on the road to the third, namely, the removal of the presence of
sin. “We know that he was manifested to take away our sins.”
The angel said of our Lord, “Thou shalt call his name Jesus, for he shall
save his people from their sins.” Our Lord Jesus came to destroy in us the
works of the devil. That which was said at our Lord’s birth was also
declared in His death; for when the soldier pierced His side forthwith came
there out blood and water, to set forth the double cure by which we are
delivered from the guilt and the defilement of sin.
If, however, you are troubled about the power of sin, and about the
tendencies of your nature, as you well may be, here is a promise for you.
Have faith in it, for it stands in that covenant of grace which is ordered in
all things and sure. God, who cannot lie, has said in Ezekiel 36:26:
A new heart also will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put within you:
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh.
You see, it is all “I will,” and “I will.” “I will give,” and “I will take away.”
This is the royal style of the King of kings, who is able to accomplish all
His will. No word of His shall ever fall to the ground.
The Lord knows right well that you cannot change your own heart, and
cannot cleanse your own nature; but He also knows that He can do both.
He can cause the Ethiopian to change his skin, and the leopard his spots.
Hear this, and be astonished: He can create you a second time; He can
cause you to be born again. This is a miracle of grace, but the Holy Ghost
will perform it. It would be a very wonderful thing if one could stand at
the foot of the Niagara Falls, and could speak a word which should make
the river Niagara begin to run up stream, and leap up that great precipice
over which it now rolls in stupendous force. Nothing but the power of

27

God could achieve that marvel; but that would be more than a fit parallel to
what would take place if the course of your nature were altogether
reversed. All things are possible with God. He can reverse the direction of
your desires and the current of your life, and instead of going downward
from God, He can make your whole being tend upward toward God. That
is, in fact, what the Lord has promised to do for all who are in the
covenant; and we know from Scripture that all believers are in the
covenant. Let me read the words again:
A new spirit will I put within you:
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and will give an heart of flesh.
(Ezekiel 11:19).

What a wonderful promise! And it is yea and amen in Christ Jesus to the
glory of God by us. Let us lay hold of it; accept it as true, and appropriate
it to ourselves. Then shall it be fulfilled in us, and we shall have, in after
days and years, to sing of that wondrous change which the sovereign grace
of God has wrought in us.
It is well worthy of consideration that when the Lord takes away the
stony heart, that deed is done; and when that is once done, no known
power can ever take away that new heart which He gives, and that right
spirit which He puts within us. “The gifts and calling of God are without
repentance”; that is, without repentance on His part; He does not take
away what He once has given. Let Him renew you and you will be
renewed. Man’s reformations and cleanings up soon come to an end, for
the dog returns to his vomit; but when God puts a new heart into us, the
new heart is there forever, and never will it harden into stone again. He
who made it flesh will keep it so. Herein we may rejoice and be glad
forever in that which God creates in the kingdom of His grace.
To put the matter very simply — did you ever hear of Mr. Rowland Hill’s
illustration of the cat and the sow? I will give it in my own fashion, to
illustrate our Savior’s expressive words — “Ye must be born again.” Do
you see that cat? What a cleanly creature she is! How cleverly she washes
herself with her tongue and her paws! It is quite a pretty sight! Did you
ever see a sow do that? No, you never did. It is contrary to its nature. It

28

prefers to wallow in the mire. Go and teach a sow to wash itself, and see
how little success you would gain. It would be a great sanitary
improvement if swine would be clean. Teach them to wash and clean
themselves as the cat has been doing! Useless task. You may by force
wash that sow, but it hastens to the mire, and is soon as foul as ever. The
only way in which you can get a sow to wash itself is to transform it into
a cat; then it will wash and be clean, but not till then! Suppose that
transformation to be accomplished, and then what was difficult or
impossible is easy enough; the swine will henceforth be fit for your parlor
and your hearth-rug. So it is with an ungodly man; you cannot force him to
do what a renewed man does most willingly; you may teach him, and set
him a good example, but he cannot learn the art of holiness, for he has no
mind to it; his nature leads him another way. When the Lord makes a new
man of him, then all things wear a different aspect. So great is this change,
that I once heard a convert say, “Either all the world is changed, or else I
am.” The new nature follows after right as naturally as the old nature
wanders after wrong. What a blessing to receive such a nature! Only the
Holy Ghost can give it.
Did it ever strike you what a wonderful thing it is for the Lord to give a
new heart and a right spirit to a man? You have seen a lobster, perhaps,
which has fought with another lobster, and lost one of its claws, and a new
claw has grown. That is a remarkable thing; but it is a much more
astounding fact that a man should have a new heart given to him. This,
indeed, is a miracle beyond the powers of nature. There is a tree. If you cut
off one of its limbs, another one may grow in its place; but can you change
the tree; can you sweeten sour sap; can you make the thorn bear figs? You
can graft something better into it and that is the analogy which nature gives
us of the work of grace; but absolutely to change the vital sap of the tree
would be a miracle indeed. Such a prodigy and mystery of power God
works in all who believe in Jesus.
If you yield yourself up to His divine working, the Lord will alter your
nature; He will subdue the old nature, and breathe new life into you. Put
your trust in the Lord Jesus Christ, and He will take the stony heart out of
your flesh, and He will give you a heart of flesh. Where everything was
hard, everything shall be tender; where everything was vicious, everything
shall be virtuous: where everything tended downward, everything shall rise

29

upward with impetuous force. The lion of anger shall give place to the
lamb of meekness; the raven of uncleanness shall fly before the dove of
purity; the vile serpent of deceit shall be trodden under the heel of truth.
I have seen with my own eyes such marvelous changes of moral and
spiritual character that I despair of none. I could, if it were fitting, point
out those who were once unchaste women who are now pure as the driven
snow, and blaspheming men who now delight all around them by their
intense devotion. Thieves are made honest, drunkards sober, liars truthful,
and scoffers zealous. Wherever the grace of God has appeared to a man it
has trained him to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present evil world: and, dear reader, it will do
the same for you.
“I cannot make this change,” says one. Who said you could? The Scripture
which we have quoted speaks not of what man will do, but of what God
will do. It is God’s promise, and it is for Him to fulfill His own
engagements. Trust in Him to fulfill His Word to you, and it will be done.
“But how is it to be done?” What business is that of yours? Must the
Lord explain His methods before you will believe him? The Lord’s
working in this matter is a great mystery: the Holy Ghost performs it. He
who made the promise has the responsibility of keeping the promise, and
He is equal to the occasion. God, who promises this marvelous change,
will assuredly carry it out in all who receive Jesus, for to all such He gives
power to become the Sons of God. Oh that you would believe it! Oh that
you would do the gracious Lord the justice to believe that He can and will
do this for you, great miracle though it will be! Oh that you would believe
that God cannot lie! Oh that you would trust Him for a new heart, and a
right spirit, for He can give them to you! May the Lord give you faith in
His promise, faith in His Son, faith in the Holy Spirit, and faith in Him,
and to Him shall be praise and honor and glory forever and ever! Amen.

30