PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Enoch: Full Audiobook, Part 6 of 10
The Third Parable and Enoch's Exaltation — Chapters 61 through 71

---

We come now to the conclusion of the Parables of Enoch. In these chapters the Elect One takes His seat upon the throne of glory, the kings and mighty of the earth are judged, and Enoch himself is translated into the heavenly presence. Let us hear the ancient text.

CHAPTER 61

Verse 1. And I saw in those days how long cords were given to those angels, and they took to themselves wings and flew, and they went towards the north.
Verse 2. And I asked the angel, saying: Why have those angels taken these cords and gone off? And he said unto me: They have gone to measure.
Verse 3. And the angel who went with me said unto me: These shall bring the measures of the righteous, and the ropes of the righteous to the righteous, that they may stay themselves on the name of the Lord of Spirits for ever and ever.
Verse 4. The elect shall begin to dwell with the elect, and those are the measures which shall be given to faith, and which shall strengthen righteousness.
Verse 5. And these measures shall reveal all the secrets of the depths of the earth, and those who have been destroyed by the desert, and those devoured by the beasts, and those devoured by the fish of the sea, that they may return and stay themselves on the day of the Elect One.
Verse 6. For none shall be destroyed before the Lord of Spirits, and none can be destroyed.
Verse 7. And all who dwell above in heaven received a command and power and one voice and one light like unto fire.
Verse 8. And that One first they blessed with their voices, and they extolled and praised with wisdom, and they were wise in utterance and in the spirit of life.
Verse 9. And the Lord of Spirits placed the Elect One on the throne of glory. And He shall judge all the works of the holy above in the heaven, and in the balance shall their deeds be weighed.

CHAPTER 62

Verse 1. And thus the Lord commanded the kings and the mighty and the exalted, and those who dwell on the earth, and said: Open your eyes and lift up your horns, if ye are able to recognize the Elect One.
Verse 2. And the Lord of Spirits seated Him on the throne of His glory, and the spirit of righteousness was poured out upon Him, and the word of His mouth slew all the sinners, and all the unrighteous were destroyed from before His face.
Verse 3. And there shall stand up in that day all the kings and the mighty and the exalted and those who hold the earth, and they shall see and recognize how He sits on the throne of His glory, and righteousness is judged before Him, and no lying word is spoken before Him.
Verse 4. Then shall pain come upon them as on a woman in travail, who hath pain when the child entereth the mouth of the womb, and she hath pain in bringing forth.
Verse 5. And one portion of them shall look on the other, and they shall be terrified, and they shall be downcast of countenance, and pain shall seize them when they see that Son of Man sitting on the throne of His glory.
Verse 6. And the kings and the mighty and all who possess the earth shall bless and glorify and extol Him who ruleth over all, who was hidden.
Verse 7. For from the beginning the Son of Man was hidden, and the Most High preserved Him in the presence of His might, and revealed Him to the elect.
Verse 8. And the congregation of the elect and holy shall be sown, and all the elect shall stand before Him on that day.
Verse 9. And all the kings and the mighty and the exalted and those who rule the earth shall fall down before Him on their faces, and worship and set their hope upon that Son of Man, and petition Him and supplicate for mercy at His hands.
Verse 10. Nevertheless that Lord of Spirits will so press them that they shall hastily go forth from His presence, and their faces shall be filled with shame, and the darkness shall grow deeper on their faces.
Verse 11. And He will deliver them to the angels for punishment, to execute vengeance on them because they have oppressed His children and His elect.

CHAPTER 63

Verse 1. In those days shall the mighty and the kings who possess the earth implore Him to grant them a little respite from His angels of punishment, that they might fall down and worship before the Lord of Spirits.
Verse 2. And they shall say: Blessed is the Lord of Spirits, and the Lord of kings, and the Lord of the mighty, and the Lord of the rich, and the Lord of glory, and the Lord of wisdom.
Verse 3. And they shall say: Would that we had rest to glorify and give thanks and confess our faith before His glory.
Verse 4. And now we long for a little rest but find it not; we follow hard upon it and obtain it not. And light hath vanished from before us, and darkness is our dwelling-place for ever and ever.
Verse 5. For we have not believed before Him nor glorified the name of the Lord of Spirits, but our hope was in the scepter of our kingdom and in our glory.
Verse 6. And in the day of our suffering and tribulation He saveth us not, and we find no respite for confession that our Lord is true in all His works, and in His judgments and His justice.
Verse 7. And we pass away from before His face on account of our works, and all our sins are reckoned up in righteousness.

CHAPTERS 64 through 69

These chapters reveal the names and deeds of the fallen angels, the condemnation pronounced upon them, and the great oath by which the secrets of creation are held in order. Noah is warned of the coming flood, and the judgment that shall fall upon the angels who corrupted the earth is declared.

Verse 1. And in those days Noah saw the earth was bowed down and its destruction was at hand.
Verse 2. And he departed from the ends of the earth and cried aloud to his grandfather Enoch with a bitter voice: Hear me, hear me, hear me.
Verse 3. And Enoch said: The Lord hath given command concerning those who dwell on the earth, that their ruin is accomplished, for they have learned all the secrets of the angels, and all the violence of their works.
Verse 4. And Michael and Gabriel and Raphael and Phanuel shall take hold of the fallen on that great day and cast them into the burning furnace, that the Lord of Spirits may take vengeance on them for their unrighteousness.
Verse 5. And the name of the great oath was revealed, by which heaven and earth and all that is in them are established. And by this oath the sea was created and set upon its foundation, and the stars and the lightning, and the depths and the winds, and all things are preserved by this oath.

CHAPTER 70

Verse 1. And it came to pass after this that the name of Enoch, the son of Jared, was lifted up alive from amongst those who dwell on the earth, and he was raised aloft on the chariots of the spirit.
Verse 2. And his name vanished among them. And from that day I was no longer numbered amongst them.
Verse 3. And He set me between the two winds, between the north and the west, where the angels took the cords to measure for me the place for the elect and righteous.
Verse 4. And there I saw the first fathers and the righteous who from the beginning dwell in that place.

CHAPTER 71

Verse 1. And it came to pass after this that my spirit was translated, and it ascended into the heavens. And I saw the holy sons of God. They were stepping on flames of fire; their garments were white, and their faces shone like snow.
Verse 2. And I saw two streams of fire, and the light of that fire shone like hyacinth, and I fell on my face before the Lord of Spirits.
Verse 3. And the angel Michael seized me by my right hand, and lifted me up and led me forth into all the secrets of mercy and the secrets of righteousness.
Verse 4. And he showed me all the secrets of the ends of the heaven, and all the chambers of all the stars, and all the luminaries, whence they proceed before the face of the holy ones.
Verse 5. And he translated my spirit into the heaven of heavens, and I saw there a structure built of crystals, and between those crystals tongues of living fire.
Verse 6. And round about were seraphim and cherubim and ophannim, and these are they who sleep not and guard the throne of His glory.
Verse 7. And I saw angels who could not be counted, a thousand thousands and ten thousand times ten thousand, encircling that house.
Verse 8. And the Head of Days came with Michael and Gabriel and Raphael and Phanuel, and thousands and ten thousands of angels without number.
Verse 9. And that angel came to me and greeted me with his voice, and said unto me: Thou art the Son of Man who is born unto righteousness, and righteousness abideth over thee, and the righteousness of the Head of Days forsaketh thee not.
Verse 10. And he said unto me: He proclaimeth unto thee peace in the name of the world to come, for from hence hath proceeded peace since the creation of the world, and so shall it be unto thee for ever and for ever and ever.
Verse 11. And all shall walk in His ways since righteousness never forsaketh Him. With Him will be their dwelling-places, and with Him their heritage, and they shall not be separated from Him for ever and ever and ever.

Thus endeth the Third Parable, and with it the Parables of Enoch. In Part 7, we shall hear the Book of the Luminaries, wherein the angel Uriel revealeth unto Enoch the laws of the heavenly bodies.