PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 14
Beholding Christ's Glory by Faith and Sight


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 12. Beholding Christ's Glory by Faith and Sight.

enabling us to see the Lord Christ as he is. The soul shall not be brought into the immediate presence of Christ without a new power,
to behold him and the immediate representation of his glory. Faith now does cease, as unto the manner of its operation in this life,
whilst we are absent from Christ. This light of glory succeeds into its room, fitted for that state and all the ends of it, as faith is for that
which is present. And, – 4. In the first operation of this light of glory, believers shall so behold the glory of Christ, and the glory of
God in him, as that there with and thereby they shall be immediately and universally changed into his likeness. They shall be as he is,
when they shall see him as he is. There is no growth in glory, as to parts; – there may be as to degrees. Additions may be outwardly
made unto what is at first received as by the resurrection of the body; but the internal light of glory and its transforming efficacy is
capable of no degrees, though new revelations may be made unto it unto eternity. For the infinite fountain of life, and light, and
goodness, can never be fathomed, much less exhausted. And what God spake on the entrance of sin, by the way of contempt and
reproach, “Behold, the man is become like one of us,” upbraiding him with what he had foolishly designed; – on the accomplishment
of the work of his grace, he says in love and infinite goodness, “Man is become like one of us,” in the perfect restoration of our image
in him. This is the first effect of the light of glory.
Faith also, in beholding the glory of Christ in this life, is accompanied with a transforming efficacy, as the apostle expressly declares, 2
Cor. 3: 18. It is the principle from whence, and the instrumental cause whereby, all spiritual change is wrought in us in this life; but
the work of it is imperfect; – first, because it is gradual, and then because it is partial.
(1.) As unto the manner of its operation, it is gradual, and does not at once transform us into the image of Christ; yes, the degrees of
its progress therein are unto us for the most part imperceptible. It requires much spiritual wisdom and observation to obtain an
experience of them in our own souls. “The inward man is renewed day by day,” whilst we behold these invisible things, 2 Cor. 4: 1618. But how? – even as the outward man decays by age, which is by insensible degrees and alterations. Such is the transformation
which we have by faith, in its present view of the glory of Christ. And according to our experience of its efficacy herein, is our evidence
of its truth and reality in the beholding of him. No man can have the least ground of assurance that he has seen Christ and his glory
by faith, without some effects of it in changing him into his likeness. For as on the touch of his garment by the woman in the Gospel,
virtue went out from him to heal her infirmity; so upon this view of faith, an influence of transforming power will proceed from
Christ unto the soul.
(2.) As unto the event, it is but partial. It does not bring this work unto perfection. The change wrought by it is indeed great and
glorious; or, as the apostle speaks, it is “from glory to glory,” in a progress of glorious grace: but absolute perfection is reserved for
vision. As to divine worship, perfection was not by the law. It did many things preparatory unto the revelation of the will of God
concerning it, but it “made nothing perfect:” so absolute perfection in holiness, and the restoration of the image of God, is not by the
Gospel, is not by faith; – however, it gives us many preparatory degrees unto it, as the apostle fully declares, Phil. 3: 10-14.
Secondly, Vision is beatifical, as it is commonly called, and that not amiss. It gives perfect rest and blessedness unto them in whom it
is. This may be a little opened in the ensuing observations.

is. This may be a little opened in the ensuing observations.
1. There are continual operations of God in Christ in the souls of them that are glorified, and communications from him unto them.
For all creatures must externally live, even in heaven, in dependence on Him who is the eternal fountain of being, life, goodness, and
blessedness unto all. As we cannot subsist one moment in our beings, lives, souls, bodies, the inward or outward man, without the
continual acting of divine power in us, and towards us; so in the glorified state our all shall depend eternally on divine power and
goodness, communicating themselves unto us, for all the ends of our blessed subsistence in heaven.
2. What is the way and manner of these communications, we cannot comprehend. We cannot, indeed, fully understand the nature
and way of his spiritual communications unto us in this life. We know these things by their signs, their outward means, and
principally by the effects they produce in the real change of our natures; but in themselves we see but little of them. “The wind
bloweth where it listeth, and we hear the sound thereof, but we know not whence it comets, and whither it goes; so is every one that is
born of the Spirit,” John 3: 8. All God’s real operations in heaven and earth are incomprehensible, as being acts of infinite power; and
we cannot search them out unto perfection.
3. All communications from the Divine Being and infinite fulness in heaven unto glorified saints, are in and through Christ Jesus, who
shall for ever be the medium of communication between God and the church, even in glory. All things being gathered into one head
in him, even things in heaven, and things in earth, – that head being in immediate dependence on God, this order shall never be
dissolved, Eph. 1: 10, 11; 1 Cor. 3: 23. And on these communications from God through Christ depends entirely our continuance in a
state of blessedness and glory. We shall no more be self-subsistent in glory than we are in nature or grace.
4 . The way on our part whereby we shall receive these communications from God by Christ, which are the eternal springs of life,
peace, joy, and blessedness, is this vision the sight whereof we speak. For, as it is expressly assigned thereunto in the Scripture, so
whereas it contains the perfect operation of our minds and souls in a perfect state, on the most perfect object, it is the only means of
our blessedness. And this is the true cause whence there neither is nor can be any satiety or weariness in heaven, in the eternal
contemplation of the same glory. For not only the object of our sight is absolutely infinite, which can never be searched unto the
bottom, yea, is perpetually new unto a finite understanding; but our subjective blessedness consisting in continual fresh
communications from the infinite fulness of the divine nature, derived unto us through vision, is always new, and always will be so to
eternity. Herein shall all the saints of God drink of the rivers of pleasure that are at his right hand, be satisfied with his likeness, and
refresh themselves in the eternal springs of life, light, and joy for evermore.
This effect, – that view, which we have by faith of the glory of Christ in this world, does not produce. It is sanctifying, not glorifying.
The best of saints are far from a perfect or glorified state in this life; and that not only on the account of the outward evils which in
their persons they are exposed unto, but also of the weakness and imperfection of their inward state in grace. Y et we may observe
some things unto the honour of faith in them who have received it.
(1.) In its due exercise on Christ, it will give unto the souls of believers some previous participation of future glory, working in them
dispositions unto, and preparation for, the enjoyment of it.
(2.) There is no glory, no peace, no joy, no satisfaction in this world, to be compared with what we receive by that weak and imperfect
view which we have of the glory of Christ by faith; yea, all the joys of the world are a thing of nought in comparison of what we so
recede.
(3.) It is sufficient to give us such a perception, such a foretaste of future blessedness in the enjoyment of Christ, as may continually
stir us up to breathe and pant after it. But it is not beatifical.
Other differences of an alike nature between our beholding of the glory of Christ in this life by faith, and that vision of it which is
reserved for heaven, might be insisted on; but I shall proceed no farther. There is nothing farther for us to do herein but that now and
always we shut up all our meditations concerning it with the deepest self-abasement, out of a sense of our unworthiness and
insufficiency to comprehend those things, admiration of that excellent glory which we cannot comprehend, and vehement longings
for that season when we shall see him as he is, be ever with him, and know him even as we are known.
End.

THE GLORY OF CHRIST,

Pa rt-2
Meditations And Discourses Concerning The Glory Of Christ;
Applied Unto Unconverted Sinners And Saints Under Spiritual Decays.
In Two Chapters, From John 17:24.

Original Preface.
To The Reader.
The design of this preface is not to commend either the author or the matter contained in this little book. Let every reader do as he
finds cause. Nor need any assurance be given that Dr Owen was the author, to any who have conversed with his writings, and will be
at the pains to read this over. It is, indeed, his application of the former Discourses upon this subject, printed in the year 1684. But the
reason why it was not then added (the omission whereof rendered that book imperfect to judicious readers) seems necessary to be

given. Had it pleased God he had lived a little longer, it would have come out as perfect as his other works. But there being no more
transcribed in his lifetime than what was then printed, and that published soon after his death, these two chapters, wrote only with his
own hand, were found too late to be then added. They are therefore now printed to complete those Discourses. And it is presumed, that
as no serious Christian who reads this will be satisfied without the other also, so all who prize the former will be glad of the
opportunity to add this thereunto. *
* The Discourses that follow were first printed in 1691, eight years after the death of Dr Owen. This circumstance may explain the
absence of the Italics, of which he generally made free use in all his publications. – Ed.
