PURITAN GOLD -- The Attributes of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 19
The Patience of God


The Attributes of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 12. The Patience of God.

The Patience of God
FAR LESS HAS BEEN WRITTEN UPON THIS THAN THE OTHER excellencies of the divine character. Not a few
of those who have expatiated at length upon the divine attributes have passed over the patience of God without any
comment. It is not easy to suggest a reason for this, for surely the longsuffering of God is as much one of the divine
perfections as is His wisdom, power, or holiness, and as much to be admired and revered by us. True, the actual term will
not be found in a concordance as frequently as the others, but the glory of this grace itself shines forth on almost every
page of Scripture. Certain it is that we lose much if we do not frequently meditate upon the patience of God and earnestly
pray that our hearts and ways may be more completely conformed thereto.
Most probably the principal reason why so many writers have failed to give us anything, separately, upon the patience
of God was because of the difficulty of distinguishing this attribute from the divine goodness and mercy, particularly the
latter. God’s longsuffering is mentioned in conjunction with His grace and mercy again and again, as may be seen by
consulting Exodus 34:6, Numbers 14:18, Psalm 86:15, etc. That the patience of God is really a display of His mercy, that
it is indeed one way in which it is frequently manifested, cannot be denied. But that patience and mercy are one and the
same excellency, and are not to be separated, we cannot concede. It may not be easy to discriminate between them,
nevertheless, Scripture fully warrants us in affirming some things about the one which we cannot about the other.

God’s patience prevails

Stephen Charnock, the Puritan, defines God’s patience, in part, thus:
It is part of the divine goodness and mercy, yet differs from both. God being the greatest goodness, hath the greatest mildness;
mildness is always the companion of true goodness, and the greater the goodness, the greater the mildness. Who so holy as
Christ, and who so meek? God’s slowness to anger is a branch...from His mercy: “The Lord is full of compassion, slow to
anger” (Psa 145:8). It differs from mercy in the formal consideration of the object: mercy respects the creature as miserable,
patience respects the creature as criminal; mercy pities him in his misery, and patience bears with the sin which engendered
the misery, and is giving birth to more.

Personally, we would define the divine patience as that power of control which God exercises over Himself, causing
Him to bear with the wicked and forbear so long in punishing them. In Nahum 1:3 we read, “The Lord is slow to anger
and great in power,” upon which Mr. Charnock said:
Men that are great in the world are quick in passion, and are not so ready to forgive an injury, or bear with an offender, as one
of a meaner rank. It is a want of power over that man’s self that makes him do unbecoming things upon a provocation. A
prince that can bridle his passions is a king over himself as well as over his subjects. God is slow to anger because great in
power. He has no less power over Himself than over His creatures.

It is at the above point, we think, that God’s patience is most clearly distinguished from His mercy. Though the
creature is benefited thereby, the patience of God chiefly respects Himself, a restraint placed upon His acts by His will;
whereas His mercy terminates wholly upon the creature. The patience of God is that excellency which causes Him to
sustain great injuries without immediately avenging Himself. He has a power of patience as well as a power of justice.
Thus the Hebrew word for the divine longsuffering is rendered “slow to anger” in Nehemiah 9:17, Psalm 103:8, etc. Not
that there are any passions in the divine nature, but that God’s wisdom and will is pleased to act with that stateliness and
sobriety which is becoming to His exalted majesty.
In support of our definition above let us point out that it was to this excellency in the divine character that Moses
appealed, when Israel sinned so grievously at Kadesh-Barnea, and there provoked Jehovah so sorely. Unto His servant the
Lord said, “I will smite them with the pestilence and disinherit them.” Then it was that the mediator Moses, as a type of
the Christ to come, pleaded, “I beseech Thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according as Thou hast spoken saying,
The LORD is longsuffering” (Num 14:17). Thus, His “ longsuffering “ is His “power” of self-restraint.
Again, in Romans 9:22 we read, “What if God, willing to shew His wrath, and to make His power known, endured
with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.” Were God to immediately break these reprobate
vessels into pieces, His power of self-control would not so eminently appear; by bearing with their wickedness and
forbearing punishment so long, the power of His patience is gloriously demonstrated. True, the wicked interpret His
longsuffering quite differently—”Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of
the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil” (Eccl 8:11)—but the anointed eye adores what they abuse.
“The God of patience” (Rom 15:5) is one of the divine titles. Deity is thus denominated, first, because God is both the
Author and Object of the grace of patience in the saint. Secondly, because this is what He is in Himself: patience is one of
His perfections. Thirdly, as a pattern for us: “Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, longsuffering “ (Col 3:12). And again, “Be ye therefore followers [emulators]
of God, as dear children” (Eph 5:1). When tempted to be disgusted at the dullness of another, or to be revenged on one
who has wronged you, call to remembrance God’s infinite patience and longsuffering with yourself.

God’s patience—then and now
The patience of God is manifested in His dealings with sinners. How strikingly was it displayed toward the
antediluvians. When mankind was universally degenerate, and all flesh had corrupted its way, God did not destroy them
till He had forewarned them. He “waited” (I Peter 3:20), probably no less than 120 years (Gen 6:3), during which time
Noah was a “preacher of righteousness” (II Peter 2:5). So, later, when the Gentiles not only worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator, but also committed the vilest abominations contrary even to the dictates of nature (Rom
1:19-26) and thereby filled up the measure of their iniquity, yet, instead of drawing His sword for the extermination of
such rebels, God “suffered all nations to walk in their own ways,” and gave them “rain from heaven and fruitful seasons”
(Acts 14:16,17).
Marvelously was God’s patience exercised and manifested toward Israel. First, He “suffered their manners” for forty
years in the wilderness (Acts 13:18). Later, when they had entered Canaan, but followed the evil customs of the nations
around them, and turned to idolatry, though God chastened them sorely, He did not utterly destroy them, but in their
distress, raised up deliverers for them. When their iniquity was raised to such a height that none but a God of infinite
patience could have borne them, He spared them many years before He allowed them to be carried down into Babylon.

Finally, when their rebellion against Him reached its climax by crucifying His Son, He waited forty years ere He sent the
Romans against them, and that, only after they had judged themselves “unworthy of everlasting life” (Acts 13:46).
How wondrous is God’s patience with the world today. On every side people are sinning with a high hand. The divine
law is trampled under foot and God Himself openly despised. It is truly amazing that He does not instantly strike dead
those who so brazenly defy Him. Why does He not suddenly cut off the haughty infidel and blatant blasphemer, as He did
Ananias and Sapphira? Why does He not cause the earth to open its mouth and devour the persecutors of His people, so
that, like Dathan and Abiram, they shall go down alive into the Pit? And what of apostate Christendom, where every
possible form of sin is now tolerated and practiced under cover of the holy name of Christ? Why does not the righteous
wrath of Heaven make an end of such abominations? Only one answer is possible: because God bears with “ much
longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.”
And what of the writer and the reader? Let us review our own lives. It is not long since we followed a multitude to do
evil, had no concern for God’s glory, and lived only to gratify self. How patiently He bore with our vile conduct! And
now that grace has snatched us as brands from the burning, giving us a place in God’s family, and has begotten us unto an
eternal inheritance in glory, how miserably we requite Him. How shallow our gratitude, how tardy our obedience, how
frequent our backslidings! One reason why God suffers the flesh to remain in the believer is that He may exhibit His
“longsuffering to us-ward “ (II Peter 3:9). Since this divine attribute is manifested only in this world, God takes advantage
to display it toward “His own.”

The school of holy experience
May our meditation upon this divine excellency soften our hearts, make our consciences tender, and may we learn in
the school of holy experience the “patience of saints,” namely, submission to the divine will and continuance in well
doing. Let us earnestly seek grace to emulate this divine excellency. “Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is
in heaven is perfect” (Matt 5:48). In the immediate context of this verse Christ exhorts us to love our enemies, bless them
that curse us, do good to them that hate us. God bears long with the wicked notwithstanding the multitude of their sins,
and shall we desire to be revenged because of a single injury?
