PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 13 Of Original Sin — Christ The Mediator Of The

OF ORIGINAL SIN
QUEST. XVI. DID all mankind fall in Adam's first transgression?

ANS. The covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but for his posterity, all mankind, descending from him by ordinary generation, sinned in him, and fell with him in his first transgression. Rom. 5:12., "By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin," &c. Adam being a representative person, he standing, we stood; and he falling, we fell. We sinned in Adam; so it is in the text, "In whom all have sinned." Adam was the head of mankind, and he being guilty, we are guilty, as the children of a traitor have their blood stained: Omnes unus ille Adam fuerunt, AUG. "All of us," saith Austin, "sinned in Adam, because we were part of Adam." OBJ. If when Adam fell, all mankind fell with him; why then, when one angel fell, did not all fall? Ans. The case is not the same. The angels had no relation to one another; they are called morning-stars,—the stars have no dependence one upon another; but it was otherwise with us, we were in Adam's loins, as a child is a branch of the parent, we were part of Adam, therefore when he sinned, we sinned. QUEST. How is Adam's sin made ours? Ans. 1. By imputation. The Pelagians of old held that Adam's transgression is hurtful to posterity by imitation only, not by imputation; but the text confutes that, "In whom all have sinned." A. 2. Adam's sin is ours by propagation. Not only is the guilt of Adam's sin imputed to us, but the depravity and corruption of his nature is derived to us as poison is carried from the fountain to the cistern. This is that which we call original sin, Ps. 51:5., "In sin did my mother conceive me." Adam's leprosy cleaves to us as Naaman's

leprosy did cleave to Gehazi, 2 Kings 5:27. This original concupiscence is called, 1. 'The old man,' Eph. 4:22. It is said to be the old man, not that it is weak as old men are, but for its long standing, and of its deformity. In old age the fair blossoms of beauty fall; so original sin is the old man, because it hath withered our beauty, and made us deformed in God's eye. 2. Original concupiscence is called 'the law of sin,' Rom. 7:25. Original sin hath vim coactivam,—the power of a law. A law binds the subject to allegiance. Men must needs do what sin will have them, when they have both the love of sin to draw them, and the law of sin to force them. In original sin there is something privative, and something positive.—1. Something privative. Carentia justiliæ debitæ, we have lost that excellent quintessential frame of soul which once we had. Sin hath cut the lock of original purity, where our strength lay.—2. Something positive. Original sin hath contaminated and defiled our virgin-nature. It was death among the Romans to poison the springs. Original sin hath poisoned the spring of our nature,—it hath turned beauty into leprosy,—it hath turned the azure brightness of our souls into a midnight darkness. Original sin hath become co-natural to us. A man by nature cannot but sin; though there were no devil to tempt,—no bad examples to imitate,—yet there is such an innate principle in him, that he cannot forbear sinning, 2 Pet. 2:14. A peccato cessare nesciunt,—who cannot cease to sin, as a horse that is lame cannot go without halting.—In the original, sin is,—1. An aversion from good. Man hath a desire to be happy, yet opposeth that which should promote his happiness; he hath a disgust of holiness, he hates to be reformed. Since we fell from God, we have no mind to return to him.—2. A propension to evil. If,

as the Pelagians say, there is so much goodness in us since the fall, then why is there not as much natural proneness to good as there is to evil? Our own experience tells us that the natural bias of the soul hath a tendency to that which is bad. The very heathens by the light of nature saw this: Hierocles the philosopher said, "It is grafted in us by nature to sin." Men roll sin as honey under their tongue. They drink iniquity as water, Job 15:16. Like an hydropical person that thirsts for drink and is not satisfied: so they have a kind of drought on them, they thirst for sin. They sin, Eph. 4:19., though they are tired out in committing sin, yet they sin, Jer. 9:5., "They weary themselves to commit iniquity;" as a man that follows his game while he is weary, yet he delights in it, and cannot leave off. Though God hath set so many flaming swords in the way to stop men in their sin, yet they go on in sin; which all shews what a strong appetite they have to the forbidden fruit. That we may further see the nature of original sin, consider, 1st. the universality of it; it hath, as a poison, diffused itself into all the parts and powers of our soul, Isa. 1:5., "The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint." Like a sick patient that hath no part sound,—his liver swelled,—his feet gangrened,—his lungs perished; such infected, gangrened souls have we, till Christ (who hath made a medicine of his blood) do cure us. 1. Original sin hath depraved the intellectual part. As in the creation "darkness was upon the face of the deep," Gen. 1:2., so the understanding,—darkness is upon the face of this deep. As there is salt in every drop of sea, bitterness in every branch of wormwood, so there is sin in every faculty; the mind is darkened, we know little of God. Ever since Adam did eat of the tree of knowledge, and his eyes were opened, we lost our eye-sight. Besides ignorance in the mind, there is error and mistake; we do not judge rightly of things; we put

bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5:20. Besides this, there is much pride, superciliousness, and prejudice, many fleshly reasonings, Jer. 4:14., "How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?" 2. Original sin hath defiled the heart; the heart is mortiferum, deadly wicked, Jer. 17:9., it is a lesser hell. In the heart are legions of lusts, obdurateness, infidelity, hypocrisy, sinful estuations; it boils as the sea with passion and revenge. "Madness is in their heart while they live," Eccl. 9:3. The heart is, officina diaboli, the devil's shop or workhouse, where all mischief is framed. 3. The Will. Contumacy is the seat of rebellion. The sinner crosseth God's will to fulfil his own, Jer. 44:18., "We will burn incense to the queen of heaven." There is a rooted enmity in the will against holiness; it is like an iron sinew, it refuseth to bend to God. Where is then the freedom of the will, when it is so full not only of indisposition, but opposition to what is spiritual? 4. The affections. These, as the strings of a viol, are out of tune. These are the lesser wheels, which are strongly carried by the will, the master-wheel. Our affections are misplaced, set on wrong objects. Our love is set on sin, our joy on the creature. Our affections are naturally as a sick man's appetite, he desires things which are noxious and hurtful for him; he calls for wine in a fever: so we have impure lustings, instead of holy longings. 2d. The adherency of original sin. It cleaves to us as blackness to the skin of the Ethiopian, we cannot get rid of it. Paul shook off the viper on his hand, but we cannot shake off this inbred corruption. It may be compared to a wild fig-tree growing on a wall, though the roots of it are pulled up, yet there are some strings of it in the joints of the stone-work which will not be eradicated but will sprout forth till the

wall be pulled in pieces. Original concupiscence comes not as a lodger, for a night, but as an indweller, Rom. 7:17., "Sin which dwelleth in me."—It is a malus genius,—an evil Spirit, that haunts us wheresoever we go, Gen. 13:7., "The Canaanite dwelt in the land." 3d. Original sin retards and hinders us in the exercises of God's worship. Whence is all that dulness and deadness in religion? It is the fruit of original sin: it is this rocks us asleep in duty, Rom. 7:19., "The good that I would, I do not." Sin is compared to a weight, Heb. 12:1. A man that hath weights tied to his legs cannot run fast. It is like that fish Pliny speaks of, a sea-lamprey, that cleaves to the keel of the ship, and hinders its progress when it is under sail. 4th. Original sin, though it lies latent in the soul, and be as a spring which runs under ground, yet oft it breaks forth unexpectedly. Christian, thou canst not believe that evil which is in thy heart, and which will break forth suddenly, if God leave thee, 2 Kings 8:13, 15., "Is thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing?" Hazael could not believe he had such a root of bitterness in his heart that he should rip up the women with child: is thy servant a dog? Yes, and worse than a dog, when that original corruption within was stirred up! If one had come to Peter, and said, "Peter, within a few hours thou wilt deny Christ,"—he would have said, "Is thy servant a dog?" But alas! Peter did not know his own heart, nor how far that corruption within would prevail upon him. The sea may be calm and look clear; but when the wind blows, how doth it rage and foam! so though now thy heart seems good, yet, when temptation blows, how may original sin discover itself, making thee foam with lust and passion. Who would have thought to have found adultery in David, and drunkenness in Noah, and cursing in Job? If God leave a man to himself, how suddenly and scandalously may original sin break forth in the holiest men alive!

5th. Original sin doth mix and incorporate itself with our duties and graces.—1. With our duties. As the hand which is paralytical or palsied cannot move without shaking, as wanting some inward strength, so we cannot do any holy action without sinning, as wanting a principle of original righteousness. As the leper, whatever he touched became unclean,—if he touched the altar, the altar did not sanctify him, but he polluted the altar,—such a leprosy is original sin, it defiles our prayers and tears, we cannot write without blotting. Though I do not say that the holy duties and good works of the regenerate are sins, for that were to reproach the Spirit of Christ by which they are wrought; yet this I say, that the best works of the godly have sin cleaving to them; only Christ's blood makes atonement for our holy things.—2. With our graces. There is some unbelief mixed with faith,—lukewarmness with zeal,—pride with humility. As bad lungs cause an asthma or shortness of breath, so original corruption, having infected our heart, our graces breathe now very faintly. 6th. Original sin is a vigorous active principle within us; it doth not lie still, but is ever exciting and stirring us up to evil; it is an inmate very unquiet; Rom. 7:15., "What I hate, that do I." How came Paul to do so? Original sin did irritate and stir him up to it. Original sin is like quick-silver, always in motion; when we are asleep, sin is awake in the fancy. Original sin sets the head a plotting evil, and the hands a working it; it hath in it principium motus, not quietis; it is like the pulse, ever beating. 7th. Original sin is the cause of all actual: it is fomes peccati,—it is the womb in which all actual sins are conceived. Hence come murders, adulteries, rapines; it is the Trojan horse, out of which a whole army of impieties come. Though actual sins may be more

scandalous, yet original sin is more heinous; the cause is more than the effect. 8th. It is not perfectly cured in this life. Grace, though it doth subdue sin, yet doth not wholly remove it. Though we are like Christ, having the first fruits of the Spirit, yet we are unlike him, having the remainders of the flesh. There are two nations in the womb. Original sin is like that tree, Dan. 4:28., though the branches of it were hewn down, and the main body of it, yet the stumps and root of the tree were left: Though the Spirit be still weakening and hewing down sin in the godly, yet the stump of original sin is still left. It is a sea that will not, in this life, be dried up. QUEST. But why doth God leave original corruption in us after regeneration? He could quite free us from it, if he pleased. Ans. He doth it, to shew the power of his grace in the weakest believer. Grace shall prevail against a torrent of corruption. Whence is this? the corruption is ours, but the grace is God's. A. 2. God leaves original corruption, to make us long after heaven, where there shall be no sin to defile, no devil to tempt. When Elias was taken up to heaven, his mantle dropped off; so, when the angels shall carry us up to heaven, this mantle of sin shall drop off, we shall never more complain of an aching head, or an unbelieving heart. Use 1st. If original sin be propagated to us, and will be inherent in us while we live here, then it confutes the Libertines and Quakers, who say they are without sin; they hold perfection; they shew much pride and ignorance, but we see the seeds of original sin remain in the best. Eccl. 7:20., There is not a just man lives, and sins not. And St. Paul complained of a 'body of death,' Rom. 7:24. Grace, though it doth purify nature, it doth not perfect it.

OBJ. But doth not the Apostle say of believers, that their 'old man is crucified,' Rom. 6:6., and they are 'dead to sin?' Rom. 7:11. Ans. They are dead, 1. Spiritually. They are dead as to the reatus,— the guilt of it; and as to the regnum,—the power of it; the love of sin is crucified. A. 2. They are dead to sin legally. As a man that is sentenced to death is dead in law, so they are legally dead to sin; there is a sentence of death gone out against sin, it shall die and drop into the grave. But at the present, sin hath its life lengthened out; nothing but the death of the body can quite free us from the body of this death. Use 2d. Let us lay to heart original sin, and be deeply humbled for it; it cleaves to us as a disease,—it is an active principle in us stirring us up to evil. Original sin is worse than all actual sin; the fountain is more than the stream. Some think, as long as they are civil, they are well enough; ay, but the nature is poisoned. A river may have fair streams, but vermin at bottom. Thou carriest an hell about thee, thou canst do nothing but thou defilest it; thy heart, like muddy ground, defiles the purest water that runs through it. Nay, though thou art regenerate, there is much of the old man in the new man. O how should original sin humble us! This is one reason God hath left original sin in us, because he would have it as a thorn in our side to humble us. As the bishop of Alexandria, after the people had embraced Christianity, destroyed all their idols but one, that the sight of that idol might make them loathe themselves for their former idolatry, so God leaves original sin to pull down the plumes of pride. Under our silver wings of grace are black feet. Use 3d. Let the sense of this make us daily look up to heaven for help, beg Christ's blood to wash away the guilt of sin, and his Spirit to mortify the power of it, beg further degrees of grace,—gratium

Christi eo obnoxius ambiamus. Though grace cannot make sin not to be, yet not to reign; though grace cannot expel sin, it can repel it; and for our comfort, where grace makes a combat with sin, death shall make a conquest. Use 4th. Let original sin make us walk with continual jealousy and watchfulness over our hearts. The sin of our nature is like a sleeping lion, the least thing that awakens it makes it rage. The sin of our nature, though it seems quiet, and lies as fire hid under the embers, yet if it be a little stirred and blown up by a temptation, how quickly may it flame forth into scandalous evils! Therefore we had need always to walk watchfully, Mark 13:37., "I say to you all, Watch." A wandering heart needs a watchful eye.

MAN'S MISERY BY THE FALL QUEST. XIX. WHAT is the misery of that estate whereinto man fell? ANS. All mankind by their fall lost communion with God, are under his wrath and curse, and so made liable to all the miseries in this life, to death itself, and to the pains of hell for ever. Eph. 2:3., 'And were by nature children of wrath.' Adam left an unhappy portion to his posterity, Sin and Misery. We have already considered the first of these, original sin,—now the misery of that estate. In the first, we have seen mankind offending; in the second, we shall see him suffering. The misery ensuing from original sin is twofold.

1st. Private. By this first hereditary sin we have lost communion with God. Adam was God's familiar, his favourite; but sin hath put us all out of favour; when we lost God's image, we lost his acquaintance. God's banishing Adam out of paradise, hieroglyphically, it shewed how sin hath banished us out of God's love and favour. 2d. Positive. In four things. 1. Under the power of Satan. 2. Heirs of God's wrath. 3. Subject to all the miseries of this life 4. Obnoxious to hell and damnation. 1. The first misery is, By nature we are "under the power of Satan," who is called 'the prince of the power of the air,' Eph. 2:2. Before the fall, man was a free denison,—now a slave; before, a king on the throne,—now in fetters. And who is man enslaved to? To one that is an hater of him. This was an aggravation of Israel's servitude, Ps. 106:41., "They that hated them ruled over them." By sin we are enslaved to Satan, who is an hater of mankind, and writes all his laws in blood. Sinners before conversion are under Satan's command, as the ass at the command of the driver, he doth all the devil's drudgery. No sooner Satan tempts, but he obeys; as the ship is at the command of the pilot, he steers it which way he will, so is the sinner at the command of Satan, he may steer him which way he will; and he never steers the ship but into hell's mouth. The devil rules all the powers and faculties of a sinner.—1. He rules the understanding, he blinds men with ignorance, and then rules them; as the Philistines first put out Samson's eyes, and then bound him. Satan can do what he will with an ignorant man; he doth not see the error of his way, therefore the devil can lead him into any sin; you may lead a blind man any whither: omne peccatum fundatur in ignorantia.—2. Satan rules the will. Though he cannot force the will, yet he can, by a temptation, draw it, John 8:44., "The lusts of your father ye will do." He hath got your hearts, and him ye will obey, Jer. 44:17, "We will

burn incense to the queen of heaven." When the devil spurs a sinner by a temptation, he will over hedge and ditch break all God's laws, that he may obey Satan. Where then is free will, when Satan hath such power over the will? "His lusts ye will do." There's not any member of the body but is at the devil's service; the head to plot sin, the hands to work it, the feet to run the devil's errand. Grave jugum servitutis! CICERO. Slavery is hateful to a noble spirit. Satan is the worst tyrant; the cruelty of a cannibal, or Nero, is nothing to his. Other tyrants do but rule over the bodies, he over the conscience; other tyrants have some pity on their slaves,—though they work in the galley, they give them meat, let them have hours for rest,—but Satan is a merciless tyrant, he lets them have no rest. What pains did Judas take? The devil would let him have no rest till he had betrayed Christ and afterwards imbrued his hands in his own blood. Use 1st. See here our misery by original sin; enslaved to Satan, Eph. 2:2. Satan is said to work effectually in the children of disobedience. What a sad plague is this for a sinner to be at the will of the devil! Just like a slave, if the Turks bid him dig in the mines, hew in the quarries, tug at the oar, the slave must do it, he dares not refuse. If the devil bids a man lie or cozen, he doth not refuse; and—which is worse,—men are enslaved, and they willingly obey this tyrant; other slaves are forced against their will: "Israel sighed by reason of their bondage," Exod. 2:23., but sinners are willing to be slaves, they will not take their freedom, they kiss their fetters. Use 2d. Let us labour to get out of this deplorable condition sin hath plunged us into; get from under the power of Satan. If any of your children were slaves, you would give great sums of money to purchase their freedom; your souls are enslaved, and will ye not labour to be set free? Improve the gospel; the gospel proclaims a jubilee to captives; sin binds men, the gospel looseth them; Paul's

preaching was "to turn men from the power of Satan to God," Acts 26:18. The gospel-star leads you to Christ; and if you get Christ, then you are made free, though not from the being of sin, yet from Satan's tyranny, John 8:36., "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." You hope to be kings to reign in heaven, and will you let Satan reign in you now? Never think to be kings when you die, and slaves while you live; the crown of glory is for conquerors, not for captives. Oh! get out of Satan's jurisdiction; get your fetters of sin filed off by repentance. II. We are heirs of God's wrath. In the text, "and were by nature the children of wrath." Tertullian's exposition here is wrong, 'children of wrath,' he understands subjectively, that is, subject to wrath and passion,—offending often in the irrascible faculty of a wrathful spirit. But, by 'children of wrath,' the apostle passively means heirs of wrath, exposed to God's displeasure. God was once a friend, but sin broke the knot of friendship; now God's smile is turned into a frown; we are now bound over to the sessions, and become children of wrath; and who knows the power of God's wrath? Ps. 90:11. "The wrath of a king is as the roaring of a lion," Prov. 19:12. How did Haman's heart tremble when the king rose up from the banquet in wrath? Est. 7:7. But God's wrath is infinite; all other is but as a spark to a flame; wrath in God is not a passion as in us, but it is an act of God's holy will, whereby he abhors sin, and decrees to punish it. This wrath is very dismal; it is this wrath of God that imbitters afflictions in this life; when sickness comes attended with God's wrath, it puts conscience into an agony. The mingling of the fire with the hail made it so terrible, Exod. 9:24. So mingling God's wrath with affliction, makes it torturing; it is the nail in the yoke. God's wrath, when but in a threatening (as a shower hanging in the cloud) made Eli's cars to tingle: what is it then, when this wrath is executed? It is terrible when the king rates and chides a traitor; but it is more dreadful when

he causeth him to be set upon the rack, or to be broke upon the wheel: "Who knows the power of God's wrath?" While we are children of wrath, 1. We have nothing to do with any of the promises; they are as the tree of life, bearing several sorts of fruit, but no right to pluck one leaf. Eph. 2:3., "Children of wrath," v. 12., "Strangers from the covenants of promise." The promises are as a fountain sealed. While we are in the state of nature, we see nothing but the flaming sword; and, as the apostle saith, Heb. 10:27., there remains nothing but "a fearful looking for of fiery indignation."—2. While children of wrath we are heirs to all God's curses, Gal. 3:10. How can the sinner eat and drink in that condition? Like Damocles's banquet, he sat at meat, and there was a sword hanging over his head by a small thread; one would think he could have little stomach to eat; so the sword of God's wrath and curse hangs every moment over a sinner's head. We read of a flying roll written with curses, Zech. 5:2.: there is a roll written with curses goes out against every person that lives and dies in sin. God's curse blasts wherever it comes; a curse on the sinner's name,—a curse on his soul,—a curse on his estate, posterity,—a curse on the ordinances. Sad, if all a man did eat should turn to poison: the sinner eats and drinks his own damnation at God's table. Thus it is before conversion. As the love of God makes every bitter thing sweet, so the curse of God makes every sweet thing bitter. Use. See our misery by the fall. 'Heirs of wrath:' and is this estate to be rested in? If a man be fallen under the king's displeasure, will he not labour to re-ingratiate himself into his favour? O let us flee from the wrath of God! And whither should we fly, but to Jesus Christ? there's none else to shield off the wrath of God from us, 1 Thess. 1:10., "Jesus which delivered us from the wrath to come."

III. Subject to all outward miseries. All the troubles incident to man's life are the bitter fruits of original sin. The sin of Adam hath "subjected the creature to vanity," Rom. 8:20. Is it not a part of the creature's vanity that all the comforts here below will not fill the heart, any more than the mariner's breath can fill the sails of a ship? Job. 20:22., "In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits." There is still something wanting, and a man would have more; the heart is always hydropical,—it thirsts and is not satisfied. Solomon put all the creatures into a limbec; and when he came to extract the spirit and quintessence, there was nothing but froth, "all was vanity," Eccl. 1:2. Nay, it is vexing vanity; not only emptiness, but bitterness. Our life is labour and sorrow; we come into the world with a cry, go out with a groan, Ps. 90:10. Some have said, that they would not be to live the life they have lived over again, because their life hath had more water in it than wine,—more water of tears, than wine of joy: Quia est diu vivere nisi diu torqueri, AUG. "Man is born unto trouble," Job 5:7. Every one is not born heir to land, but he is born heir to trouble; as well separate weight from lead. We do not finish our troubles in this life, but change them. Trouble is the vermin bred out of the putrid matter of sin. Whence are all our fears, but from sin? 1 John 4:18., There is torment in fear. Fear is the ague of the soul, sets it a shaking. Some fear want, others alarms, others fear loss of relations; if we rejoice, it is with trembling. Whence are all our disappointments of hopes but from sin? Where we look for comfort, there a cross; where we expect honey, there we taste wormwood. Whence is it that the earth is filled with violence, that "the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?" Hab. 1:13. Whence is it that so much fraudulency in dealing, so much falseness in friendship, such crosses in relations? Whence is it children prove undutiful? They that should be as the staff of the parent's age, are a sword to pierce their hearts. Whence is it servants are unfaithful to their masters? The apostle speaks of some who have entertained

angels in their houses, Heb. 13:2., but how oft, instead of entertaining angels in their houses, do some entertain devils? Whence are all the mutinies and divisions in a kingdom? 2 Chron. 15:5., "In those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in." All this is but the sour core in that apple our first parents ate, viz. fruit of original sin. Besides all the deformities and diseases of the body, fevers, convulsions, catarrhs,—"Macies et nova febrium terris incubuit cohors"—These are from sin. There had never been a stone in the kidnies, if it had not been first a stone in the heart. Yea, the death of the body, is the fruit and result of original sin, Rom. 5:12., "Sin entered into the world, and death by sin." Adam was made immortal, conditionally, if he had not sinned; sin digged Adam's grave. Death is terrible to nature. Lewis king of France forbade all that came into his court to mention the name of death in his ears. The Socinians say that death comes only from the infirmness of the constitution; but the apostle saith, sin ushered in death into the world,—"by sin came death." Certainly, had not Adam ate of the tree of knowledge, he had not died; Gen. 2:17, "In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die," implying, if Adam had not eaten, he should not have died. O then see the misery ensuing upon original sin! Sin dissolves the harmony and good temperature of the body, it pulls this frame in pieces. IV. Original sin without repentance exposeth to hell and damnation. "This is the second death," Rev. 20:14. Two things in it: 1. Pœna damni,—punishment of loss. The soul is banished from the beatifical presence of God, in whose presence is fulness of joy. 2. Pœna census,—punishment of sense. The sinner feels the scalding vials of God's wrath. It is penetrating, abiding, John 3:36., "reserved," 2 Pet. 2:17. If, when God's anger be kindled but a little,

and a spark or two of it flies into a man's conscience here in this life, it be so terrible; what then will it be when God stirs up all his anger? In hell there is the worm and the fire, Mark 9:44. Hell is the very accent and emphasis of misery; there's judgment without mercy. O what flames of wrath,—what seas of vengeance,—what rivers of brimstone, are poured out there upon the damned! Bellarmine is of opinion that one glimpse of hell fire were enough to make the most flagitious sinner to turn Christian; nay, live like an hermit, a most strict mortified life. What is all other fire to this, but painted fire? Ejus adesse intolerabile, ejus abesse impossibile,—to bear it will be intolerable, to avoid it will be impossible; and these hell-torments are for ever, have no period put to them, Rev. 9:6., "They shall seek death, and shall not find it." Origen fancied a fiery stream in which the souls of sinful men were to be purged after this life, and then to pass into heaven; but it is for ever. The breath of the Lord kindles that fire; and where shall we find engines or buckets to quench it? Rev. 14:11., "And the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever and ever, and they have no rest night nor day." Thank original sin for all. Use 1st. What sad thoughts should we have of this primitive original sin that hath created so many miseries? What honey can be got out of this lion? What grapes can we gather off this thorn? It sets heaven and earth against us: while we choose this bramble to rule, fire comes out of the bramble to devour us. Use 2d. How are all believers bound to Jesus Christ, who hath freed them from that misery to which sin hath exposed them? Eph. 1:7., "In whom we have redemption through his blood." Sin hath brought trouble and a curse into the world; Christ hath sanctified the trouble, and removed the curse. Nay, he hath not only freed believers from misery, but purchased for them a crown of glory and immortality,

1 Pet. 5:4., "When the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a
crown of glory that fadeth not away."

OF THE COVENANT OF GRACE QUEST. XX. DID God leave all mankind to perish in this state of sin and misery? ANS. No, he entered into a covenant of grace to deliver the elect out of that estate, and bring them into a state of grace by a Redeemer. Isa. 55:3., "I will make an everlasting covenant with you." Man being by his fall, plunged into a labyrinth of misery, and having no way left to recover himself, God was pleased to enter into a new covenant with him, and so restored him to life by a Redeemer.—The great proposition I shall go upon is, that there is a new covenant ratified between God and the elect. QUEST. What is the new covenant? Ans. It is a solemn compact and agreement made between God and fallen man, wherein the Lord undertakes to be our God, and to make us his people. QUEST. What names are given to the covenant? Ans. 1. It is called the covenant of peace, Ezek. 37:26., because it seals up reconciliation between God and humble sinners. Before this covenant there was nothing but enmity; God did not love us,—a creature that offends cannot be loved by an holy God; and we did not love him,—a God that condemns, cannot be loved by a guilty

creature; so that there was war on both sides. But God hath found out a way in the new covenant to reconcile differing parties, so that it is fitly called the covenant of peace. 2. It is called a covenant of grace, and well it may, for, 1st. It was with grace, that, when we had forfeited the first covenant, God should enter into a new covenant, after we had cast away ourselves. The covenant of grace is tabula post naufragium,—as a plank after shipwreck. O the free grace of God, that he should parley with sinners, and set his wisdom and mercy a-work to bring rebels into the bond of the covenant!—2d. It is a covenant of grace, because it is a royal charter, all made up of terms of grace: that "God will cast our sins behind his back,"—that "he will love us freely," Hos. 14:4.,—that he will give us a will to accept of the mercy of the covenant, and strength to perform the conditions of the covenant, Ezek. 37:26. All this is pure grace. QUEST. Why should God make a covenant with us? Ans. 1. It is out of indulgence, favour, and respect to us. A tyrant will not enter into a covenant with slaves, he will not shew them such respect. God's entering into covenant with us to be our God, is a dignity he puts upon us. A covenant is insigne honoris,—a note of distinction between God's people and heathens, Ezek. 16:62., "I will establish my covenant with thee." When the Lord told Abraham that he would enter into a covenant with him, Abraham fell upon his face, Gen. 17:2., as being amazed that the God of glory should bestow such a favour upon him. A. 2. God makes a covenant with us, to tie us fast to him; it is called in Ezekiel, 'the bond of the covenant.' God knows we have slippery hearts, therefore he will have a covenant to bind us; it is horrid impiety to go away from God after covenant. If one of the vestal

nuns, who had vowed herself to religion, was deflowered, the Romans caused her to be buried alive. It is perjury to depart from God after solemn covenant. QUEST. How doth the covenant of grace differ from the first covenant made with Adam? Ans. 1. The terms of the first covenant were more strict and severe: for, 1st. The least failing would have made the covenant with Adam null and void, but many failings do not null the covenant of grace. I grant, the least sin is a trespass upon the covenant, but it doth not make it null and void. There may be many failings in the conjugal relation, but every failing doth not break the marriage-bond. It would be sad, if, as oft as we break covenant with God, he should break covenant with us; but God will not take advantage of every failing, but "in anger remember mercy."—2dly. The first covenant being broken, allowed the sinner no remedy, all doors of hope were shut, but the new covenant allows the sinner a remedy, it leaves room for repentance, it provides a mediator, Heb. 12:24., "Jesus the mediator of the new covenant." A. 2. The first covenant did run all upon 'working,' the second upon 'believing,' Rom. 4:5. QUEST. But are not works required in the covenant of grace? Ans. Yes; Tit. 3:8., "This is a faithful saying, that they which have believed in God, be careful to maintain good works." But the covenant of grace doth not require works in the same manner as the covenant of works did. In the first covenant, works were required as the condition of life; in the second, they are required only as the signs of a man that is alive. In the first covenant, works were required as grounds of salvation; in the new covenant, they are

required as evidences of our love to God. In the first, they were required to the justification of our persons; in the new, to the testification of our grace. QUEST. What is the condition of the covenant of grace? Ans. The main condition is faith. QUEST. But why is faith more the condition of the new covenant than any other grace? Ans. To exclude all glorying in the creature; faith is an humble grace. If repentance or works were the condition of the covenant, a man would say, "It is my righteousness hath saved me:" but if it be of faith, where is boasting? Faith fetcheth all from Christ, and gives all the glory to Christ; it is a most humble grace. Hence it is God hath singled out this grace to be the condition of the covenant. And if faith be the condition of the covenant of grace, it excludes desperate presumptuous sinners from the covenant. They say there is a covenant of grace, and they shall be saved: but did you ever know a bond without a condition? The condition of the covenant is faith, and if thou hast no faith, thou hast no more to do with the covenant than a foreigner or a country farmer with the city charter. Use 1st. Of information. See the amazing goodness of God, to enter into covenant with us: he never entered into covenant with the angels when they fell. It was much condescension in God to enter into covenant with us in a state of innocency, but more so when we were in a state of enmity. In this covenant of grace we may see the cream of God's love and the working of his bowels to sinners. This is a marriage-covenant, Jer. 3:14., "I am married to you, saith the Lord." In the new covenant, God makes himself over to us, and what

can he give more? And he makes over his promises to us, and what better bonds can we have? Use 2d. Of trial. Whether we are in covenant with God. There are three characters. 1. God's covenant-people are an humble people, 1 Pet. 5:5., "Be clothed with humility." God's people esteem of others better than themselves; they shrink into nothing in their own thoughts, Phil. 2:3. David cries out, "I am a worm, and no man, Ps. 22:6.; though a saint, though a king, yet a worm. When Moses' face shined, he covered it with a veil: God's people, when they shine most in grace, are covered with the veil of humility. Pride excludes from the covenant; "God resisteth the proud," 1 Pet. 5:5., and sure such are not in covenant with God, whom he resists. 2. A people in covenant with God are a willing people; though they cannot serve God perfectly, they serve him willingly. They do not grudge God a little time spent in his worship; they do not hesitate or murmur at sufferings; they will go through a sea and a wilderness if God call: Ps. 110:3., "Thy people shall be a willing people,"—Heb. 'a people of willingness.' This spontaneity and willingness, is from the attractive power of God's Spirit; the Spirit doth not impellere, force, but trahere, sweetly draw the will; and this willingness in religion makes all our services accepted. God doth sometimes accept of willingness without the work, but never the work without willingness. 3. God's covenant-people are a consecrated people; they have holiness to the Lord written upon them; Deut. 7:6., "Thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God." God's covenant-people are separated from the world and sanctified by the Spirit. The priests under the law were not only to wash in the great laver, but were arrayed with

glorious apparel, Exod. 28:2. This was typical to shew God's people are not only washed from gross sins, but adorned with holiness of heart, they bear not only God's name, but image. Tamerlane refused a pot of gold, when he saw it had not his father's stamp upon it, but the Roman stamp. Holiness is God's stamp; if he doth not see this stamp upon us, he will not own us for his covenant-people. Use 3d. Of exhortation. To such as are out of covenant, labour to get into covenant, and have God for your God. How glad would the old world have been of an ark? How industrious should we be to get within the ark of the covenant? Consider, 1. The misery of such as live and die out of covenant with God. (1.) Such have none to go to in an hour of distress. When conscience accuseth, when sickness approacheth, (which is but an harbinger to bespeak a lodging for death) then what will you do? Whither will you flee? Will you look to Christ for help? He is a mediator only for such as are in covenant. O how will you be filled with horror and despair! and be as Saul, 1 Sam. 28:15., "The Philistines make war against me, and the Lord is departed." (2.) Till you are in covenant with God, there is no mercy. The mercy-seat was placed upon the ark, and the mercy-seat was no larger than the ark, to shew, that the mercy of God reacheth no further than the covenant. 2. The excellency of the covenant of grace; it is a better covenant than the covenant made with Adam. (1.) Because it is more friendly and propitious. Those services which would have been rejected in the first covenant, are accepted in the second. Here God accepts of the will for the deed, 2 Cor. 8:12.; here sincerity is crowned in the covenant of grace; wherein we are weak, God will give strength, and wherein we come short, God will accept of a surety. (2.) It is a better covenant, because it is surer, 2 Sam. 23:5., "God hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure." The first

covenant was not sure, it stood upon a tottering foundation, works; Adam had no sooner a stock of righteousness to trade with, but he broke; but the covenant of grace is sure, it is confirmed with God's decree, and it rests upon two mighty pillars, the oath of God, and the blood of God. (3.) It hath better privileges. The covenant of grace brings preferment. Our nature now is more ennobled, we are raised to higher glory than in innocency, we are advanced to sit upon Christ's throne, Rev. 3:21. We are by virtue of the covenant of grace, nearer to Christ than the angels: they are his friends, we his spouse. God is willing to be in covenant with you. Why doth God woo and beseech you by his ambassadors to be reconciled, if he were not willing to be in covenant? OBJ. I would fain be in covenant with God, but I have been a great sinner, and I fear God will not admit me into covenant. Ans. If thou seest thy sins, and loathest thyself for them, yet God will take thee into covenant, Isa. 43:24., "Thou hast wearied me with thy iniquities; I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions." As the sea covers great rocks, so God's covenant-mercy covers great sins. Some of the Jews that crucified Christ, yet had their sins washed away in his blood. OBJ. But I am not worthy that ever God should admit me into covenant. Ans. It never came into God's thoughts to make a new covenant upon terms of worthiness. If God should shew mercy to none but such as are worthy, then must he shew mercy to none at all. But it is God's design in the new covenant to advance the riches of grace, to love us freely, and, when we have no worthiness of our own, to accept us through Christ's worthiness. Therefore let not unworthiness

discourage you; it is not unworthiness excludes any from the covenant, but unwillingness. QUEST. What shall we do that we may be in covenant with God? Ans. 1. Seek to God by prayer. Exige a Domino misericordium, AUG. "Lord, be my God in covenant." The Lord hath made an express promise that, upon our prayer to him, the covenant should be ratified, he will be our God, and we shall be his people: Zec. 13:9., "They shall call upon my name, and I will hear them: I will say, 'it is my people;' and they shall say, 'the Lord is my God.' " Only it must be an importunate prayer; come as earnest suitors, resolve to take no denial. A. 2. If you would be in covenant with God, break off the covenant with sin; before the marriage-covenant there must be a divorce, 1 Sam. 7:3., "If ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts, then put away the strange gods;" and they put away Ashtaroth, viz. their female gods. Will any king enter into covenant with that man who is in league with his enemies? A. 3. If you would enter into the bond of the covenant, get faith in the blood of the covenant. Christ's blood is the blood of atonement; believe in this blood, and you are safely arked in God's mercy; Eph. 2:13., "Ye are made nigh by the blood of Christ." Use 4th. Of comfort to such as can make out their covenant-interest in God. 1. You that are in covenant with God, all your sins are pardoned. Pardon is the crowning mercy, Ps. 103:3., "Who forgiveth thy iniquity, who crowneth thee," &c. This is a branch of the covenant, Jer. 31:33, 34., "I will be their God, and I will forgive their iniquity." Sin being pardoned, all wrath ceaseth. How terrible is it when but a spark of God's wrath flies into a man's conscience! but sin

being forgiven, no more wrath. God doth not appear now in the fire or earthquake, but covered with a rainbow full of mercy. 2. All your temporal mercies are fruits of the covenant. Wicked men have mercies by providence, not by virtue of a covenant; with God's leave, not with his love. But such as are in covenant have their mercies sweetened with God's love, and they swim to them in the blood of Christ. As Naaman said to Gehazi, 2 Kings 5:23., "Take two talents," so saith God to such as are in covenant, take two talents,— take health, and take Christ with it,—take riches, and take my love with them,—take the venison, and take the blessing with it,—take two talents. 3. You may upon all occasions plead the covenant. If you are haunted with temptations, plead the covenant: Lord, thou hast promised to bruise Satan under my feet shortly, wilt thou suffer thy child to be thus worried? take off the roaring lion. If in want, plead the covenant: Lord, thou hast said, "I shall want no good thing," wilt thou save me from hell, and not from want? wilt thou give me a kingdom, and deny me daily bread? 4. If in covenant with God, all things shall co-operate for your good: etiam mala cidunt in bonum, Ps. 25:10. Not only golden paths, but his bloody paths. Every wind of providence shall blow them nearer heaven. Affliction shall humble and purify, Heb. 12:10. Out of the bitterest drug God distils your salvation. Afflictions add to the saints' glory. The more the diamond is cut, the more it sparkles; the heavier the saints' cross is, the heavier shall be their crown. 5. If thou art in covenant once, then for ever in covenant. The text calls it, 'an everlasting covenant.' Such as are in covenant are elected; God's electing love is unchangeable, Jer. 32:40., "I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them;

but I will put my fear in their heart, that they shall not depart from me." God will so love the saints, that he will not forsake them; and the saints shall so fear God, that they shall not forsake him. 'Tis a covenant of eternity. It must be so; for who is this covenant made with? Is it not with believers? and have not they coalition and union with Christ? Christ is the head, they are the body, Eph. 1:23. This is a near union, much like that union between God the Father and Christ, John 17:21., "As thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be One in us." Now the union between Christ and the saints being so inseparable, it can never be dissolved, or the covenant made void; you may die with comfort. 6. Thou art in covenant with God, and thou art going to thy God: behold a death-bed cordial; death breaks the union between the body and the soul, but perfects the union between Christ and the soul. This hath made the saints desire death as the bride the wedding-day: Phil. 1:23., cupio dissolvi. "Lead me, Lord, to that glory," (said one) "a glimpse whereof I have seen as in a glass darkly." Use 5th. Of direction: to shew how you should walk who have tasted of covenant-mercy—Live as a people in covenant with God. As you differ from others in respect of dignity, so you must in point of carriage. 1st. You must love this God. God's love to you calls for love. 1. It is amor gratiatus,—a free love. Why should God pass by others and take you into a league of friendship with himself? In the law, God passed by the lion and eagle, and chose the dove: so he passes by the noble and mighty. 2. It is amor plenus,—a full love. When God takes you into covenant, you are his Hephzibah, Isa. 62:5.; his delight is in you; he gives you the key of all his treasure, he heaps pearls upon you, he settles heaven and earth upon you, he gives you a bunch of grapes by

the way, and saith, 'Son, all I have is thine.' And doth not all this call for love? Who can tread upon these hot coals, and his heart not burn in love to God? 2dly. Walk holily. The covenant hath made you a royal nation, therefore be an holy people. Shine as lights in the world; live as earthly angels. God hath taken you into covenant, that you and he may have communion together; and what is it keeps up your communion with God, but holiness? 3dly. Walk thankfully, Ps. 103:1. God is your God in covenant, he hath done more for you than if he had made you ride upon the high places of the earth, and given you crowns and sceptres. O take the cup of salvation, and bless the Lord! Eternity will be little enough to praise him. Musicians love to play on their music where there is the loudest sound; and God loves to bestow his mercies where he may have the loudest praises. You that have angels' reward, do angels' work. Begin that work of praise here, which you hope to be always doing in heaven.

CHRIST THE MEDIATOR OF THE COVENANT HEB. 12:24. Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, &c. Jesus Christ is the sum and quintessence of the gospel, the wonder of angels, the joy and triumph of saints. The name of Christ is sweet, it is as music in the ear, honey in the mouth, and a cordial at the heart. —I shall wave the context, and only speak of that which concerns our present purpose: having discoursed of the covenant of grace, I shall

speak now of the Mediator of the covenant, and the restorer of lapsed sinners, 'Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant.' There are several names and titles in scripture given to Christ, as the great restorer of mankind: 1. Sometimes he is called a Saviour, Mat. 1:21. His name shall be called Jesus. The Hebrew word for JESUS, signifies a Saviour, and whom he saves from hell, he saves from sin: where Christ is a Saviour, he is a sanctifier, Mat. 1:21., "He shall save his people from their sins." There is no other Saviour, Acts 4:12., "Neither is there salvation in any other." As there was but one ark to save the world from drowning, so there is but one Jesus to save sinners from damning. As Naomi said to her daughters-in-law, Ruth 1:11., "Are there yet any more sons in my womb?" So hath God any other sons in the womb of his eternal decree, to be saviours to us, besides Christ? Job 28:12., "Where shall wisdom be found? the depth saith, it is not in me; and the sea saith, it is not in me." Let me allude, Where shall salvation be found? The angel saith, it is not in me; mortality saith it is not in me; the ordinance saith it is not in me, Christ alone is the wellspring of life; the ordinance is the conduitpipe that conveys salvation, but Christ is the spring that feeds it. "Neither is there salvation in any other." 2. Sometimes Christ is called a Redeemer: Isa. 59:20., "The Redeemer shall come to Sion." Some understand it of Cyrus, others of an angel; but the most ancient Jewish doctors understood it of Christ, the Redeemer of the elect: Job 19:23., "My Redeemer liveth." The Hebrew word for Redeemer, signifies such a one as is near a-kin, and hath right to redeem a mortgage; so Christ is near of kin to us, being our elder brother, therefore hath the best right to redeem us. 3. Christ is called a Mediator in the text, "Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant." The Greek word for Mediator, signifies a middle

person, one that doth make up the breach between two disagreeing parties. God and we were at variance by sin, now Christ doth mediate and umpire between us, he reconciles us to God through his blood, therefore he is called the Mediator of the new covenant. There is no way of communion and intercourse between God and man, but in and through a Mediator: Christ takes away the enmity in us, and the wrath of God, and so makes peace. Nor is Christ only a Mediator of reconciliation, but intercession, Heb. 9:24., "Christ is entered, not into the holy place made with hands, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us." The priest, when he had slain the sacrifice, was to go with the blood before the altar and mercyseat, and show it to the Lord. Now, in Christ our blessed Mediator, consider two things. 1st. His person. 2d. His graces. I. His person. His person is amiable; he is all made up of love and beauty. He is the effigies of his Father, Heb. 1:3., "The express image of his person." Consider, 1st. Christ's person in two natures. 2d. His two natures in one person. 1st. Christ's person in two natures. Look upon his human nature as incarnate. The Valentinians deny his human nature; but John 1:14., "The Word was made flesh." It is spoken of Christ the promised Messiah. Christ took our flesh, that the same nature which sinned might suffer; and "the Word was made flesh," that through the glass of his human nature we might look upon God. QUEST. Why is Christ called the Word? Ans. Because, as a word is the interpreter of the mind and reveals what is in a man's breast, so Jesus Christ reveals his Father's mind to us concerning the great matters of our salvation, John 1:18. Were it

not for Christ's manhood, the sight of the Godhead would be formidable to us; but through Christ's flesh we may look upon God without terror. And Christ took our flesh, that he might know how to pity us; he knows what it is to be faint, sorrowful, tempted, Ps. 103:14., "He knows our frame." And he took our flesh, that he might, as Austin saith, ennoble our human nature with honour. Christ having married our flesh, hath exalted it above the angelical nature. 2. Look upon Christ's divine nature. Christ may be fitly compared to Jacob's ladder, Gen. 28:12., which reacheth from earth to heaven. Christ's human nature was the foot of the ladder which stood upon earth; his divine nature the top of the ladder which reacheth to heaven. This being a grand article of our faith, I shall amplify. I know the Arians, Socinians, Ebionites would rob Christ of the best jewel of his crown,—his Godhead; but the Apostolical, Nicene, Athanasian creeds, affirm Christ's Deity; to this the churches of Helvetia, Bohemia, Wittemberg, Transylvania, &c. give their full consent; and the scripture is clear for it. He is called the 'mighty God,' Isa. 9:6., "And in him dwells the fulness of the Godhead," Col. 2:9. He is of the same nature and essence with the Father. So Athanasius, Basil, Chrysostom; 1. Is God the Father called Almighty? so is Christ, Rev. 1:8., "The Almighty."—2. Is God the Father, the heart-searcher? so is Christ, John 2:25., "He knew their thoughts?"—3. Is God the Father omnipresent? So is Christ, John 3:13., "The Son of Man which is in heaven." Christ as God was then in heaven, when as man he was upon the earth. QUEST. Is God eternal? Ans. Christ is the everlasting Father, Isa. 9:6., which scripture may be urged against the Cerinthian heretics, who denied the pre-

existency of Christ's Godhead, and held that Christ had no being till he derived it from the Virgin Mary. 4. Doth divine worship belong to the first person in the Trinity? so it doth to Christ, John 5:23., Heb. 1:6., "Let all the angels of God worship him."—5. Is creation proper to the Deity? this is a flower of Christ's crown, Col. 1:16., "By him were all things created."—6. Is invocation proper to the Deity; this is given to Christ, Acts 7:59., "Lord Jesus receive my spirit."—7. Is recumbency and trust peculiar to God the Father? this is given to Christ, John 14:1., "Ye believe in God, believe also in me." Christ must needs be God, not only that the divine nature might support the human from sinking under God's wrath, but also to give value and weight to his sufferings. Christ being God, his death and passion is meritorious; Christ's blood is called sanguis Dei,—the blood of God, Acts 20:28., because the person who was offered in sacrifice was God as well as man. This is an invincible support to believers; it was God who was offended, and it was God who satisfied. Thus Christ's person in two natures. 2d. Consider Christ's two natures in one person, God-man, 1 Tim. 3:16., "God manifest in the flesh." Christ had a twofold substance, divine and human; yet not a twofold subsistence, both natures make but one Christ. A scion may be grafted into another tree,—a pear-tree into an apple,—which, though it bear different fruits, is but one tree; so Christ's manhood is united to the Godhead in an ineffable manner; yet though there are two natures, yet but one person. This union of the two natures in Christ was not by transmutation, the divine nature changed into the human, or the human into the divine, —nor by mixture, the two natures mingled together as wine and water are mixed,—both the natures of Christ remain distinct, yet

make not two distinct persons, but one person; the human nature not God, yet one with God. II. Consider Christ, our Mediator, in his graces: these are the sweet savour of his ointments that make the virgins love him. Christ, our blessed Mediator, is said to be "full of grace and truth," John 1:14. He had the anointing of the Spirit without measure, John 3:35. Grace in Christ is after a more eminent and glorious manner than it is in any of the saints. 1. Jesus Christ, our Mediator, hath perfection in every grace, Col. 1:19. He is a panoply, magazine, and storehouse of all heavenly treasure, all fulness. This no saint on earth hath; he may excel in one grace, but not in all: as Abraham was eminent for faith, Moses for meekness, but Christ excels in every grace. 2. There is a never-failing fulness of grace in Christ; grace in the saints is ebbing and flowing, it is not always in the same degree and proportion; at one time David's faith was strong, at another time so faint and weak that you could hardly feel any pulse, Ps. 31:22., "I said, I am cut off from before thine eyes." But grace in Christ is a never-failing fulness, it did never abate in the least degree, he never lost a drop of his holiness. What was said of Joseph, may more truly be applied to Christ, Gen. 49:23., "The archers shot at him, but his bow abode in strength." Men and devils shot at him, but his grace remained in its full vigour and strength,—"his bow abode in strength." 3. Grace in Christ is communicative, his grace is for us; the holy oil of the Spirit was poured on the head of this blessed Aaron that it might run down upon us. The saints have not grace to bestow on others. When the foolish virgins would have bought oil of their neighbour virgins, Matth. 25:8, 9., "Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone

out," the wise virgins answered, "Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you." The saints have no grace to spare to others; but Christ diffuseth his grace to others; grace in the saints is as water in the vessel, grace in Christ is as water in the spring; John 1:16., "Of his fulness have we received grace for grace." Set a glass under a still or limbeck, and it receives water from the limbeck drop by drop; so the saints have the drops and influences of Christ's grace distilling upon them. What a rich consolation is this to those who either have no grace, or their stock is but low! They may go to Christ, the Mediator, as a treasury of grace: "Lord, I am indigent, but whither shall I carry my empty vessel, but to a full fountain?" Ps. 87:7., "All my springs are in thee;" I am guilty, thou hast blood to pardon me; I am polluted, thou hast grace to cleanse me; I am sick unto death, thou hast the "balm of Gilead, to heal me." Gen. 41:56. Joseph opened all the storehouses of corn: Christ is our Joseph, that opens all the treasuries and storehouses of grace, and communicates to us. He is not only sweet as the honey-comb, but drops as the honey-comb; this is a great comfort, in Christ our Mediator there is a cornucopia, and fulness of all grace; and Christ is desirous that we should come to him for grace, like the full breast that aches till it be drawn. Use 1st. Admire the glory of this Mediator; he is God-man, he is coessentially glorious with the Father. All the Jews that saw Christ in the flesh, did not see his Godhead; all that saw the man did not see the Messiah; the temple of Solomon within was embellished with gold; travellers, as they passed along, might see the outside of the temple, but only the priests saw the glory which sparkled within the temple; only believers, who are made priests unto God, Rev. 1:6., see Christ's glorious inside, the Godhead shining through the manhood. Use 2d. If Christ be God-man in one person, then look unto Jesus Christ alone for salvation. There must be something of the Godhead

to fasten our hope upon; in Christ there is Godhead and manhood hypostatically united. If we could weep rivers of tears,—out-fast Moses on the mount,—if we were exact moralists, touching the law blameless,—if we could arrive at the highest degree of sanctification in this life,—all this would not save us, without looking to the merits of him who is God; our perfect holiness in heaven is not the cause of our salvation, but the righteousness of Jesus Christ. To this therefore did Paul flee, as to the horns of the altar, Phil. 3:9., "That I may be found in him, not having my own righteousness." It is true, we may look to our graces as evidences of salvation, but to Christ's blood only as the cause. In time of Noah's flood, all that trusted to the high hills and trees, and not to the ark, were drowned: Heb. 12:2., "Looking unto Jesus;" and so look unto him, as to believe in him, that so Christ may not only be united to our nature, but to our persons, John 20:31., "That believing, you may have life through his name." Use 3d. Is Jesus Christ God and man in one person? This, as it shews the dignity of believers, that they are nearly related to one of the greatest persons that is, Col. 2:9., "In him dwells the fulness of the Godhead bodily," so it is of unspeakable comfort. Christ's two natures being married together, the divine and human, all that Christ in either of his natures can do for believers, he will do. In his human nature he prays for them, in his divine nature he merits for them. This for the person of our Mediator. Use 4th. Admire the love of Christ our Mediator, that he should humble himself, and take our flesh, that he might redeem us. Believers should put Christ in their bosom, as the spouse did, Cant. 1:13., "Lie betwixt my breasts." What was said of Ignatius, that the name of Jesus was found written in his heart, should be verified of every saint, he should have Jesus Christ written in his heart.
