PURITAN GOLD -- The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 13
The Advantages of Recording


The Mystery of Providence. By John Flavel.

Chapter 13. The Advantages of Recording.

Chapter 13: The Advantages of Recording
our Experiences of Providence
In consideration of the great and manifold advantages resulting from
a humble and careful observation of Providence, I cannot but judge it
the concern of Christians that have time and ability for such a work,
to keep written memorials or journals of Providence by them; for
their own and others' use and benefit. For want of collecting and
communicating such observations, not only ourselves, but the
Church of God is greatly impoverished.
Some say the art of medicine was acquired and perfected thus. When
anyone had met with some rare medicinal herb, and accidentally
discovered the virtues of it, he would post it up in some public place;
and so the physician attained his skill by a collection of those posted
experiments and recipes.
I am not for posting up all that a Christian knows or meets with in
his experience, for, as I have said before, religion does not lay all
open; yet there is a prudent, humble and seasonable communication
of our experiences and observations of Providence which is
exceeding beneficial both to ourselves and our brethren.
If Christians in reading the Scriptures would judiciously collect and
record the providences they shall meet with there, and (if destitute of
other helps) but add those that have fallen out in their own time and
experience, O what a precious treasure would these make! What an
antidote would it be to their souls against the spreading atheism of
these days, and satisfy them beyond what many other arguments can

do, that 'The LORD he is the God; the LORD he is the God' (1 Kings
18:39).
Whilst this work was under my hand, I was both delighted and
assisted by a pious and useful essay of an unknown author, who has
to very good purpose used many Scriptural passages of Providence
which seem to lie out of the road of common observation. Some
passages I have noted out of it which have been sweet to me. O that
Christians would everywhere set themselves to such work!
Providence carries our lives, liberties and concerns in its hand every
moment. Your bread is in its cupboard, your money in its purse, your
safety in its enfolding arms; and surely it is the least part of what you
owe to record the favours you receive at its hands.
Do not trust your slippery memories with such a multitude of
remarkable passages of Providence as you have, and shall meet with
in your way to heaven. It is true, things that greatly affect us are not
easily forgotten by us; and yet, how ordinary is it for new
impressions to raze out former ones? It was a saying of that worthy
man, Dr. Harris: 'My memory never failed me in all my life; for
indeed, I durst never trust it.' Written memorials secure us against
that hazard, and besides, make them useful to others when we are
gone, so that you do not carry away all your treasure to heaven with
you, but leave these choice legacies to your surviving friends.
Certainly it were not so great a loss to lose your silver, your goods
and chattels, as it is to lose your experiences which God has this way
given you in this world.
Take heed of clasping up those rich treasures in a book, and thinking
it enough to have noted them there; but have frequent recourse to
them, as oft as new needs, fears or difficulties arise and assault you.
Now it is seasonable to consider and reflect, Was I never so

distressed before? Is this the first plunge that ever befell me? Let me
consider the days of old, the years of ancient times, as Asaph did
(Psalm 77:5).
Beware of slighting former straits and dangers in comparison with
present ones. That which is next to us always appears greatest to us,
and as time removes us farther and farther from our former mercies
or dangers, so they grow less in our eyes, just as the land does from
those who sail. Know that your dangers have been as great, and your
fears no less formerly than now. Make it as much your business to
preserve the sense and value as the memory of former providences,
and the fruit will be sweet to you.

MONERGISM BOOKS
The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel, Copyright © 2018
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted
the non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text
of this e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, downloaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored
in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system,
in any form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now
known or hereinafter invented, without the express written
permission of Monergism Books.
ePub, .mobi & .pdf Editions April 2018 Requests for information
should be addressed to: Monergism Books, Po Box 491, West Linn,

OR 97068
