PURITAN GOLD -- Human Nature in Its Fourfold State by Thomas Boston: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 13
The State of Nature: The Sinfulness of Man's Natural State


1. The Sinfulness of Man's Natural State
Genesis 6:5. "And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil continually."
We have seen what man was, as God made him; a lovely and happy
creature—let us view him now as he has unmade himself; and we shall see
him a sinful and a miserable creature. This is the sad state we are brought
into by the fall; a state as black and doleful, as the former was glorious;
and this we commonly call, "The State of Nature;" or "Man's Natural
State;" according to that of the apostle, Eph. 2:3, "And were by nature the
children of wrath, even as others." And herein two things are to be
considered—1. The sinfulness; 2. The misery of this state, in which all the
unregenerate live. I begin with the sinfulness of man's natural state,
whereof the text gives us a full, though short account. "And God saw that
the wickedness of man was great," &e.
The scope and design of these words are, to clear God's justice in bringing
the flood on the old world. There are two particular causes taken notice of
in the preceding verses:
1. Mixed marriages, verse 2, "The sons of God," the posterity of Seth and
Enoch, professors of the true religion, married with "the daughters of
men," the profane, cursed race of Cain. They did not carry the matter
before the Lord, that he might choose for them, Ps. 48:14—but without
any respect to the will of God, they chose, not according to the rules of
their faith—but of their fancy; they "saw that they were fair;" and their
marriage with them occasioned their divorce from God. This was one of
the causes of the deluge, which swept away the old world. Would to God
that all professors in our day could plead not guilty—but though that sin
brought on the deluge—yet the deluge has not swept away that sin; which
as of old, so in our day, may justly be looked upon as one of the causes of

the decay of religion. It was an ordinary thing among the Pagans, to
change their gods, as they changed their condition into a married lot—
many sad instances the Christian world affords of the same; as if people
were of Pharaoh's opinion, That religion is only for those who have no
other care upon their heads, Exodus 5:17.
2. Great oppression, verse 4, "There were giants in the earth in those
days;" men of great stature, great strength, and monstrous wickedness,
"filling the earth with violence," verse 11. But neither their strength, nor
treasures of wickedness, could profit them in the day of wrath. Yet the
gain of oppression still causes many to forget the terror of this dreadful
example.
Thus much for the connection, and what particular crimes that
generation was guilty of. But every person that was swept away by the
flood could not be guilty of these things; and "shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right?" Therefore, in my text, there is a general indictment
drawn up against them all, "The wickedness of man was great in the
earth," etc., and clearly proved, for God saw it. Two things are here
laid to their charge:
1. Corruption of life, wickedness, great wickedness. I understand this
of the wickedness of their lives; for it is plainly distinguished from the
wickedness of their hearts. The sins of their outward lives were great in
the nature of them, and greatly aggravated by their attendant
circumstances—and this not only among those of the race of cursed Cain
—but those of holy Seth; the wickedness of man was great. And then it is
added, "in the earth:" (1.) To vindicate God's severity, in that he not only
cut off sinners—but defaced the beauty of the earth, and swept off the
brute creatures from it, by the deluge; that as men had set the marks of
their impiety, God might set the marks of his indignation, on the earth.
(2.) To show the heinousness of their sin, in making the earth, which God
had so adorned for the use of man--a sink of sin, and a stage whereon to
act their wickedness, in defiance of Heaven. God saw this corruption of
life—he not only knew it, and took notice of it—but he made them to
know that he took notice of it, and that he had not forsaken the earth,
though they had forsaken heaven.

2. Corruption of nature—Every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually. All their wicked practices are here traced
to the fountain and spring-head—a corrupt heart was the source of all.
The soul, which was made upright in all its faculties, is now wholly
disordered. The heart, that was made according to God's own heart, is
now the reverse of it, a forge of evil imaginations, a sink of inordinate
affections, and a storehouse of all impiety, Mark 7:21, 22. Behold the
heart of the natural man, as it is opened in our text. The mind is defiled;
the thoughts of the heart are evil; the will and affections are defiled—
the imagination of the thoughts of the heart, that is, whatever the heart
frames within itself by thinking, such as judgment, choice, purposes,
devices, desires, every inward motion, or rather the frame of the thoughts
of the heart, namely, the frame, make, or mold of these, 1 Chron. 29:18, is
evil.
Yes, and every imagination, every frame of his thoughts, is evil. The
heart is ever framing something; but never one right thing—the frame of
thoughts, in the heart of man, is exceedingly various; yet are they never
cast into a right frame. But is there not, at least, a mixture of good in
them? No, they are only evil; there is nothing in them truly good and
acceptable to God—nor can anything be so, which comes out of that forge;
where, not the Spirit of God—but "the prince of the power of the air,
works," Eph. 2:2. Whatever changes may be found in them, are only from
evil to evil; for the imagination of the heart, or frame of thoughts in
natural men, is evil continually, or every day. From the first day to the
last day, in this state, they are in midnight darkness; there is not the
glimmering of the light of holiness in them; not one holy thought can ever
be produced by the unholy heart.
O, what a vile heart is this! O, what a corrupt nature is this! The tree that
always brings forth fruit—but never good fruit, whatever soil it be set in,
whatever pains be taken with it, must naturally be an evil tree—and what
can that heart be, whereof every imagination, every set of thoughts, is
only evil, and that continually? Surely that corruption is ingrained in our
hearts, interwoven with our very natures, has sunk deep into our souls,
and will never be cured but by a miracle of grace. Now such is man's
heart, such is his nature, until regenerating grace changes it. God, who

searches the heart, saw man's heart was so, he took special notice of it—
and the faithful and true Witness cannot mistake our case; though we are
most apt to mistake ourselves in this point, and generally overlook it.
Beware that there be not a thought in your wicked heart saying, "What is
that to us? Let that generation, of whom the text speaks, see to that." For
the Lord has left the case of that generation on record, to be a lookingglass to all after generations, wherein they may see their own corruption
of heart, and what their lives would be too, if he restrained them not—for
"as in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man," Proverbs
27:19. Adam's fall has framed all men's hearts alike in this matter. Hence
the apostle, Romans 3:10-18, proves the corruption of the nature, hearts,
and lives of all men, from what the psalmist says of the wicked in his day,
Psalm 14:1-3; 5:9; 140:3; 10:7; 36:1; and from what Jeremiah says of the
wicked in his day, Jer. 9:3, and from what Isaiah says of those that lived
in his time, Isaiah 57:7, 8, and concludes, verse 19, "Now we know that
whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, so that
every mouth may be silenced and the whole world held accountable to
God."
Had the history of the deluge been transmitted unto us, without the
reason thereof in the text, we might thence have gathered the corruption
and total depravity of man's nature—for what other quarrel could the
holy and just God have with the infants that were destroyed by the flood,
seeing they had no actual sin? If we saw a wise man, who, having made a
beautiful piece of work, and heartily approved of it when he gave it out of
his hand, as fit for the use it was designed for, rise up in wrath and break
it all in pieces, when he looked on it afterwards; should we not thence
conclude that the frame of it had been quite marred since it came out of
his hand, and that it does not serve for the use it was at first designed for?
How much more, when we see the holy and wise God destroying the work
of his own hands, once solemnly pronounced by him very good, may we
not conclude that the original frame thereof is utterly marred, that it
cannot be mended—but must needs be new made, or lost altogether?
Gen. 6:6, 7, "And it repeated the Lord that he had made man on the earth,
and it grieved him at his heart; and the Lord said, I will destroy man," or
blot him out; as a man does a sentence out of a book, that cannot be

corrected by cutting off some letters, syllables, or words, and interlining
others here and there—but must needs be wholly new framed.
But did the deluge carry off this corruption of man's nature? did it mend
the matter? No, it did not. God, in his holy Providence, "that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the" new "world may become guilty before God,"
as well as the old, permits that corruption of nature to break out in Noah,
the father of the new world, after the deluge was over. Behold him, as
another Adam, sinning in the fruit of a tree, Gen. 9:20, 21, "He planted a
vineyard, and he drank of the wine, and was drunken, and he was
uncovered within his tent." More than that, God gives the same reason
against a new deluge, which he gives in our text for bringing that on the
old world—"I will not," says he, "again curse the ground any more for
man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth,"
Gen. 8:21. Whereby it is intimated that there is no mending of the matter
by this means; and that if he should always take the same course with
men that he had done, he would be always sending deluges on the earth,
seeing the corruption of man's nature still remains.
But though the flood could not carry off the corruption of nature—yet it
pointed at the way how it is to be done; namely, that men must be "born
of water and of the Spirit," raised from spiritual death in sin by the grace
of Jesus Christ, who came by water and blood; out of which a new world
of saints arise in regeneration, even as the new world of sinners out of the
waters, where they had long lain buried, as it were, in the ark. This we
learn from 1 Pet. 3:20, 21, where the apostle, speaking of Noah's ark, says,
"Wherein few, that is, eight souls, were saved by water. The like figure
whereunto even baptism does also now save us." Now the waters of the
deluge being a like figure to baptism, it plainly follows, that they signified
as baptism does "the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy
Spirit." To conclude then, those waters, though now dried up, may serve
us still for a looking-glass, in which we may see the total corruption of our
nature, and the necessity of regeneration.
From the text, thus explained, this weighty point of doctrine arises, which
he who runs may read in it, namely, Man's nature is now wholly
corrupted. There is a sad alteration, an astonishing overturning
in the nature of man—where, at first, there was nothing evil,

now there is nothing good. In treating on this doctrine, I shall,
I. Confirm it.
II. Represent this corruption of nature in its several parts.
III. Show you how man's nature comes to be thus corrupted.
IV. Apply this doctrine.
