PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 15 of 28
The Necessity of Ministerial Progress

---

Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 15. The Necessity of Ministerial Progress.

LECTURE XV
THE NECESSITY OF MINISTERIAL PROGRESS*
Dear fellow soldiers! We are few, and we have a desperate fight
before us, therefore it is needful that every man should be made the
most of, and nerved to his highest point of strength. It is desirable
that the Lord's ministers should be the picked men of the church,
yea, of the entire universe, for such the age demands; therefore, in
reference to yourselves and your personal qualifications, I give you
the motto, "Go forward." Go forward in personal attainments,
forward in gifts and in grace, forward in fitness for the work, and
forward in conformity to the image of Jesus. The points I shall speak
upon begin at the base, and ascend.
1. First, dear brethren, I think it necessary to say to myself and to you
that we must go forward in our mental acquirements. It will never
do for us continually to present ourselves to God at our worst. We are
not worth His having at our best; but at any rate let not the offering
be maimed and blemished by our idleness. "Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart" is, perhaps, more easy to comply with,
than to love Him with all our mind; yet we must give Him our mind
as well as our affections, and that mind should be well furnished,
that we may not offer Him an empty casket. Our ministry demands
mind. I shall not insist upon "the enlightenment of the age"; still it is
quite certain that there is a great educational advance among all
classes, and that there will yet be much more of it. The time is passed
when ungrammatical speech will suffice for a preacher. Even in a
country village, where, according to tradition, "nobody knows
nothing," the schoolmaster is now abroad, and want of education will
hinder usefulness more than it once did; for, when the speaker
wishes his audience to remember the gospel, they on the other hand
will remember his ungrammatical expressions, and will repeat them
as themes for jest, when we could have wished they had rehearsed
the divine doctrines to one another in solemn earnest. Dear brethren,

we must cultivate ourselves to the highest possible point, and we
should do this, first, by gathering in knowledge that we may fill the
barn, then by acquiring discrimination that we may winnow the
heap, and lastly by a firm retentiveness of mind, by which we may lay
up the winnowed grain in the storehouse. These three points may not
be equally important, but they are all necessary to a complete man.
We must, I say, make great efforts to acquire information, especially
of a Biblical kind. We must not confine ourselves to one topic of
study, or we shall not exercise our whole mental manhood. God
made the world for man, and He made man with a mind intended to
occupy and use all the world; he is the tenant, and nature is for a
while his house, why should he shut himself out of any of its rooms?
Why refuse to taste any of the cleansed meats the great Father has
put upon the table? Still, our main business is to study the
Scriptures. The smith's main business is to shoe horses; let him see
that he knows how to do it, for should he be able to belt an angel with
a girdle of gold he will fail as a smith if he cannot make and fix a
horse-shoe. It is a small matter that you should be able to write the
most brilliant poetry, as possibly you could, unless you can preach a
good and telling sermon, which will have the effect of comforting
saints and convincing sinners. Study the Bible, dear brethren,
through and through, with all helps that you can possibly obtain:
remember that the appliances now within the reach of ordinary
Christians are much more extensive than they were in our fathers'
days, and therefore you must be greater Biblical scholars if you
would keep in front of your hearers. Intermeddle with all knowledge,
but above all things meditate day and night in the law of the Lord.
Be well instructed in theology, and do not regard the sneers of those
who rail at it because they are ignorant of it. Many preachers are not
theologians, and hence the mistakes which they make. It cannot do
any hurt to the most lively evangelist to be also a sound theologian,
and it may often be the means of saving him from gross blunders.
Nowadays we hear men tear a single sentence of Scripture from its
connection, and cry "Eureka! Eureka!" as if they had found a new

truth; and yet they have not discovered a diamond, but a piece of
broken glass. Had they been able to compare spiritual things with
spiritual, had they understood the analogy of the faith, and had they
been acquainted with the holy learning of the great Bible students of
ages past, they would not have been quite so fast in vaunting their
marvellous knowledge. Let us be throughly well acquainted with the
great doctrines of the Word of God, and let us be mighty expounding
Scripture. I am sure that no preaching will last so long, or build up a
church so well, as the expository. To renounce altogether the
hortatory discourse for the expository would be running to a
preposterous extreme; but I cannot too earnestly assure you that if
your ministries are to be lastingly useful you must be expositors. For
this you must understand the Word yourselves, and be able so to
comment upon it that the people may be built up by this Word. Be
masters of your Bibles, brethren: whatever other works you have not
searched, be at home with the writings of the prophets and apostles.
"Let the word of God dwell in you richly."
Having given precedence to the inspired writings, neglect no field of
knowledge. The presence of Jesus on the earth has sanctified the
realms of nature, and what He has cleansed call not you common. All
that your Father has made is yours, and you should learn from it.
You may read a naturalist's journal, or a traveller's voyage, and find
profit in it. Yes, and even an old herbal, or a manual of alchemy may,
like Samson's dead lion, yield you honey. There are pearls in oyster
shells, and fruits on thorny boughs. The paths of true science,
especially natural history and botany, drop fatness. Geology, so far as
it is fact, and not fiction, is full of treasures.
History--wonderful are the visions which it makes to pass before
you--is eminently instructive; indeed, every portion of God's
dominion in nature teems with precious teachings. Follow the trails
of knowledge, according as you have the time, the opportunity, and
the peculiar faculty; and do not hesitate to do so because of any
apprehension that you will educate yourselves up to too high a point.
When grace abounds, learning will not puff you up, or injure your

simplicity in the gospel. Serve God with such education as you have,
and thank Him for blowing through you if you are a ram's horn, but
if there be a possibility of your becoming a silver trumpet, choose it
rather.
I have said that we must also learn to discriminate, and at this
particular time that point needs insisting on. Many run after
novelties, charmed with every invention: learn to judge between
truth and its counterfeits, and you will not be led astray. Others
adhere like limpets to old teachings, and yet these may only be
ancient errors: prove all things, and hold fast that which is good. The
use of the sieve, and the winnowing fan, is much to be commended.
Dear brethren, a man who has asked of the Lord to give him clear
eyes by which he shall see the truth and discern its bearings, and
who, by reason of the constant exercise of his faculties, has obtained
an accurate judgment, is one fit to be a leader of the Lord's host; but
all are not such. It is painful to observe how many embrace anything
if it be but earnestly brought before them. They swallow the medicine
of every spiritual quack who has enough of brazen assurance to
appear to be sincere. Be ye not such children in understanding, but
test carefully before you accept. Ask the Holy Spirit to give you the
faculty of discerning, so shall you conduct your flocks far from
poisonous meadows, and lead them into safe pasturage.
When in due time you have gained the power of acquiring
knowledge, and the faculty of discrimination, seek next for ability to
retain and hold firmly what you have learned. In these times certain
men glory in being weathercocks; they hold fast nothing, they have,
in fact, nothing worth the holding. They believed yesterday, but not
that which they believe to-day, nor that which they will believe tomorrow; and he would be a greater prophet than Isaiah who should
be able to tell what they will believe when next the moon doth fill her
horns, for they are constantly altering, and seem to be born under
that said moon, and to partake of her changing moods. These men
may be as honest as they claim to be, but of what use are they? Like
good trees oftentimes transplanted, they may be of a noble nature,

but they bring forth nothing; their strength goes out in rooting and
re-rooting, they have no sap to spare for fruit. Be sure you have the
truth, and then be sure you hold it. Be ready for fresh truth, if it be
truth, but be very chary how you subscribe to the belief that a better
light has been found than that of the sun. Those who hawk new truth
about the Street, as the boys do a second edition of the evening
paper, are usually no better than they should be. The fair maid of
truth does not paint her cheeks and tire her head like Jezebel,
following every new philosophic fashion; she is content with her own
native beauty, and her aspect is in the main the same yesterday, today, and for ever. When men change often they generally need to be
changed in the most emphatic sense. Our "modern thought" gentry
are doing incalculable mischief to the souls of men, and resemble
Nero fiddling upon the top of a tower with Rome burning at his feet.
Souls are being damned, and yet these men are spinning theories.
Hell gapes wide, and with her open mouth swallows up myriads, and
those who should spread the tidings of salvation are "pursuing fresh
lines of thought." Highly cultured soul-murderers will find their
boasted "culture" to be no excuse in the day of judgment. For God's
sake, let us know how men are to be saved, and get to the work: to be
for ever deliberating as to the proper mode of making bread while a
nation dies of famine is detestable trifling. It is time we knew what to
teach, or else renounced our office. "For ever learning and never
coming to the truth" is the motto of the worst rather than the best of
men. I saw in Rome a statue of a boy extracting a thorn from his foot;
I went my way, and returned in a year's time, and there sat the
selfsame boy, extracting the intruder still. Is this to be our model? "I
shape my creed every week," was the confession of one of these
divines to me. Whereunto shall I liken such unsettled ones? Are they
not like those birds which frequent the Golden Horn, and are to be
seen from Constantinople, of which it is said that they are always on
the wing, and never rest? No one ever saw them alight on the water
or on the land, they are for ever poised in mid-air. The natives call
them "lost souls," seeking rest and finding none. Assuredly, men who
have no personal rest in the truth, if they are not saved themselves,
are, at least, very unlikely to save others. He who has no assured

truth to tell must not wonder if his hearers set small store by him.
We must know the truth, understand it, and hold it with firm grip, or
we cannot hope to lead others to believe it. Brethren, I charge you,
seek to know and to discriminate; and then, having discriminated,
labour to be rooted and grounded in the truth. Keep in full operation
the processes of filling the barn, winnowing the grain, and storing it
in granaries, so shall you mentally "Go forward."
2. We need to go forward in oratorical qualifications. I am beginning
at the bottom, but even this is important, for it is a pity that even the
feet of this image should be of clay. Nothing is trifling which can be
of any service to our grand design. Only for want of a nail the horse
lost his shoe, and so became unfit for the battle; that shoe was only a
trifling rim of iron which smote the ground, and yet the neck clothed
with thunder was of no avail when the shoe was gone. A man may be
irretrievably ruined for spiritual usefulness, not because he fails
either in character or spirit, but because he breaks down mentally or
oratically, and, therefore, I have begun with these points, and again
remark that we must improve in utterance. It is not every one of us
who can speak as some can do, and even these men cannot speak up
to their own ideal. If there be any brother here who thinks he can
preach as well as he should, I would advise him to leave off
altogether. If he did so he would be acting as wisely as the great
painter who broke his palette, and, turning to his wife, said, "My
painting days are over, for I have satisfied myself, and therefore I am
sure my power is gone." Whatever other perfection may be
reachable, I am certain that he who thinks he has gained perfection
in oratory mistakes volubility for eloquence, and verbiage for
argument. Whatever you may know, you cannot be truly efficient
ministers if you are not "apt to teach." You know ministers who have
mistaken their calling, and evidently have no gifts for it: make sure
that none think the same of you. There are brethren in the ministry
whose speech is intolerable; either they rouse you to wrath, or else
they send you to sleep. No chloral can ever equal some discourses in
sleep-giving properties; no human being, unless gifted with infinite
patience, could long endure to listen to them, and nature does well to

give the victim deliverance through sleep. I heard one say the other
day that a certain preacher had no more gifts for the ministry than an
oyster, and in my own judgment this was a slander on the oyster, for
that worthy bivalve shows great discretion in his openings, and
knows when to close. If some men were sentenced to hear their own
sermons it would be a righteous judgment upon them, and they
would soon cry out with Cain, "My punishment is greater than I can
bear." Let us not fall under the same condemnation.
Brethren, we should cultivate a clear style. When a man does not
make me understand what he means, it is because he does not
himself know what he means. An average hearer, who is unable to
follow the course of thought of the preacher, ought not to worry
himself, but to blame the preacher, whose business it is to make the
matter plain. If you look down into a well, if it be empty it will appear
to be very deep, but if there be water in it you will see its brightness. I
believe that many "deep" preachers are simply so because they are
like dry wells with nothing whatever in them, except decaying leaves,
a few stones, and perhaps a dead cat or two. If there be living water
in your preaching it may be very deep, but the light of truth will give
clearness to it. It is not enough to be so plain that you can be
understood, you must speak so that you cannot be misunderstood.
We must cultivate a cogent as well as a clear style; our speech must
be forceful. Some imagine that this consists in speaking loudly, but I
can assure them they are in error. Nonsense does not improve by
being bellowed. God does not require us to shout as if we were
speaking to ten thousand when we are only addressing three
hundred. Let us be forcible by reason of the excellence of our matter,
and the energy of spirit which we throw into the delivery of it. In a
word, let our speaking be natural and living. I hope we have
foresworn the tricks of professional orators, the strain for effect, the
studied climax, the pre-arranged pause, the theatric strut, the
mouthing of words, and I know not what besides, which you may see
in certain pompous divines who still survive upon the face of the
earth. May such become extinct animals ere long, and may a living,

natural, simple way of talking out the gospel be learned by us all; for
I am persuaded that such a style is one which God is likely to bless.
Among many other things, we must cultivate persuasiveness. Some
of our brethren have great influence over men, and yet others with
greater gifts are devoid of it; these last do not appear to get near to
the people, they cannot grip them and make them feel. There are
preachers who in their sermons seem to take their hearers one by
one by the button-hole, and drive the truth right into their souls,
while others generalise so much, and are so cold withal, that one
would think they were speaking of dwellers in some remote planet,
whose affairs did not much concern them. Learn the art of pleading
with men. You will do this well if you often see the Lord. If I
remember rightly, the old classic story tells us that, when a soldier
was about to kill Darius, his son, who had been dumb from his
childhood, suddenly cried out in surprise, "Know you not that he is
the king?" His silent tongue was unloosed by love to his father, and
well may ours find earnest speech when the Lord is seen by us
crucified for sin. If there be any speech in us, this will rouse it. The
knowledge of the terrors of the Lord should also bestir us to
persuade men. We cannot do other than plead with them to be
reconciled to God. Brethren, mark those who woo sinners to Jesus,
find out their secret, and never rest till you obtain the same power. If
you find them very simple and homely, yet if you see them really
useful, say to yourself, "That is my fashion"; but if on the other hand
you listen to a preacher who is much admired, and on inquiry find
that no souls are savingly converted, say to yourself, "This is not the
thing for me, for I am not seeking to be great, but to be really useful."
Let your oratory, therefore, constantly improve in clearness, cogency,
naturalness, and persuasiveness. Try, dear brethren, to get such a
style of speaking that you suit yourselves to your audiences. Much
lies in that. The preacher who should address an educated
congregation in the language which he would use in speaking to a
company of costermongers would prove himself a fool: and on the
other hand, he who goes down amongst miners and colliers with

technical theological terms and drawing-room phrases acts like an
idiot. The confusion of tongues at Babel was more thorough than we
imagine. It did not merely give different lauguages to great nations,
but it made the speech of each class to vary from that of others. A
fellow of Billingsgate cannot understand a Fellow of Brasenose. Now
as the costermonger cannot learn the language of the college, let the
college learn the language of the costermonger. "We use the language
of the market," said Whitfield, and this was much to his honour; yet
when he stood in the drawing-room of the Countess of Huntingdon,
and his speech entranced the infidel noblemen whom she brought to
hear him, he adopted another style. His language was equally plain
in each case, because it was equally familiar to the audience: he did
not use the ipsissima verba, or his language would have lost its
plainness in the one case or the other, and would either have been
slang to the nobility, or Greek to the crowd. In our modes of speech
we should aim at being "all things to all men." He is the greatest
master of oratory who is able to address any class of people in a
manner suitable to their condition, and likely to touch their hearts.
Brethren, let none excel us in power of speech: let none surpass us in
the mastery of our mother tongue. Beloved fellow-soldiers, our
tongues are the swords which God has given us to use for Him, even
as it is said of our Lord, "Out of His mouth went a two-edged sword."
Let these swords be sharp. Cultivate your powers of speech, and be
amongst the foremost in the land for utterance. I do not exhort you
to this because you are remarkably deficient; far from it, for
everybody says to me, "We know the college men by their plain, bold
speech." This leads me to believe that you have the gift largely in you,
and I beseech you to take pains to perfect it.
3. Brethren, we must be even more earnest to go forward in moral
qualities. Let the points I shall mention here come home to those
who shall require them, but I assure you I have no special persons
among you in my mind's eye. We desire to rise to the highest style of
ministry, and if so, even if we obtain the mental and oratorical

qualifications, we shall fail, unless we also possess high moral
qualities.
There are evils which we must shake off, as Paul shook the viper
from his hand, and there are virtues which we must gain at any cost.
Self-indulgence has slain its thousands; let us tremble lest we perish
by the hands of that Delilah. Let us have every passion and habit
under due restraint: if we are not masters of ourselves we are not fit
to be leaders in the church.
We must put away all notion of self-importance. God will not bless
the man who thinks himself great. To glory even in the work of God
the Holy Spirit in yourself is to tread dangerously near to selfadulation. "Let another praise thee, and not thine own lips," and be
very glad when that other has sense enough to hold his tongue.
We must also have our tempers well under restraint. A vigorous
temper is not altogether an evil. Men who are as easy as an old shoe
are generally of as little worth. I would not say to you, "Dear
brethren, have a temper," but I do say, "If you have it, control it
carefully." I thank God when I see a minister have temper enough to
be indignant at wrong, and to be firm for the right; still, temper is an
edged tool, and often cuts the man who handles it. "Gentle, easy to
be entreated," preferring to bear evil rather than inflict it, this is to be
our spirit. If any brother here naturally boils over too soon, let him
mind that when he does do so he scalds nobody but the devil, and
then let him boil away.
We must conquer--some of us especially--our tendency to levity. A
great distinction exists between holy cheerfulness, which is a virtue,
and that general levity, which is a vice. There is a levity which has not
enough heart to laugh, but trifles with everything; it is flippant,
hollow, unreal. A hearty laugh is no more levity than a hearty cry. I
speak of that religious veneering which is pretentious, but thin,
superficial, and insincere about the weightiest matters. Godliness is

no jest, nor is it a mere form. Beware of being actors. Never give
earnest men the impression that you do not mean what you say, and
are mere professionals. To be burning at the lip and freezing at the
soul is a mark of reprobation. God deliver us from being superfine
and superficial: may we never be the butterflies of the garden of God.
At the same time, we should avoid everything like the ferocity of
bigotry. I know a class of religious people who, I have no doubt, were
born of a woman, but they appear to have been suckled by a wolf. I
have done them no dishonour: were not Romulus and Remus, the
founders of Rome, so reared? Some warlike men of this order have
had sufficient mental power to found dynasties of thought; but
human kindness and brotherly love consort better with the kingdom
of Christ. We are not to go about the world searching out heresies,
like terrier dogs sniffing for rats; nor are we to be so confident of our
own infallibility as to erect ecclesiastical stakes at which to roast all
who differ from us, not, 'tis true, with fagots of wood, but with those
coals of juniper, which consist of strong prejudice and cruel
suspicion.
In addition to all this, there are mannerisms, and moods, and ways
which I cannot now describe, against which we must struggle, for
little faults may often be the source of failure, and to get rid of them
may be the secret of success. Count nothing little which even in a
small degree hinders your usefulness; cast out from the temple of
your soul the seats of them that sell doves as well as the traffickers in
sheep and oxen.
And, dear brethren, we must acquire certain moral faculties and
habits, as well as put aside their opposites. He will never do much for
God who has not integrity of spirit. If we be guided by policy, if there
be any mode of action for us but that which is straightforward, we
shall make shipwreck before long. Resolve, dear brethren, that you
can be poor, that you can be despised, that you can lose life itself, but
that you cannot do a crooked thing. For you, let, the only policy be
honesty.

May you also possess the grand moral characteristic of courage. By
this we do not mean impertinence, impudence, or self-conceit; but
real courage to do and say calmly the right thing, and to go straight
on at all hazards, though there should be none to give you a good
word. I am astonished at the number of Christians who are afraid to
speak the truth to their brethren. I thank God I can say this, there is
no member of my church, no officer of the church, and no man in the
world to whom I am afraid to say before his face what I would say
behind his back. Under God I owe my position in my own church to
the absence of all policy, and the habit of saying what I mean. The
plan of making things pleasant all round is a perilous as well as a
wicked one. If you say one thing to one man, and another to another,
they will one day compare notes and find you out, and then you will
be despised. The man of two faces will sooner or later be the object of
contempt, and justly so. Above all things avoid cowardice, for it
makes men liars. If you have anything that you feel you ought to say
about a man, let the measure of what you say be this-- "How much
dare I say to his face?" You must not allow yourselves a word more in
censure of any man living. If that be your rule, your courage will save
you from a thousand difficulties, and win you lasting respect.
Having the integrity and the courage, dear brethren, may you be
gifted with an indomitable zeal. Zeal--what is it? How shall I describe
it? Possess it, and you will know what it is. Be consumed with love
for Christ, and let the flame burn continuously, not flaming up at
public meetings and dying out in the routine work of every day. We
need indomitable perseverance, dogged resolution, and a
combination of sacred obstinacy, self-denial, holy gentleness, and
invincible courage.
Excel also in one power, which is both mental and moral, namely, the
power of concentrating all your forces upon the work to which you
are called. Collect your thoughts, rally all your faculties, mass your
energies, focus your capacities. Turn all the springs of your soul into
one channel, causing it to flow onward in an undivided stream. Some
men lack this quality. They scatter themselves and fail. Mass your

battalions, and hurl them upon the enemy. Do not try to be great at
this and great at that--to be "everything by turns, and nothing long";
but suffer your entire nature to be led in captivity by Jesus Christ,
and lay everything at His dear feet who bled and died for you.
4. Above all these, we need spiritual qualifications, graces which
must be wrought in us by the Lord Himself. This is the main matter,
I am sure. Other things are precious, but this is priceless; we must be
rich towards God.
We need to know ourselves. The preacher should be great in the
science of the heart, the philosophy of inward experience. There are
two schools of experience, and neither is content to learn from the
other; let us be content, however, to learn from both. The one school
speaks of the child of God as one who knows the deep depravity of
his heart, who understands the loathsomeness of his nature, and
daily feels that in his flesh there dwelleth no good thing. "That man
has not the life of God in his soul," say they, "who does not know and
feel this, and feel it by bitter and painful experience from day to day."
It is in vain to talk to them about liberty, and joy in the Holy Ghost;
they will not have it. Let us learn from these one-sided brethren.
They know much that should be known, and woe to that minister
who ignores their set of truths. Martin Luther used to say that
temptation is the best teacher for a minister. There is truth on that
side of the question. Another school of believers dwell much upon
the glorious work of the Spirit of God, and rightly and blessedly so.
They believe in the Spirit of God as a cleansing power, sweeping the
Augean stable of the soul, and making it into a temple for God. But
frequently they talk as if they had ceased to sin, or to be annoyed by
temptation; they glory as if the battle were already fought, and the
victory won. Let us learn from these brethren. All the truth they can
teach us let us know. Let us become familiar with the hill-tops and
the glory that shines thereon, the Hermons and the Tabors, where we
may be transfigured with our Lord. Do not be afraid of becoming too
holy. Do not be afraid of being too full of the Holy Spirit. I would
have you wise on all sides, and able to deal with man both in his

conflicts and in his joys, as one familiar with both. Know where
Adam left you; know where the Spirit of God has placed you. Do not
know either of these so exclusively as to forget the other. I believe
that if any men are likely to cry. "O wretched man that I am! Who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?" it will always be the
ministers, because we need to be tempted in all points, so that we
may be able to comfort others. In a railway carriage last week I saw a
poor man with his leg placed upon the seat. An official happening to
see him in this posture, remarked, "Those cushions were not made
for you to put your dirty boots on." As soon as the guard was gone
the man put up his leg again, and said to me, "He has never broken
his leg in two places, I am sure, or he would not be so sharp with
me." When I have heard brethren who have lived at ease, enjoying
good incomes, condemning others who are much tried, because they
could not rejoice in their fashion, I have felt that they knew nothing
of the broken bones which others have to carry throughout the whole
of their pilgrimage.
Brethren, know man in Christ, and out of Christ. Study him at his
best, and study him at his worst; know his anatomy, his secrets, and
his passions. You cannot do this by books; you must have personal
spiritual experience; God alone can give you that.
Among spiritual acquirements, it is beyond all other things needful
to know him who is the sure remedy for all human diseases. Know
Jesus. Sit at His feet. Consider His nature, His work, His sufferings,
His glory. Rejoice in His presence: commune with Him from day to
day. To know Christ is to understand the most excellent of sciences.
You cannot fail to be wise if you commune with wisdom; you cannot
miss of strength if you have fellowship with the mighty Son of God. I
saw the other day in an Italian grotto a little fern, which grew where
its leaves continually glistened and danced in the spray of a fountain.
It was always green, and neither summer's drought nor winter's cold
affected it. So let us for ever abide under the sweet influence of Jesus'
love. Dwell in God, brethren; do not occasionally visit Him, but abide
in Him. They say in Italy that where the sun does not enter the

physician must. Where Jesus does not shine the soul is sick. Bask in
His beams and you shall be vigorous in the service of the Lord. Last
Sunday night I had a text which mastered me: "No man knoweth the
Son but the Father." I told the people that poor sinners who had gone
to Jesus and trusted Him thought they knew Him, but that they knew
only a little of Him. Saints of sixty years' experience, who have
walked with Him every day, think they know Him; but they are only
beginners yet. The perfect spirits before the throne, who have been
for five thousand years perpetually adoring Him, perhaps think they
know Him, but they do not to the full. "No man knoweth the Son but
the Father." He is so glorious, that only the infinite God has full
knowledge of Him, therefore there will be no limit to our study, or
narrowness in our line of thought, if we make our Lord the great
object of all our meditations.
Brethren, as the outcome of this, if we are to be strong men, we must
be conformed to our Lord. Oh, to be like Him! Blessed be that cross
on which we shall suffer, if we suffer for being made like unto the
Lord Jesus. If we obtain conformity to Christ, we shall have a
wondrous unction upon our ministry, and without that, what is
ministry worth?
In a word, we must labour for holiness of character. What is
holiness? Is it not wholeness of character? a balanced condition in
which there is neither lack nor redundance? It is not morality: that is
a cold lifeless statue; holiness is life. You must have holiness; and
dear brethren, if you should fail in mental qualifications (as I hope
you will not), and if you should have a slender measure of the
oratorical faculty (as I trust you will not), yet, depend upon it, holy
life is, in itself, a wonderful power, and will make up for many
deficiencies; it is, in fact, the best sermon the best man can deliver.
Let us resolve that all the purity which can be had we will have, that
all the sanctity which can be reached we will obtain, and that all the
likeness to Christ that is possible in this world of sin shall certainly
be in us through the work of the Spirit of God. The Lord lift us all as a
college right up to a higher platform, and He shall have the glory!

5. Still I have not done, dear brethren. I have to say to you, go
forward in actual work, for, after all, we shall be known by what we
have done. We ought to be mighty in deed as well as word. There are
good brethren in the world who are impractical. The grand doctrine
of the second advent makes them stand with open mouths peering
into the skies, so that I am ready to say, "Ye men of Plymouth why
stand ye here gazing up into heaven?" The fact that Jesus Chris is to
come is not a reason for star-gazing, but for working in the power of
the Holy Ghost. Be not so taken up with speculations as to prefer a
Bible reading over a dark passage in the Revelation to teaching in a
ragged-school or discoursing to the poor concerning Jesus. We must
have done with day-dreams, and get to work. I believe in eggs, but we
must get chickens out of them. I do not mind how big your egg is; it
may be an ostrich's egg if you like, but if there is nothing in it, pray
clear away the shells. If something comes of it God bless your
speculations, and even if you should go a little further than I think it
wise to venture, still, if you are more useful, God be praised for it. We
want facts--deeds done, souls saved. It is all very well to write essays,
but what souls have you saved from going down to hell? Your
excellent management of your school interests me, but how many
children have been brought into the church by it? We are glad to hear
of those special meetings, but how many have really been born to
God in them? Are saints edified? Are sinners converted? To swing to
and fro on a five-barred gate is not progress, yet some seem to think
so. I see them in perpetual Elysium, humming over to themselves
and their friends, "We are very comfortable." God save us from living
in comfort while sinners are sinking into hell. In travelling along the
mountain roads in Switzerland you will continually see marks of the
boring-rod; and in every minister's life there should be traces of stern
labour. Brethren, do something; do something; do something. While
committees waste their time over resolutions, do something. While
Societies and Unions are making constitutions, let us win souls. Too
often we discuss, and discuss, and discuss, and Satan laughs in his
sleeve. It is time we had done planning and sought something to
plan. I pray you, be men of action all of you. Get to work and quit
yourselves like men. Old Suvarov's idea of war is mine: "Forward and

strike! No theory! Attack! Form column! Charge bayonets! Plunge
into the centre of the enemy." Our one aim is to save sinners, and
this we are not to talk about, but to do in the power of God.
6. Lastly, and here I am going to deliver a message which weighs
upon me,--Go forward in the matter of the choice of your sphere of
action. I plead this day for those who cannot plead for themselves,
namely, the great outlying masses of the heathen world. Our existing
pulpits are tolerably well supplied, but we need men who will build
on new foundations. Who will do this? Are we, as a company of
faithful men, clear in our consciences about the heathen? Millions
have never heard the name of Jesus. Hundreds of millions have seen
a missionary only once in their lives, and know nothing of our King.
Shall we let them perish? Can we go to our beds and sleep while
China, India, Japan, and other nations are being damned? Are we
clear of their blood? Have they no claim upon us? We ought to put it
on this footing--not "Can I prove that I ought to go?" but "Can I
prove that I ought not to go?" When a man can prove honestly that
he ought not to go then he is clear, but not else. What answer do you
give, my brethren? I put it to you man by man. I am not raising a
question among you which I have not honestly put to myself. I have
felt that if some of our leading ministers would go forth it would have
a grand effect in stimulating the churches, and I have honestly asked
myself whether I ought to go. After balancing the whole thing I feel
bound to keep my place, and I think the judgment of most Christians
would be the same; but I hope I would cheerfully go if it were my
duty to do so. Brethren, put yourselves through the same process. We
must have the heathen converted; God has myriads of His elect
among them, we must go and search for them till we find them.
Many difficulties are now removed, all lands are open to us, and
distance is annihilated. True we have not the Pentecostal gift of
tongues, but languages are now readily acquired, while the art of
printing is a full equivalent for the lost gift. The dangers incident to
missions ought not to keep any true man back, even if they were very
great, but they are now reduced to a minimum. There are hundreds
of places where the cross of Christ is unknown, to which we can go

without risk. Who will go? The men who ought to go are young
brethren of good abilities who have not yet taken upon themselves
family cares.
Each student entering the college should consider this matter, and
surrender himself to the work unless there are conclusive reasons for
his not doing so. It is a fact that even for the colonies it is very
difficult to find men, for I have had openings in Australia which I
have been obliged to decline. It ought not to be so. Surely there is
some self-sacrifice among us yet, and some among us are willing to
be exiled for Jesus. The Mission languishes for want of men. If the
men were forthcoming the liberality of the church would supply their
needs, and, in fact, the liberality of the church had made the supply,
and yet there are not the men to go. I shall never feel, brethren, that
we, as a band of men, have done our duty until we see our comrades
fighting for Jesus in every land in the van of conflict. I believe that if
God moves you to go, you will be among the best of missionaries,
because you will make the preaching of the gospel the great feature
of your work, and that is God's sure way of power. I wish that our
churches would imitate that of Pastor Harms, in Germany, where
every member was consecrated to God indeed and of a truth. The
farmers gave the produce of their lands, the working-men their
labour; one gave a large house to be used as a missionary college, and
Pastor Harms obtained money for a ship which he fitted out, to make
voyages to Africa, and then he sent missionaries, and little
companies of his people with them, to form Christian communities
among the Bushmen. When will our churches be equally self-denying
and energetic? Look at the Moravians! how every man and woman
becomes a missionary, and how much they do in consequence. Let us
catch their spirit. Is it a right spirit? Then it is right for us to have it.
It is not enough for us to say, "Those Moravians are very wonderful
people!" We ought to be wonderful people too. Christ did not
purchase the Moravians any more than He purchased us; they are
under no more obligation to make sacrifices than we are. Why then
this backwardness? When we read of heroic men who gave up all for
Jesus, we are not merely to admire, but to imitate them. Who will

imitate them now? Come to the point. Are there not some among you
willing to consecrate yourselves to the Lord? "Forward" is the
watchword to-day! Are there no bold spirits to lead the van? Pray all
of you that during this Pentecost the Spirit may say, "Separate me
Barnabas and Saul for the work."
Forward! In God's name, FORWARD!!
--*This lecture was delivered to ministers who had been educated at
the Pastors' College as well as to students, hence certain differences
of expression.