PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 18 of 28
Open-Air Preaching — Remarks Thereon


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 18. Open-Air Preaching — Remarks Thereon.

LECTURE XVIII
OPEN-AIR PREACHING-REMARKS THEREON
I fear that in some of our less enlightened country churches there are
conservative individuals who almost believe that to preach anywhere
except in the chapel would be a shocking innovation, a sure token of
heretical tendencies, and a mark of zeal without knowledge. Any
young brother who studies his comfort among them must not
suggest anything so irregular as a sermon outside the walls of their
Zion. In the olden times we are told "Wisdom crieth without, she
uttereth her voice in the streets, she crieth in the chief places of
concourse, in the openings of the gates"; but the wise men of
orthodoxy would have wisdom gagged except beneath the roof of a
licensed building. These people believe in a New Testament which
says, "Go out into the highways and hedges and compel them to
come in," and yet they dislike a literal obedience to the command. Do
they imagine that a special blessing results from sitting upon a
particular deal board with a piece of straight-up panelling at their
back--an invention of discomfort which ought long ago to have made
people prefer to worship outside on the green grass? Do they
suppose that grace rebounds from sounding-boards, or can be beaten
out of pulpit cushions in the same fashion as the dust? Are they
enamoured of the bad air, and the stifling stuffiness which in some of
our meeting-houses make then almost as loathsome to the nose and
to the lungs as the mass-houses of Papists with their cheap and nasty
incense? To reply to these objectors is a task for which we have no
heart: we prefer foemen worthy of the steel we use upon them, but
these are scarcely worth a passing remark. One smiles at their
prejudice, but we may yet have to weep over it, if it be allowed to
stand in the way of usefulness.
No sort of defence is needed for preaching out of doors; but it would
need very potent arguments to prove that a man had done his duty
who has never preached beyond the walls of his meeting-house. A
defence is required rather for services within buildings than for

worship outside of them. Apologies are certainly wanted for
architects who pile up brick and stone into the skies when there is so
much need for preaching rooms among poor sinners down below.
Defence is greatly needed for forests of stone pillars, which prevent
the preacher's being seen and his voice from being heard; for highpitched Gothic roofs in which all sound is lost, and men are killed by
being compelled to shout till they burst their bloodvessels; and also
for the wilful creation of echoes by exposing hard, sound-refracting
surfaces to satisfy the demands of art, to the total overlooking of the
comfort of both audience and speaker. Surely also some decent
excuse is badly wanted for those childish people who must needs
waste money in placing hobgoblins and monsters on the outside of
their preaching houses, and must have other ridiculous pieces of
Popery stuck up both inside and outside, to deface rather than to
adorn their churches and chapels: but no defence whatever is wanted
for using the heavenly Father's vast audience chamber, which is in
every way so well fitted for the proclamation of a gospel so free, so
full, so expansive, so sublime. The usual holding of religious
assemblies under cover may be excused in England, because our
climate is so execrably bad; but it were well to cease from such use
when the weather is fine and fixed, and space and quiet can be
obtained. We are not like the people of Palestine, who can foresee
their weather, and are not every hour in danger of a shower; but if we
meet sub Jove, as the Latins say, we must expect the Jove of the hour
to be Jupiter pluvius. We can always have a deluge if we do not wish
for it, but if we fix a service out of doors for next Sunday morning, we
have no guarantee that we shall not all be drenched to the skin. It is
true that some notable sermons have been preached in the rain, but
as a general rule the ardour of our auditors is hardly so great as to
endure much damping. Besides, the cold of our winters is too intense
for services out of doors all the year round, though in Scotland I have
heard of sermons amid the sleet, and John Nelson writes of speaking
to "a crowd too large to get into the house, though it was dark and
snowed." Such things may be done now and then, but exceptions
only prove the rule. It is fair also to admit that when people will come
within walls, if the house be so commodious that a man could not

readily make more persons hear, and if it be always full, there can be
no need to go out of doors to preach to fewer than there would be
indoors; for, all things considered, a comfortable seat screened from
the weather, and shut in from noise and intrusion, is helpful to a
man's hearing the gospel with solemnity and quiet thought. A well
ventilated, well managed building is an advantage if the crowds can
be accommodated and can be induced to come; but these conditions
are very rarely met, and therefore my voice is for the fields.
The great benefit of open-air preaching is that we get so many
newcomers to hear the gospel who otherwise would never hear it.
The gospel command is, "Go ye into all the world and preach the
gospel to every creature," but it is so little obeyed that one would
imagine that it ran thus, "Go into your own place of worship and
preach the gospel to the few creatures who will come inside." "Go ye
into the highways and hedges and compel them to come in,"--albeit
it constitutes part of a parable, is worthy to be taken very literally,
and in so doing its meaning will be best carried out. We ought
actually to go into the streets and lanes and highways, for there are
lurkers in the hedges, tramps on the highway, street-walkers, and
lane-haunters, whom we shall never reach unless we pursue them
into their own domains. Sportsmen must not stop at home and wait
for the birds to come and be shot at, neither must fishermen throw
their nets inside their boats and hope to take many fish. Traders go
to the markets, they follow their customers and go out after business
if it will not come to them; and so must we. Some of our brethren are
prosing on and on, to empty pews and musty hassocks, while they
might be conferring lasting benefit upon hundreds by quitting the
old walls for a while, and seeking living stones for Jesus. Let them
come out of Rehoboth and find room at the street corner, let them
leave Salem and seek the peace of neglected souls, let them dream no
longer at Bethel, but make an open space to be none other than the
house of God, let them come down from Mount Zion, and up from
Ænon, and even away from Trinity, and St. Agnes, and St. Michaeland-All-Angels, and St. Margaret-Pattens, and St. Vedast, and St.

Ethelburga, and all the rest of them, and try to find new saints
among the sinners who are perishing for lack of knowledge.
I have known Street preaching in London remarkably blest to
persons whose character and condition would quite preclude their
having been found in a place of worship. I know, for instance, a
Jewish friend who, on coming from Poland, understood nothing
whatever of the English language. In going about the streets on the
Sunday he noticed the numerous groups listening to earnest
speakers. He had never seen such a thing in his own country, where
the Russian police would be alarmed if groups were seen in
conversation, and he was therefore all the more interested. As he
acquired a little English he became more and more constant in his
attendance upon Street speakers; indeed, it was very much with the
view of learning the language that he listened at the first. I am afraid
that the English which he acquired was not of the very best, which
judgment I form as much from what I have heard of open-air oratory
as from having listened to our Jewish friend himself, whose theology
is better than his English. However, that "Israelite indeed" has
always reason to commend the street preachers. How many other
strangers and foreigners may, by the same instrumentality, have
become fellow-citizens with the saints and of the household of God
we cannot tell. Romanists also are met with in this manner more
frequently than some would suppose. It is seldom prudent to publish
cases of conversion among Papists, but my own observation leads me
to believe that they are far more common than they were ten years
ago, and the gracious work is frequently commenced by what is
heard of the gospel at our street corners. Infidels, also, are constantly
yielding to the word of the Lord thus brought home to them. The
street evangelist, moreover, wins attention from those eccentric
people whose religion can neither be described nor imagined. Such
people hate the very sight of our churches and meeting houses, but
will stand in a crowd to hear what is said, and are often most
impressed when they affect the greatest contempt.

Besides, there are numbers of persons in great cities who have not fit
clothes to worship in, according to the current idea of what clothes
ought to be; and not a few whose persons as well as their garments
are so filthy, so odorous, so unapproachable, that the greatest
philanthropist and the most levelling democrat might desire to have
a little space between himself and their lively individualities. There
are others who, whatever raiment they wear, would not go into a
chapel upon any consideration, for they consider it to be a sort of
punishment to attend divine service. Possibly they remember the
dull Sundays of their childhood and the dreary sermons they have
heard when for a few times they have entered a church, but it is
certain that they look upon persons who attend places of worship as
getting off the punishment they ought to endure in the next world by
suffering it in this world instead. The Sunday newspaper, the pipe,
and the pot, have more charms for them than all the preachments of
bishops and parsons, whether of church or dissent. The open-air
evangelist frequently picks up these members of the "No church"
party, and in so doing he often finds some of the richest gems that
will at last adorn the Redeemer's crown: jewels, which, by reason of
their roughness, are apt to be unnoticed by a more fastidious class of
soul-winners. Jonah in the streets of Nineveh was heard by
multitudes who would never have known of his existence if he had
hired a hall; John the Baptist by the Jordan awakened an interest
which would never have been aroused had he kept to the synagogue;
and those who went from city to city proclaiming everywhere the
word of the Lord Jesus would never have turned the world upside
down if they had felt it needful to confine themselves to iron rooms
adorned with the orthodox announcement, "The gospel of the grace
of God will (D.V.) be preached here next Lord's day evening."
I am quite sure, too, that if we could persuade our friends in the
country to come out a good many times in the year and hold a service
in a meadow, or in a shady grove, or on the hill side, or in a garden,
or on a common, it would be all the better for the usual hearers. The
mere novelty of the place would freshen their interest, and wake
them up. The slight change of scene would have a wonderful effect

upon the more somnolent. See how mechanically they move into
their usual place of worship, and how mechanically they go out
again. They fall into their seats as if at last they had found a resting
place; they rise to sing with an amazing effort, and they drop down
before you have time for a doxology at the close of the hymn because
they did not notice it was coming. What logs some regular hearers
are! Many of them are asleep with their eyes open. After sitting a
certain number of years in the same old spot, where the pews, pulpit,
galleries, and all things else are always the same, except that they get
a little dirtier and dingier every week, where everybody occupies the
same position for ever and for evermore, and the minister's face,
voice, tone are much the same from January to December,--you get
to feel the holy quiet of the scene and listen to what is going on as
though it were addressed to "the dull cold ear of death." As a miller
hears his wheels as though he did not hear them, or a stoker scarcely
notices the clatter of his engine after enduring it for a little time; or
as a dweller in London never notices the ceaseless grind of the
traffic; so do many members of our congregations become insensible
to the most earnest addresses, and accept them as a matter of course.
The preaching and the rest of it get to be so usual that they might as
well not be at all. Hence a change of place might be useful, it might
prevent monotony, shake up indifference, suggest thought, and in a
thousand ways promote attention, and give new hope of doing good.
A great fire which should burn some of our chapels to the ground
might not be the greatest calamity which has ever occurred, if it only
aroused some of those rivals of the seven sleepers of Ephesus who
will never be moved so long as the old house and the old pews hold
together. Besides, the fresh air and plenty of it is a grand thing for
every mortal man, woman, and child. I preached in Scotland twice on
a Sabbath day at Blairmore, on a little height by the side of the sea,
and after discoursing with all my might to large congregations, to be
counted by thousands, I did not feel one-half so much exhausted as I
often am when addressing a few hundreds in some horrible black
hole of Calcutta, called a chapel. I trace my freshness and freedom
from lassitude at Blairmore to the fact that the windows could not be
shut down by persons afraid of draughts, and that the roof was as

high as the heavens are above the earth. My conviction is that a man
could preach three or four times on a Sabbath out of doors with less
fatigue than would be occasioned by one discourse delivered in an
impure atmosphere, heated and poisoned by human breath, and
carefully preserved from every refreshing infusion of natural air.
Tents are bad--unutterably bad: far worse than the worst buildings. I
think a tent is the most objectionable covering for a preaching place
that was ever invented. I am glad to see tents used in London, for the
very worst place is better than none, and because they can easily be
moved from place to place, and are not very expensive; but still if I
had my choice between having nothing at all and having a tent I
should prefer the open air by far. Under canvas the voice is deadened
and the labour of speaking greatly increased. The material acts as a
wet blanket to the voice, kills its resonance, and prevents its
travelling. With fearful exertion, in the sweltering air generated in a
tent, you will be more likely to be killed than to be heard. You must
have noticed even at our own College gatherings, when we number
only some two hundred, how difficult it is to hear at the end of a tent,
even when the sides are open, and the air is pure. Perhaps you may
on that occasion attribute this fact in some degree to a want of
attentiveness and quietness on the part of that somewhat jubilant
congregation, but still even when prayer is offered, and all is hushed,
I have observed a great want of travelling power in the best voice
beneath a marquee.
If you are going to preach in the open air in the country, you will
perhaps have your choice of a spot wherein to preach; if not, of
course you must have what you can get, and you must in faith accept
it as the very best. Hobson's choice of that or none makes the matter
simple, and saves a deal of debate. Do not be very squeamish. If there
should happen to be an available meadow hard by your chapel, select
it because it will be very convenient to turn into the meeting-house
should the weather prove unsuitable, or if you wish to hold a prayermeeting or an after-meeting at the close of your address. It is well to
preach before your regular services on a spot near your place of

worship, so as to march the crowd right into the building before they
know what they are about. Half-an-hour's out-of-door speaking and
singing before your ordinary hour of assembly will often fill an empty
house. At the same time, do not always adhere to near and handy
spots, but choose a locality for the very opposite reason, because it is
far away from any place of worship and altogether neglected. Hang
up the lamps wherever there is a dark corner; the darker the more
need of light. Paradise Row and Pleasant Place are generally the least
paradisiacal and the most unpleasant: thither let your steps be
turned. Let the dwellers in the valley of the shadow of death perceive
that light has sprung up for them.
I have somewhere met with the recommendation always to preach
with a wall behind you, but against that I respectfully enter my
caveat. Have a care of what may be on the other side of the wall! One
evangelist received a can of scalding water from over a wall with the
kindly remark, "There's soup for Protestants!" and another was
favoured with most unsavoury bespatterings from a vessel emptied
from above. Gideon Ouseley began to preach in Roscommon with his
back against the gable of a tobacco factory in which there was a
window with a wooden door, through which goods were hoisted into
the loft. Would you be surprised to learn that the window suddenly
opened, and that from it descended a pailful of tobacco water, an
acrid fluid most painful to the eyes? The preacher in after years knew
better than to put himself in such a tempting position. Let his
experience instruct you.
If I had my choice of a pitch for preaching, I should prefer to front a
rising ground, or an open spot bounded at some little distance by a
wall. Of course there must be sufficient space to allow of the
congregation assembling between the pulpit and the bounding object
in front, but I like to see an end, and not to shout into boundless
space. I do not know a prettier site for a sermon than that which I
occupied in my friend Mr. Duncan's grounds at Benmore. It was a
level sweep of lawn, backed by rising terraces covered with fir-trees.
The people could either occupy the seats below, or drop down upon

the grassy banks, as best comported with their comfort, and thus I
had part of my congregation in rising galleries above me, and the rest
in the area around me. My voice readily ascended, and I conceive
that if the people had been seated up the hill for half-a-mile they
would have been able to hear me with ease. I should suppose that
Wesley's favourite spot at Gwennap Pit must be somewhat after the
same order. Amphitheatres and hillsides are always favourite spots
with preachers in the fields, and their advantages will be at once
evident to you.
My friend Mr. Abraham once produced for me a grand cathedral in
Oxfordshire. The remains of it are still called "Spurgeon's
Tabernacle," and may be seen near Minster Lovell, in the form of a
quadrilateral of oaks. Originally it was the beau ideal of a preaching
place, for it was a cleared spot in the thick forest of Witchwood, and
was reached by roads cut through the dense underwood. I shall never
forget those "alleys green," and the verdant walls which shut them in.
When you reached the inner temple it consisted of a large square, out
of which the underwood and smaller trees had been cut away, while a
sufficient number of young oaks had been left to rise to a
considerable height, and then overshadow us with their branches.
Here was a truly magnificent cathedral, with pillars and arches: a
temple not made with hands, of which we might truly say,
"Father, thy hand
Hath reared these venerable columns, thou
Didst weave this verdant roof."
I have never, either at home or on the Continent, seen architecture
which could rival my cathedral. "Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we
found it in the fields of the wood." The blue sky was visible through
our clerestory, and from the great window at the further end the sun
smiled upon us toward evening. Oh, sirs, it was grand indeed, to
worship thus beneath the vaulted firmament, beyond the sound of
city hum, where all around ministered to quiet fellowship with God,
That spot is now cleared, and the place of our assembly has been

selected at a little distance from it. It is of much the same character,
only that my boundary walls of forest growth have disappeared to
give place to an open expanse of ploughed fields. Only the pillars and
the roof of my temple remain, but I am still glad, like the Druids, to
worship among the oak trees. This year a dove had built her nest just
above my head, and she continued flying to and fro to feed her
young, while the sermon proceeded. Why not? Where should she be
more at home than where the Lord of love and Prince of Peace was
adored? It is true my arched cathedral is not waterproof, and other
showers besides those of grace will descend upon the congregation,
but this has its advantages, for it makes us the more grateful when
the day is propitious, and the very precariousness of the weather
excites a large amount of earnest prayer.
I once preached a sermon in the open air in haying time during a
violent storm of rain. The text was, "He shall come down like rain
upon the mown grass, as showers that water the earth," and surely
we had the blessing as well as the inconvenience. I was sufficiently
wet, and my congregation must have been drenched, but they stood
it out, and I never heard that anybody was the worse in health,
though, I thank God, I have heard of souls brought to Jesus under
that discourse. Once in a while, and under strong excitement, such
things do no one any harm, but we are not to expect miracles, nor
wantonly venture upon a course of procedure which might kill the
sickly and lay the foundations of disease in the strong.
I remember well preaching between Cheddar Cliffs. What a noble
position! What beauty and sublimity! But there was great danger
from falling pieces of stone, moved by the people who sat upon the
higher portions of the cliff, and hence I would not choose the spot
again. We must studiously avoid positions where serious accident
might be possible. An injured head qualifies no one for enjoying the
beauties of nature, or the consolations of grace. Concluding a
discourse in that place, I called upon those mighty rocks to bear
witness that I had preached the gospel to the people, and to be a
testimony against them at the last great day, if they rejected the

message. Only the other day I heard of a person to whom that appeal
was made useful by the Holy Spirit.
Look well to the ground you select, that it is not swampy. I never like
to see a man slip up to his knees in mire while I am preaching. Rushy
places are often so smooth and green that we select them without
noting that they are apt to be muddy, and to give our hearers wet
feet. Always inconvenience yourself rather than your audience: your
Master would have done so. Even in the streets of London a concern
for the convenience of your hearers is one of the things which
conciliates a crowd more than anything.
Avoid as your worst enemy the neighbourhood of the Normandy
poplar. These trees cause a perpetual hissing and rustling sound,
almost like the noise of the sea. Every leaf of certain kinds of poplar
is in perpetual motion, like the tongue of Talkative. The noise may
not seem very loud, but it will drown the best of voices. "The sound
of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees" is all very well, but keep
clear of the noise of poplars and some other trees, or you will suffer
for it. I have had painful experience of this misery. The old serpent
himself seemed to hiss at me out of those unquiet boughs.
Practised preachers do not care to have the sun directly in their faces
if they can help it, neither do they wish their hearers to be distressed
in like manner, and therefore they take this item into consideration
when arranging for a service. In London we do not see that luminary
often enough to be much concerned upon this point.
Do not try to preach against the wind, for it is an idle attempt. You
may hurl your voice a short distance by an amazing effort, but you
cannot be well heard even by the few. I do not often advise you to
consider which way the wind blows, but on this occasion I urge you
to do it, or you will labour in vain. Preach so that the wind carries
your voice towards the people, and does not blow it down your
throat, or you will have to eat your own words. There is no telling
how far a man may be heard with the wind. In certain atmospheres

and climates, as for instance in that of Palestine, persons might be
heard for several miles; and single sentences of well-known speech
may in England be recognised a long way off, but I should gravely
doubt a man if he asserted that he understood a new sentence
beyond the distance of a mile. Whitefield is reported to have been
heard a mile, and I have been myself assured that I was heard for
that distance, but I am somewhat sceptical.* Half-a-mile is surely
enough, even with the wind, but you must make sure of that to be
heard at all.
In the country it ought to be easy to find a fit place for preaching.
One of the earliest things that a minister should do when he leaves
College and settles in a country town or village is to begin open-air
speaking. He will generally have no difficulty as to the position; the
land is before him and he may choose according to his own sweet
will. The market-cross will be a good beginning, then the head of a
court crowded with the poor, and next the favourite corner of the
idlers of the parish. Cheap-Jack's stand will make a capital pulpit on
Sunday night during the village fair, and a wagon will serve well on
the green, or in a field at a little distance, during the week-day
evenings of the rustic festival. A capital place for an alfresco
discourse is the green where the old elm trees, felled long ago, are
still lying in reserve as if they were meant to be seats, for your
congregation; so also is the burial ground of the meeting-house
where "the rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep." Consecrate it to the
living and let the people enjoy "Meditations among the Tombs."
Make no excuses, then, but get to work at once.
In London, or any other large town, it is a great thing to find a vacant
spot where you can obtain a right to hold services at your pleasure. If
you can discover a piece of ground which is not yet built over, and if
you can obtain the use of it from the owner till he covers it, it will be
a great acquisition, and worth a slight expense in fencing; for you are
then king of the castle and disturbers will be trespassers. I suppose
that such a spot is not often obtainable, especially by persons who
have no money; but it is worth thinking about. It is a great gain when

your place of worship has even a small outside space, like that at
Surrey Chapel, or upon the Tabernacle steps; for here you are beyond
the interference of the police or drunken men. If we have none of
these, we must find street corners, triangles, quiet nooks, and wide
spaces wherein to proclaim the gospel. Years ago I preached to
enormous assemblies in King Edward's Road, Hackney, which was
then open fields, but now not a spare yard remains. On those
occasions the rush was perilous to life and limb, and there seemed no
limit to the throngs. Half the number would have been safer. That
open space has vanished, and it is the same with fields at Brixton,
where in years gone by it was delightful to see the assembled crowds
listening to the word. Burdened with the rare trouble of drawing too
many together, I have been compelled to abstain from these
exercises in London, but not from any lessened sense of their
importance. With the Tabernacle always full I have as large a
congregation as I desire at home, and therefore do not preach
outside except in the country; but for those ministers whose area
under cover is but small, and whose congregations are thin, the open
air is the remedy whether in London or in the provinces.
In raising a new interest, and in mission operations, out of door
services are a main agency. Get the people to listen outside that they
may by-and-by worship inside. You want no pulpit, a chair will do,
or the kerb of the road. The less formality the better, and if you begin
by merely talking to the two or three around you and make no
pretence of sermonizing you will do well. More good may be done by
personal talk to one than by a rhetorical address to fifty. Do not
purposely interfere with the thoroughfare, but if the crowd should
accumulate do not hasten away in sheer fright: the policeman will let
you know soon enough. You are most wanted, however, where you
will be in no danger of impeding passers-by, but far more likely to be
in danger yourself--I refer to those central courts and blind alleys in
our great cities which lie out of the route of decency, and are known
to nobody but the police, and to them principally through bruises
and wounds, Talk of discovering the interior of Africa, we need
explorers for Fryingpan Alley and Emerald-Island Court: the Arctic

regions are well nigh as accessible as Dobinson's Rents and Jack
Ketch's Warren. Heroes of the cross--here is a field for you more
glorious than the Cid ever beheld when with his brave right arm he
smote the Paynim hosts. "Who will bring me into the strong city?
Who will lead me into Edom?" Who will enable us to win these slums
and dens for Jesus? Who can do it but the Lord? Soldiers of Christ
who venture into these regions must expect a revival of the practices
of the good old times, so far as brickbats are concerned, and I have
known a flower-pot fall accidentally from an upper window in a
remarkably slanting direction. Still, if we are born to be drowned we
shall not be killed by flower-pots. Under such treatment it may be
refreshing to read what Christopher Hopper wrote under similar
conditions more than a hundred years ago. "I did not much regard a
little dirt, a few rotten eggs, the sound of a cow's horn, the noise of
bells, or a few snowballs in their season; but sometimes I was saluted
with blows, stones, brickbats, and bludgeons. These I did not well
like: they were not pleasing to flesh and blood. I sometimes lost a
little skin, and once a little blood, which was drawn from my
forehead with a sharp stone. I wore a patch for a few days, and was
not ashamed; I gloried in the cross. And when my small sufferings
abounded for the sake of Christ, my comfort abounded much more. I
never was more happy in my own soul, or blessed in my labours."
I am somewhat pleased when I occasionally hear of a brother being
locked up by the police, for it does him good, and it does the people
good also. It is a fine sight to see the minister of the gospel marched
off by the servant of the law! It excites sympathy for him, and the
next step is sympathy for his message. Many who felt no interest in
him before are eager to hear him when he is ordered to leave off, and
still more so when he is taken to the station. The vilest of mankind
respect a man who gets into trouble in order to do them good, and if
they see unfair opposition excited they grow quite zealous in the
man's defence.
I am persuaded that the more of open-air preaching there is in
London the better. If it should become a nuisance to some it will be a

blessing to others, if properly conducted. If it be the gospel which is
spoken, and if the spirit or the preacher be one or love and truth, the
results cannot be doubted: the bread cast upon the waters must be
found again after many days. The gospel must, however, be preached
in a manner worth the hearing, for mere noise-making is an evil
rather than a benefit. I know a family almost driven out of their
senses by the hideous shouting of monotonous exhortations, and the
howling of "Safe in the arms of Jesus" near their door every Sabbath
afternoon by the year together. They are zealous Christians, and
would willingly help their tormentors if they saw the slightest
probability of usefulness from the violent bawling: but as they
seldom see a hearer, and do not think that what is spoken would do
any good if it were heard, they complain that they are compelled to
lose their few hours of quiet because two good men think it their duty
to perform a noisy but perfectly useless service. I once saw a man
preaching with no hearer but a dog, which sat upon its tail and
looked up very reverently while its master orated. There were no
people at the windows nor passing by, but the brother and his dog
were at their post whether the people would hear or whether they
would forbear. Once also I passed an earnest declaimer, whose hat
was on the ground before him, filled with papers, and there was not
even a dog for an audience, nor any one within hearing, yet did he
"waste his sweetness on the desert air." I hope it relieved his own
mind. Really it must be viewed as an essential part of a sermon that
somebody should hear it: it cannot be a great benefit to the world to
have sermons preached in vacuo.
As to style in preaching out of doors, it should certainly be very
different from much of that which prevails within, and perhaps if a
speaker were to acquire a style fully adapted to a street audience, he
would be wise to bring it indoors with him. A great deal of
sermonizing may be defined as saying nothing at extreme length; but
out of doors verbosity is not admired, you must say something and
have done with it and go on to say something more, or your hearers
will let you know. "Now then," cries a street critic, "let us have it, old
fellow." Or else the observation is made, "Now then, pitch it out!

You'd better go home and learn your lesson." "Cut it short, old boy,"
is a very common admonition, and I wish the presenters of this
advice gratis could let it be heard inside Ebenezer and Zoar and some
other places sacred to long-winded orations. Where these outspoken
criticisms are not employed, the hearers rebuke prosiness by quietly
walking away. Very unpleasant this, to find your congregation
dispersing, but a very plain intimation that your ideas are also much
dispersed.
In the street, a man must keep himself alive, and use many
illustrations and anecdotes, and sprinkle a quaint remark here and
there. To dwell long on a point will never do. Reasoning must be
brief, clear, and soon done with. The discourse must not be laboured
or involved, neither must the second head depend upon the first, for
the audience is a changing one, and each point must be complete in
itself. The chain of thought must be taken to pieces, and each link
melted down and turned into bullets: you will need not so much
Saladin's sabre to cut through a muslin handkerchief as Coeur de
Lion's battle axe to break a bar of iron. Come to the point at once,
and come there with all your might.
Short sentences of words and short passages of thought are needed
for out of doors. Long paragraphs and long arguments had better be
reserved for other occasions. In quiet country crowds there is much
force in an eloquent silence, now and then interjected; it gives people
time to breathe, and also to reflect. Do not, however, attempt this in
a London street; you must go ahead, or someone else may run off
with your congregation. In a regular field sermon pauses are very
effective, and are useful in several ways, both to speaker and
listeners, but to a passing company who are not inclined for anything
like worship, quick, short, sharp address is most adapted.
In the streets a man must from beginning to end be intense, and for
that very reason he must be condensed and concentrated in his
thought and utterance. It would never do to begin by saying, "My
text, dear friends, is a passage from the inspired word, containing

doctrines of the utmost importance, and bringing before us in the
clearest manner the most valuable practical instruction. I invite your
careful attention and the exercise of your most candid judgment
while we consider it under various aspects and place it in different
lights, in order that we may be able to perceive its position in the
analogy of the faith. In its exegesis we shall find an arena for the
cultured intellect, and the refined sensibilities. As the purling brook
meanders among the meads and fertilizes the pastures, so a stream
of sacred truth flows through the remarkable words which now lie
before us. It will be well for us to divert the crystal current to the
reservoir of our meditation, that we may quaff the cup of wisdom
with the lips of satisfaction." There, gentleman, is not that rather
above the average of word-spinning, and is not the art very generally
in vogue in these days? If you go out to the obelisk in Blackfriars
Road, and talk in that fashion, you will be saluted with "Go on, old
buffer," or "Ain't he fine? MY EYE!" A very vulgar youth will cry,
"What a mouth for a tater!" and another will shout in a tone of mock
solemnity, "AMEN!" If you give them chaff they will cheerfully return
it into your own bosom. Good measure, pressed down and running
over will they mete out to you. Shams and shows will have no mercy
from a street gathering. But have something to say, look them in the
face, say what you mean, put it plainly, boldly, earnestly, courteously,
and they will hear you. Never speak against time or for the sake of
hearing your own voice, or you will obtain some information about
your personal appearance or manner of oratory which will probably
be more true than pleasing. "Crikey," says one, "wouldn't he do for
an undertaker! He'd make 'em weep." This was a compliment paid to
a melancholy brother whose tone is peculiarly funereal. "There, old
fellow," said a critic on another occasion, "you go and wet your
whistle. You must feel awfully dry after jawing away at that rate
about nothing at all." This also was specially appropriate to a very
heavy brother of whom we had aforetime remarked that he would
make a good martyr, for there was no doubt of his burning well, he
was so dry. It is sad, very sad, that such rude remarks should be
made, but there is a wicked vein in some of us, which makes us take
note that the vulgar observations are often very true, and "hold as

'twere the mirror up to nature." As caricature often gives you a more
vivid idea of a man than a photograph would afford you, so do these
rough mob critics hit off an orator to the life by their exaggerated
censures. The very best speaker must be prepared to take his share of
street wit, and to return it if need be; but primness, demureness,
formality, sanctimonious long-windedness, and the affectation of
superiority, actually invite offensive pleasantries, and to a
considerable extent deserve them. Chadband or Stiggins in rusty
black, with plastered hair and huge choker, is as natural an object of
derision as Mr. Guido Fawkes himself. A very great man in his own
esteem will provoke immediate opposition, and the affectation of
supernatural saintliness will have the same effect. The less you are
like a parson the more likely you are to be heard; and, if you are
known to be a minister, the more you show yourself to be a man the
better. "What do you get for that, governor?" is sure to be asked, if
you appear to be a cleric, and it will be well to tell them at once that
this is extra, that you are doing overtime, and that there is to be no
collection. "You'd do more good if you gave us some bread or a drop
of beer, instead of them tracts," is constantly remarked, but a manly
manner, and the outspoken declaration that you seek no wages but
their good, will silence that stale objection.
The action of the street preacher should be of the very best. It should
be purely natural and unconstrained. No speaker should stand up in
the street in a grotesque manner, or he will weaken himself and
invite attack. The Street preacher should not imitate his own
minister, or the crowd will spy out the imitation very speedily, if the
brother is anywhere near home. Neither should he strike an attitude
as little boys do who say, "My name is Norval." The stiff straight
posture with the regular up and down motion of arm and hand is too
commonly adopted: and I would even more condemn the wildraving-maniac action which some are so fond of, which seems to be a
cross between Whitefield with both his arms in the air, and Saint
George with both his feet violently engaged in trampling on the
dragon. Some good men are grotesque by nature, and others take

great pains to make themselves so. The wicked Londoners say, "What
a cure!" I only wish I knew of a cure for the evil.
All mannerisms should be avoided. Just now I observe that nothing
can be done without a very large Bagster's Bible with a limp cover.
There seems to be some special charm about the large size, though it
almost needs a little perambulator in which to push it about. With
such a Bible full of ribbons, select a standing in Seven Dials, after the
pattern of a divine so graphically described by Mr. McCree. Take off
your hat, put your Bible in it, and place it on the ground. Let the kind
friend who approaches you on the right hold your umbrella, See how
eager the dear man is to do so! Is it not pleasing? He assures you he
is never so happy as when he is helping good men to do good. Now
close your eyes in prayer. When your devotions are over, somebody
will have profited by the occasion. Where is your affectionate friend
who held your umbrella and your hymn-book? Where is that wellbrushed hat, and that orthodox Bagster? Where? oh, where? Echo
answers, "Where?"
The catastrophe which I have thus described suggests that a brother
had better accompany you in your earlier ministries, that one may
watch while the other prays. If a number of friends will go with you
and make a ring around you it will be a great acquisition, and if these
can sing it will be still further helpful. The friendly company will
attract others, will help to secure order, and will do good service by
sounding forth sermons in song.
It will be very desirable to speak so as to be heard, but there is no use
in incessant bawling. The best street preaching is not that which is
done at the top of your voice, for it must be impossible to lay the
proper emphasis upon telling passages when all along you are
shouting with all your might. When there are no hearers near you,
and yet people stand upon the other side of the road and listen,
would it not be as well to cross over and so save a little of the
strength which is now wasted? A quiet, penetrating, conversational
style would seem to be the most telling. Men do not bawl and halloa

when they are pleading in deepest earnestness; they have generally
at such times less wind and a little more rain: less rant and a few
more tears. On, on, on with one monotonous shout and you will
weary everybody and wear out yourself. Be wise now, therefore, O ye
who would succeed in declaring your Master's message among the
multitude, and use your voices as common sense would dictate.
In a tract published by that excellent society "The Open Air Mission,"
I notice the following:
QUALIFICATIONS FOR OPEN-AIR PREACHERS
1. A good voice.
2. Naturalness of manner.
3. Self-possession.
4. A good knowledge of Scripture and of common things.
5. Ability to adapt himself to any congregation.
6. Good illustrative powers.
7. Zeal, prudence, and common sense.
8. A large, loving heart.
9. Sincere belief in all he says.
10. Entire dependence on the Holy Spirit for success.
11. A close walk with God by prayer.
12. A consistent walk before men by a holy life.
If any man has all these qualifications, the Queen had better make a
bishop of him at once, yet there is no one of these qualities which
could well be dispensed with.
Interruptions are pretty sure to occur in the streets of London. At
certain places all will go well for months, but in other positions the
fight begins as soon as the speaker opens his mouth. There are
seasons of opposition: different schools of adversaries rise and fall,
and accordingly there is disorder or quiet. The best tact will not
always avail to prevent disturbance; when men are drunk there is no
reasoning with them, and of furious Irish Papists we may say much

the same. Little is to be done with such unless the crowd around will
co-operate, as oftentimes they will, in removing the obstructor.
Certain characters, if they find that preaching is going on, will
interrupt by hook or by crook. They go on purpose, and if answered
once and again they still persevere. One constant rule is to be always
courteous and good tempered, for if you become cross or angry it is
all over with you. Another rule is to keep to your subject, and never
be drawn into side issues. Preach Christ or nothing: don't dispute or
discuss except with your eye on the cross. If driven off for a moment
always be on the watch to get back to your sole topic. Tell them the
old, old story, and if they will not hear that, move on. Yet be adroit,
and take them with guile. Seek the one object by many roads. A little
mother-wit is often the best resource and will work wonders with a
crowd. Bonhomie is the next best thing to grace on such occasions. A
brother of my acquaintance silenced a violent Romanist by offering
him his stand and requesting him to preach. The man's comrades for
the very fun of the thing urged him on, but, as he declined, the dog in
the manger fable was narrated and the disturber disappeared. If it be
a real sceptic who is assailing you it is prudence to shun debate as
much as possible, or ask him questions in return, for your business is
not to argue but to proclaim the gospel. Mr. John McGregor says
"Sceptics are of many kinds. Some of them ask questions to get
answers, and others put difficulties to puzzle the people. An honest
sceptic said to me in a crowd in Hyde-park, 'I have been trying to
believe for these ten years, but there is a contradiction I cannot get
over, and it is this: we are told that printing was invented not five
hundred years ago, and yet that the Bible is five thousand years old,
and I cannot for the life of me see how this can be.' Nay! the crowd
did not laugh at this man. Very few people in a crowd know much
more than he did about the Bible. But how deeply they drank in a
half-hour's account of the Scripture manuscripts, their preservation,
their translations and versions, their dispersion and collection, their
collation and transmission, and the overwhelming evidence of their
genuine truth!"

I remember an infidel on Kennington Common being most
effectually stopped. He continued to cry up the beauties of nature
and the works of nature until the preacher asked him if he would
kindly tell them what nature was. He replied that "everybody knew
what nature was." The preacher retorted, "Well, then, it will be all the
easier for you to tell us." "Why, nature--nature," he said, "nature,-nature is nature." Of course, the crowd laughed and the wise man
subsided.
Ignorance when it is allied with a coarse voluble tongue is to be met
by letting it have rope enough. One fellow wanted to know "how
Jacob knew that Esau hated him." He had hold of the wrong end of
the stick that time, and the preacher did not enlighten him, or he
would have set him up with ammunition for future encounters.
Our business is not to supply men with arguments by informing
them of difficulties. In the process of answering them ministers have
published the sentiments of infidels more widely than the infidels
themselves could have done. Unbelievers only "glean their blunted
shafts, and shoot them at the shield of truth again." Our object is not
to conquer them in logical encounters, but to save their souls. Real
difficulties we should endeavour to meet, and hence a competent
knowledge of the evidences is most desirable; but honest objectors
are best conversed with alone, when they are not ashamed to own
themselves in the wrong, and this we could not expect of them in the
crowd. Christ is to be preached whether men will believe in Him or
no. Our own experience of His power to save will be our best
reasoning, and earnestness our best rhetoric. The occasion will
frequently suggest the fittest thing to say, and we may also fall back
on the Holy Spirit who will teach us in the self-same hour what we
shall speak.
The open-air speaker's calling is as honourable as it is arduous, as
useful as it is laborious. God alone can sustain you in it, but with
Him at your side you will have nothing to fear. If ten thousand rebels
were before you and a legion of devils in every one of them you need

not tremble. More is He that is for you than all they that be against
you.
"By all hell's host withstood,
We all hell's host o'erthrow;
And conquering them through Jesus' blood,
We still to conquer go."
*From Chambers' Book of Days we borrow the following note: "Mrs.
Oliphant, in her Life of the Rev. Edward Irving, states that he had
been on some occasions clearly heard at the distance of half-a-mile.
It has been alleged however, that Black John Russell, of Kilmarnock,
celebrated by Burns in no gracious terms, was heard, though not
perhaps intelligibly, at the distance of a full mile. It would appear
that even this is not the utmost stretch of the phenomenon. A
correspondent of the Jameson's Journal, in 1828, states that, being
at the west end of Dunfermline, he overheard part of a sermon then
delivering at a tent at Cairneyhill by Dr. Black: he did not miss a
word, 'though the distance must be something about two miles'; the
preacher has, perhaps, seldom been surpassed for distinct speaking
and a clear voice; 'and the wind, which was steady and moderate,
came in the direction of the sound.'"
