PURITAN GOLD -- The Glory of Christ by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 14
The Glory of Christ in His Conjunction with the Church


The Glory of Christ. By John Owen.

Chapter 9. The Glory of Christ in His Conjunction with the Church.

And therefore those who dream of his personal reign on the earth before the day of judgement, unless they suppose that all the saints
shall be perfectly glorified also (which is only to bring down heaven to the earth for awhile, to no purpose), provide not at all for the
edification or consolation of the church. For no present grace, advanced unto the highest degree whereof in this world it is capable,
can make us meet for an immediate converse with Christ in his unveiled glory.
How much more abominable is the folly of men, who would represent the Lord Christ in his present glory by pictures and images of
him! When they have done their utmost with their burnished glass and gildings, an eye of flesh can not only behold it, but, if it be
guided by reason, see it contemptible and foolish But the true glory of Christ, neither inward nor outward sight can bear the rays of it
in this life.
The dispensation which we are meet for is only that of his presence with us by his Spirit. We know him now no more after the flesh, 2
Cor. 5: 16. We are advanced above that way and means of the knowledge at him by the fleshly, carnal ordinances of the Old
Testament. And we know him not according unto that bodily presence of his which his disciples enjoyed in the days of his flesh. We
have attained somewhat above that also. For such was the nature of his ministry here on earth, that there could not be the promised
dispensation of the Spirit until that was finished. Therefore he tells his disciples that it was expedient for them that he should go away,
and send the Spirit to them, John 16: 7. Hereon they had a clearer view of the glory of Christ than they could have by beholding him
in the flesh. This is our spiritual posture and condition. We are past the knowledge of him according to the flesh, – we cannot attain
nor receive the sight of him in glory; but the life which we now lead is by the faith of the Son of God.
I shall not here inquire into the nature of this vision, or the power and ability which we shall have in heaven to behold the glory of
Christ. Some few things may be mentioned, as it relates unto our minds, and our bodies also, after the resurrection.
1 . For the mind, it shall be perfectly freed from all that darkness, unsteadiness, and other incapacities, which here it is accompanied
with; and whereby it is weakened, hindered, and obstructed, in the exercise of faith. And they are of two sorts.
(1.) Such as are the remainders of that depravation of our natures which came upon us by sin. Hereby our minds became wholly vain,
dark, and corrupt, as the Scripture testifieth, – utterly unable to discern spiritual things in a due manner. This is so far cured and
removed in this life by grace, as that those who were darkness do become light in the Lord, or are enabled to live unto God under the
conduct of a new spiritual light communicated unto them. But it is so cured and removed in part only, it is not perfectly abolished.
Hence are all our remaining weaknesses and incapacities in discerning things spiritual and eternal, which we yet groan under, and
long for deliverance from. No footsteps, no scars or marks that ever it had place in our minds shall abide in glory, Eph. 5: 27. Nothing
shall weaken, disturb, or incapacitate our souls, in acting all their powers, unimpeded by vanity, diversions, weakness, inability, upon
their proper objects. The excellency hereof, in universal liberty and power, we cannot here comprehend; nor can we yet conceive the
glory and beauty of those immixed spiritual actings of our minds which shall have no clog upon them, no encumbrance in them, no
alloy of dross accompanying them. One pure act of spiritual sight in discerning the glory of Christ, – one pure act of love in cleaving
unto God, – will bring in more blessedness and satisfaction into our minds than in this world we are capable of.
(2.) There is an incapacity in our minds, as unto their acting on things spiritual and eternal, that is merely natural, from the posture
wherein they are, and the figure which they are to make in this life. For they are here clothed with flesh, and that debased and
corrupted. Now, in this state, though the mind act its conceptions by the body as its organ and instrument, yet is it variously
straitened, encumbered, and impeded in the exercise of its native powers, especially towards things heavenly, by this prison of the
flesh, wherein it is immured. There is an angelical excellency in the pure acting of the soul when delivered from all material
instruments of them, or when they are all glorified and made suitable helps in its utmost spiritual activity. How and by what degrees
our minds shall be freed from these obstructions in their beholding the glory of Christ shall be afterward declared.
2. Again, a new light, the light of glory, shall be implanted in them. There is a light in nature, which is the power of a man to discern
the things of man; – an ability to know, perceive, and judge of things natural. It is that “spirit of a man” which “is the candle of the
Lord, searching all the inward parts of the belly,” Prov. 20: 27.
But by the light hereof no man can discern spiritual things in a due manner, as the apostle declares, 1 Cor. 2: 11-16. Wherefore God
gives a superior, a supernatural light, the light of faith and grace, unto them whom he effectually calls unto the knowledge of himself
by Jesus Christ. He shines into their hearts, to give them the knowledge of his glory in the face of his dear Son. Howbeit this new light
does not abolish, blot out, or render useless, the other light of nature, as the sun, when it riseth, extinguisheth the light of the stars; but
it directs it and rectifies it as unto its principle, object, and end. Y et is it in itself a light quite of another nature. But he who has only
the former light can understand nothing of it, because he has no taste or experience of its power and operations. He may talk of it, and
make inquiries about it, but he knows it not.
Now , we have received this light of faith and grace, whereby we discern spiritual things, and behold the glory of Christ in the
imperfect manner before described. But in heaven there shall be a superadded light of glory, which shall make the mind itself “shine as
the firmament,” Dan. 12: 3. I shall only say three things of it. 1. That as the light of grace does not destroy or abolish the light of
nature, but rectify and improve it, so the light of glory shall not abolish or destroy this light of faith and grace, but, by incorporating
with it, render it absolutely perfect. 2. That as by the light of nature we cannot clearly comprehend the true nature and efficacy of the
light of grace, because it is of another kind, and is seen only in its own light; so by the light of grace we cannot absolutely comprehend
this light of glory, being of a peculiar kind and nature, seen perfectly only by its own light. It does not appear what we shall be. 3. That
this is the best notion we can have of this light of glory, – that, in the first instance of its operation, it perfectly transforms the soul into
the image and likeness of Christ.
This is the progress of our nature unto its rest and blessedness. The principles remaining in it concerning good and evil, with its
practical convictions, are not destroyed but improved by grace; as its blindness, darkness, and enmity to God are in part taken away.
Being renewed by grace, what it receives here of spiritual life and light shall never be destroyed, but be perfected in glory. Grace
renews nature; glory perfects grace; and so the whole soul is brought unto its rest in God. We have an image of it in the blind man
whom our Saviour cured, Mark 8: 22-25. He was absolutely blind, – born so, no doubt. Upon the first touch, his eyes were opened,
and he saw, but very obscurely; – he saw men walking like trees. But on the second, he saw all things clearly. Our minds in
themselves are absolutely blind. The first visitation of them by grace gives them a sight of things spiritual, heavenly, and eternal; but it

is obscure and unsteady. The sight of glory makes all things clear and evident.
3. The body as glorified, with its senses, shall have its use and peace herein. After we are clothed again with our flesh, we shall see our
Redeemer with our eyes. We know not here what power and spirituality there will be in the acts of our glorified bodies. Such they will
be as shall bear a part in eternal blessedness. Holy Stephen, the first martyr, took up somewhat of glory by anticipation before he died.
For when he was brought to his trial before the council, all that sat therein, “looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as the face of an
angel,” Acts 6: 16. He had his transfiguration, escorting unto his measure, answerable unto that of our blessed Saviour in the mount.
And by this initial beam of glory he received such a piercing vivacity and edge on his bodily eyes, that through all those inconceivable
distances between the earth and the residence of the blessed, he looked steadfastly into heaven, and “saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God,” Acts 7: 55, 56. Who, then, can declare what will be the power and acting of this sense of sight
when perfectly glorified; or what sweetness and refreshment may be admitted into our souls thereby? It was a privilege (who would
not have longed to partake of it?) to have seen Him with our bodily eyes in the days of his flesh, as did the apostles and his other
disciples. Howbeit he was not then glorified himself in the manifestation of his glory; nor they who saw him, in the change or
transformation of their nature. How great this privilege was, himself declares unto those that so saw him, Matt. 13: l7, “Verily I say
unto you, That many prophets and righteous men have desired to see those things which ye see;” whereunto we shall speak
immediately. And if this were so excellent a privilege as that we cannot but congratulate them by whom it was enjoyed, how excellent,
how glorious will it be, when with these eyes of ours, gloriously purified and strengthened beyond those of Stephen, we shall behold
Christ himself immediately in the fulness of his glory! He alone perfectly understands the greatness and excellency hereof, who prayed
his Father that those who “believe in him may be where he is, so to behold his glory.”
These are some of the grounds of this first difference between our beholding the glory of Christ by faith here, and by immediate vision
hereafter. Hence the one is weak, imperfect, obscure, reflexive; the other direct, immediate, even, and constant; – and we may stay a
little in the contemplation of these things.
This view of the glory of Christ which we have now spoken unto is that which we are breathing and panting after; that which the
Lord Christ prays that we may arrive unto; that which the apostle testifies to be our best; – the best thing or state which our nature is
capable of, – that which brings eternal rest and satisfaction unto our souls.
Here our souls are burdened with innumerable infirmities, and our faith is clogged in its operations by ignorance and darkness. This
makes our best estate and highest attainments to be accompanied with groans for deliverance: “We which have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body,” Rom. 8: 23. Y ea, whilst
we are in this tabernacle, we groan earnestly, as being burdened, because we are not “absent from the body, and present with the
Lord,” 2 Cor. 5: 2, 4, 8. The more we grow in faith and spiritual light, the more sensible are we of our present burdens, and the more
vehemently do we groan for deliverance into the perfect liberty of the sons of God. This is the posture of their minds who have
received the first fruit of the Spirit in the most eminent degree. The nearer any one is to heaven, the more earnestly he desires to be
there, because Christ is there. For the more frequent and steady are our views of him by faith, the more do we long and groan for the
removal of all obstructions and interpositions in our so doing. Now groaning is [the expression of] a vehement desire, mixed with
sorrow, for the present want of what is desired. The desire has sorrow, and that sorrow has joy and refreshment in it; – like a shower
that falls on a man in a garden in the spring; it wets him, but withal refresheth him with the savour it causeth in the flowers and
herbs of the garden where he is, and this groaning, which, when it is constant and habitual, is one of the choicest effects of faith in this
life, respects what we would be delivered from, and what we would attain unto. The first is expressed, Rom. 7: 24, the other in the
places now mentioned. And this triune, with an intermixture of some sighs from weariness by the troubles, sorrows, pains, sicknesses
of this life, is the best we can here attain unto.
Alas! we cannot here think of Christ, but we are quickly ashamed of, and troubled at, our own thoughts; so confused are they, so
unsteady, so imperfect. Commonly they issue in a groan or a sigh: Oh! when shall we come unto him? when shall we be ever with
him? when shall we see him as he is? And if at any time he begins to give more than ordinary evidences and intimations of his glory
and love unto our souls, we are not able to bear them, so as to give them any abiding residence in our minds. But ordinarily this
trouble and groaning is amongst our best attainments in this world, – a trouble which, I pray God, I may never be delivered from,
until deliverance do come at once from this state of mortality; yea, the good Lord increase this trouble more and more in all that
believe.
The heart of a believer affected with the glory of Christ, is like the needle touched with the loadstone. It can no longer be quiet, no
longer be satisfied in a distance from him. It is put into a continual motion towards him. This motion, indeed, is weak and tremulous.
Pantings, breathing, sighings, greenings in prayer, in meditations, in the secret recesses of our minds, are the life of it. However, it is
continually pressing towards him. But it obtains not its point, it comes not to its centre and rest, in this world.
But now above, all things are clear and serene, all plain and evident in our beholding the glory of Christ, – we shall be ever with him,
and see him as he is. This is heaven, this is blessedness, this is eternal rest.
Th e person of Christ in all his glory shall be continually before us; and the eyes of our understandings shall be so gloriously
illuminated, as that we shall be able steadily to behold and comprehend that glory.
But, alas! here at present our minds recoil, our meditations fail, our hearts are overcome, our thoughts confused, and our eyes turn
aside from the lustre of this glory; nor can we abide in the contemplation of it. But there, an immediate, constant view of it, will bring
in everlasting refreshment and joy unto our whole souls.
This beholding of the glory of Christ given him by his Father, is, indeed, subordinate unto the ultimate vision of the essence of God.
What that is we cannot well conceive; only we know that the “pure in heart shall see God.” But it has such an immediate connection
with it, and subordination unto it, as that without it we can never behold the face of God as the objective blessedness of our souls. For
he is, and shall be to eternity, the only means of communication between God and the church.
And we may take some direction in our looking into and longing after this perfect view of the glory of Christ, from the example of the
saints under the Old Testament. The sight which they had of the glory of Christ – for they also saw his glory through the obscurity of

its revelation, and its being veiled with types and shadows – was weak and imperfect in the most illuminated believers; much inferior
unto what we now have by faith, through the Gospels. Y et such it was as encouraged them to inquire and search diligently into what
was revealed, 1 Peter 1: 10,11. Howbeit, their discoveries were but dark and confused, such as men have of things at a great distance,
or “in a land that is very far off,” as the prophet speaks, Isa. 33: 17. And the continuance of this veil on the revelation of the glory of
Christ, whilst a veil of ignorance and blindness was upon their hearts and minds, proved the ruin of that church in its apostasy, as the
apostle declares, 2 Cor. 3: 7, 13, 14. This double veil (the covering covered, the veil veiled) God promised to take away, Isa. 25: 7; and
then shall they turn to the Lord, when they shall be able clearly to behold the glory of Christ, 2 Cor. 3: 16.
But this caused them who were real believers among them to desire, long, and pray for, the removal of these veils, the departure of
those shadows, which made it as night unto them in comparison of what they knew would appear, when “the Sun of Righteousness
should arise with healing in his wings.” They thought it long ere “the day did break, and the shadows flee away,” Cant. 2: 17; 4: 6.
There was an “apokaradokia”, as the apostle speaks, Rom. 8: 19, – a thrusting forth of the head with desire and expectation of the
exhibition of the Son of God in the flesh, and the accomplishment of all divine promises therein. Hence he was called the Lord whom
they sought and delighted in, Mal. 3: 1.
And great was the spiritual wisdom of believers in those days. They rejoiced and gloried in the ordinances of divine worship which they
did enjoy. They looked on them as their chiefest privilege, and attended unto them with diligence, as an effect of divine wisdom and
love, as also because they had a shadow of good things to come. But yet, at the same time, they longed and desired that the time of
reformation were come, wherein they should all be removed; that so they might behold and enjoy the good things signified by them.
And those who did not so, but rested in and trusted unto their present institutions, were not accepted with God. Those who were really
illuminated did not so, but lived in constant desires after the revelation of the whole mystery of the wisdom of God in Christ; as did the
angels themselves, 1 Peter 1: 3; Eph. 3: 9, 10.
I n this same of heart and suitable acting of their souls there was more of the power of true faith and love than is found among the
meet at this day. They saw the promises afar off, and were pervaded of them, and embraced them, Heb. 11: 13. They reached out the
arms of their most intent affections to embrace the things that were promised. We have an instance of this frame in old Simon, who,
so soon as he had taken the child Jesus in his arms, cried out, “Now, Lord, let me depart,” now let me die; this is that which my soul
has longed for, Luke 2: 28, 29.
O ur present darkness and weakness in beholding the glory of Christ, is not like theirs. It is not occasioned by a veil of types and
shadows, cast on it by the representative institutions of it, – it does not arise from the want of a clear doctrinal revelation of the person
and office of Christ; but, as was before declared, it proceedeth from two other causes. First, From the nature of faith itself, in
comparison with vision. It is not able to look directly into this excellent glory, nor fully to comprehend it. Secondly, From the way of
its propose which is not substantial of the thing itself, but only of an image of it, as in a glass. But the sight, the view of the glory of
Christ, which we shall have in heaven, is much more above that which we now enjoy by the gospel, than what we do or may so enjoy
is above what they have attained under their types and shadows. There is a far greater distance between the vision of heaven and the
sight which we have now by faith, than is between the sight which we now have and what they had under the Old Testament.
Heaven does more excel the Gospel state than that state does the Law. Wherefore, if they did so pray, so long for, so desire the
removal of their shadows and veils, that they might see what we now see, that they might so behold the glory of Christ as we may
behold it in the light of the gospel; how much more should we, if we have the same faith with them, the same love (which neither will
nor can be satisfied without perfect fruition), long and pray for the removal of all weakness, of all darkness and interposition, that we
may come unto that immediate beholding of his glory which he so earnestly prayed that we might be brought unto! To sum up
briefly what has been spoken: There are three things to be considered concerning the glory of Christ, three degrees in its manifestation,
– the shadow, the perfect image, and the substance itself. Those under the Law had only the shadow of it, and of the things that
belong unto it; – they had not the perfect image of them, Heb. 10: 1. Under the gospel we have the perfect image, which they had not;
or a clever, complete revelation and declaration of it, presenting it unto us as in a glass: but the enjoyment of these things in their
substance is reserved for heaven; we must be “where he is, that we may behold his glory.” Now, there is a greater difference and
distance between the real substance of any thing and the most perfect image of it, than there is between the most perfect image and
the lowest shadow of the same thing. If, then, they longed to be freed from their state of types and shadows, to enjoy the
representation of the glory of Christ in that image of it which is given us in the gospel; much more ought we to breathe and pant after
our deliverance from beholding it in the image of it, that we may enjoy the substance itself. For, whatever can be manifest of Christ
on this side heaven, it is granted unto us for this end, that we may the more fervently desire to be present with him.
And as it was their wisdom and their grace to rejoice in the light they had, and in those typical administrations of divine worship
which shadowed out the glory of Christ unto them, yet did always pant after that more excellent light and full discovery of it which
was to be made by the Gospel; so it will be ours also thankfully to use and improve the revelations which we enjoy of it, and those
institutions of worship wherein our faith is assisted in the view thereof, – yet so as continually to breathe after that perfect, that
glorifying sight of it which is reserved for heaven above.
And may we not a little examine ourselves by these things? Do we esteem this pressing towards the perfect view of the glory of Christ
to be our duty? and do we abide in the performance of it? If it be otherwise with any of us, it is a signal evidence that our profession is
hypocritical. If Christ be in us, he is the hope of glory in us; and where that hope is, it will be active in desires of the things hoped for.
Many love the world too well, and have their minds too much filled with the things of it, to entertain desires of speeding through it
unto a state wherein they may behold the glory of Christ. They are at home, and are unwilling to be absent from the body, though to
be present with the Lord. They hope, it may be, that such a season will come at one time or another, and then it will be the best they
can look for when they can be here no more. But they have but a little sight of the glory of Christ in this world by faith, if any at all,
who so little, so faintly desire to have the immediate sight of it above. I cannot understand how any man can walk with God as he
ought, or has that love for Jesus Christ which true faith will produce, or does place his refreshments and joy in spiritual things, in
things above, that does not on all just occasions so meditate on the glory of Christ in heaven as to long for an admittance into the
immediate sight of it.
Our lord Jesus Christ alone perfectly understood wherein the eternal blessedness of them that believe in him does consist. And this is
the sum of what he prays for with respect unto that end, – namely, that we may be where he is, to behold his glory. And is it not our

duty to live in a continual desire of that which he prayed so earnestly that we might attain? If in ourselves we as yet apprehend but
little of the glory, the excellency, the blessedness of it, yet ought we to repose that confidence in the wisdom and love of Christ, that it
is our best, – infinitely better than any thing we can enjoy here below.
Unto those who are inured unto these contemplations, they are the salt of their lives, whereby every thing is condited and made
savoury unto them, as we shall show afterward. And the want of spiritual diligence herein is that which has brought forth a negligent,
careless, worldly profession of religion, which, countenancing itself with some outward duties, has lost out of it the power of faith and
love in their principal operations. Hereby many deceive their own souls. Goods, lands, possessions, relations, trades, with secular
interests in them, are the things whose image is drawn on their minds, and whose characters are written on their foreheads, as the
titles whereby they may be known. As believers, beholding the glory of Christ in the blessed glass of the gospel, are changed into the
same image and likeness by the Spirit of the Lord; so these persons, beholding the beauty of the world and the things that are in it in
the cursed glass of self-love, are in their minds changed into the same image. Hence perplexing fears, vain hopes, empty embraces of
perishing things, fruitless desires, earthly, carnal designs, cursed, self-pleasing imaginations, feeding on, and being fed by, the love of
the world and self, do abide and prevail in them. But we have not so learned Christ Jesus.

The Second Difference between our Beholding the Glory of Christ by Faith in
this World and by Sight in Heaven.
Faith is the light wherein we behold the glory of Christ in this world. And this in its own nature, as unto this great end, is weak and
imperfect, like weak eyes, that cannot behold the sun in its beauty. Hence our sight of it differs greatly from what we shall enjoy in
glory, as has been declared. But this is not all; it is frequently hindered and interrupted in its operations, or it loses the view of its object
by one means or other. As he who sees any thing at a great distance, sees it imperfectly, and the least interposition or motion takes it
quite out of his sight, so is it with our faith in this matter; whence sometimes we can have little, sometimes no sight at all of the glory
of Christ by it. And this gives us, as we sha11 see, another difference between faith and sight.
Now, although the consideration hereof may seem a kind of diversion from our present argument, yet I choose to insist upon it, that I
may evidence the reasons whence it is that many have so little experience of the things whereof we have treated, – that they find so
little of reality or power in the exercise of this grace, or the performance of this duty. For it will appear in the issue that the whole
defect is in themselves; – the truth itself insisted on is great and efficacious Whilst we are in this life, the Lord Christ is pleased, in his
sovereign wisdom, sometimes to withdraw, and, as it were, to hide himself from us. Then do our minds fall into clouds and darkness;
faith is at a loss; we cannot behold his glory; yea, we may seek him, but cannot find him. So Job complains, as we observed before,
“Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot perceive him: on the left hand, where he does work, but I
cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him,” chap. 23: 8, 9. Which way soever I turn myself,
whatever are my endeavours, in what way or work of his own I seek him, I cannot find him, I cannot see him, – I cannot behold his
glory. So the church also complains, “Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour,” Isa. 45: 15; and the
Psalmist, “How long, LORD? wilt thou hide thyself for ever?” Ps. 89: 46. This hiding of the face of God is the hiding of the shining of
his glory in the face of Christ Jesus, and therefore of the glory of Christ himself, for it is the glory of Christ to be the representative of
the glory of God. The spouse in the canticles is often at a loss, and herein bemoans herself, that her Beloved was withdrawn, – that
she could neither find him nor see him, chap. 3: 1, 2; 5: 6.
Men may retain their notions concerning Christ, his person and his glory. These cannot be blotted out of their minds but by heresy or
obdurate stupidity. They may have the same doctrinal knowledge of him with others; but the sight of his glory does not consist
therein. They may abide in the outward performance of duties towards him as formerly; but yet all this while, as unto the especial
gracious communications of himself unto their souls, and as unto a cheerful refreshing view of his glory, he may withdraw and hide
himself from them.
As under the same outward dispensations of the Word he does manifest himself unto some, and not unto others – (“how is it that
thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the world?” John 14: 22), – whereon they to whom he does so manifest himself do
see him to be beautiful, glorious, and lovely (for “unto them that believe, he is precious”); whilst the others see nothing hereof, but
wonder at them by whom he is admired, Cant. 5: 9; – so, in the same dispensation of the Word he sometimes hides his face, turns
away the light of his countenance, clouds the beams of his glory unto some, whilst others are cherished and warmed with them.
Two things we must here speak unto.
1. Why does the Lord Christ, at any time, thus hide himself in his glory from the faith of believers, that they cannot behold him? 2.
How we may perceive and know that he does so withdraw himself from us, so that, however we may please ourselves, we do not
indeed behold his glory.
1 . As unto the first of these, though what he does is supposed an act of sovereign, unaccountable wisdom, yet there are many holy
ends of it, and consequently reasons for it. I shall mention one only. He does it to stir us up in an eminent manner unto a diligent
search and inquiry after him. Woeful sloth and negligence are apt to prevail in us in our meditations on heavenly things. Though our
hearts wake (as the spouse speaks, Cant. 5: 2), in a valuation of Christ, his love, and his grace, yet we sleep as unto the due exercise of
faith and love towards him. Who is it that can justify himself herein? – that can say, “My heart is pure, I am clean from this sin?”
Y ea, it is so far otherwise with many of us, that he is for ever to be admired in his patience, – that on the account of our unkindness
and woeful negligence herein, he has not only withdrawn himself at seasons, but that he has not utterly departed from us. Now, he
knows that those with whom he has been graciously present, – who have had views of his glory, although they have not valued the
mercy and privilege of it as they ought, yet can they not bear a sense of his absence and his hiding himself from them. By this,
therefore, will he awake them unto a diligent inquiry after him. Upon the discovery of his absence, and such a distance of his glory

from them as their faith cannot reach unto it, they become like the doves of the valleys, all of them mourning every one for his
iniquity, and do stir up themselves to seek him early and with diligence. See Hosea 5: 15. So wherever the spouse intimates this
withdrawing of Christ from her, she immediately gives an account of her restless diligence and endeavours in her inquiries after him
until she have found him, chap. 3: 1-4; 5: 2-8. And in these inquiries there is such an exercise of faith and love, though it may be
acting themselves mostly in sighs and groans, as is acceptable and well-pleasing to him.
We are like him in the parable of the prophet that spake unto Ahab, who having one committed unto him to keep, affirms that whilst
he was busy here and there, he was gone. Christ commits himself unto us, and we ought carefully to keep his presence. “I held him,”
saith the church, “and would not let him go,” Cant. 3: 4. But whilst we are busy here and there, while our minds are overfilled with
other things, he withdraws himself, – we cannot find him. But even this rebuke is a sanctified ordinance for our recovery, and his
return unto us.
2. Our second inquiry is, how we may know when Cheat does so withdraw himself from us, that we do not, that we cannot, behold
his glory.
I speak herein unto them alone who make this observation of the lively actings of faith and love in and towards Jesus Christ their
chiefest concern in all their retirements, yea, in their whole walk before God. concerning these, our inquiry is, how they may know
when Christ does in any degree or measure withdraw from them so as that they cannot in a due manner behold his glory.
A n d the first discovery hereof is by the consequent of such withdrawings. And what are the consequent of it we can know no
otherwise but by the effects of his presence with us, and the manifestation of himself unto us; which, as unto some degrees, must
necessarily cease thereon.
(1.) Now the first of these is the life, vigour, and effectual acting of all grace in us. This is an inseparable consequent and effect of a
view of his glory. Whilst we enjoy it, we live; nevertheless not we, but Christ lives in us, exciting and acting all his graces in us.
This is that which the apostle instructs us in; while “we behold his glory as in a glass, we are transformed into the same image, from
glory to glory,” 2 Cor. 3: 18; – that is, whilst by faith we contemplate on the glory of Christ as revealed in the gospel, all grace will
thrive and flourish in us towards a perfect conformity unto him. For whilst we abide in this view and contemplation, our souls will be
preserved in holy frames, and in a continual exercise of love and delight, with all other spiritual affections towards him. It is
impossible, whilst Christ is in the eye of our faith as proposed in the Gospel, but that we shall labour to be like him, and greatly love
him. Neither is there any way for us to attain unto either of these, which are the great concernments of our souls, – namely, to be like
unto Christ, and to love him, – but by a constant view of him and his glory by faith; which powerfully and effectually works them in
us. All the doctrinal knowledge which we have of him is useless, all the view we have of his glory is but fancy, imagination, or
superstition, which are not accompanied with this transforming power. And that which is wrought by it, is the increase and vigour of
all grace; for therein alone our conformity unto him does consist. Growth in grace, holiness, and obedience, is a growing like unto
Christ; and nothing else is so.
I cannot refrain here from a necessary short digression. This transforming efficacy, from a spiritual view of Christ as proposed in the
Gospel, being lost, as unto an experience of it, in the minds of men carnal and ignorant of the mystery of believing (as it is at present
by many derided, though it be the life of religion), fancy and superstition provided various supplies in the room of it. For they found
out crucifixes and images with paintings to represent him in his sufferings and glory. By these things, their carnal affections being
excited by their outward senses, they suppose themselves to be affected with him, and to be like unto him. Y ea, some have proceeded
so far as, either by arts diabolical, or by other means, to make an appearance of wounds on their hands, and feet, and sides; therein
pretending to be like him, – yea, to be wholly transformed into his image. But that which is produced by an image is but an image. An
imaginary Christ will effect nothing in the minds of men but imaginary grace.
Thus religion was lost, and died. When men could not obtain any experience in their minds of the spiritual mysteries of the gospel, nor
be sensible of any spiritual change or advantage by them, they substituted some outward duties and observances in their stead; as I
shall show, God willing, elsewhere more at large. These produced some kind of effects on their minds and affections, but quite of
another nature than those which are the real effects of true evangelical grace. This is openly evident in this substitution of images
instead of the representation of Christ and his glory made in the gospel.
However, there is a general supposition granted on all hands, – namely, that there must be a view of Christ and his glory, to cause us
to love him, and thereby to make us conformable or like unto him. But here lies the difference: – those of the church of Rome say
that this must be done by the beholding of crucifixes, with other images and pictures of him; and that with our bodily eyes: we say it is
by our beholding his glory by faith, as revealed in the Gospel, and no otherwise. And, to confess the truth, we have some who, as they
reject the use of images, so they despise that spiritual view of the glory of Christ which we inquire after. Such persons on the first
occasion will fall on the other side; for anything is better than nothing.
But, as we have a sure word of prophecy to secure us from these abominations, by an express prohibition of such images unto all ends
whatever; so, unto our stability in the profession of the truth, an experience of the efficacy of this spiritual view of Christ transforming
our souls into his own likeness, is absolutely necessary. For if an idolater should plead, as they do all, that in the beholding of the
image of Christ, or of a crucifix, especially if they are sedulous and constant therein, they find their affections unto him greatly
excited, increased, and inflamed (as they will be, Isa. 57: 6); and that hereon he endeavours to be like unto him; what shall we have to
oppose thereunto? For it is certain that such images are apt to make impressions on the minds of men; partly from the readiness of
the senses and imagination to give them admittance into their thoughts; and partly from their natural inclinations unto superstition,
their aversion from things spiritual and invisible, with an inclination unto things present and visible. Hence among them who are
satisfied that they ought not to be adored with any religious veneration, yet some are apt, upon the sight of them, to entertain a
thoughtful reverence, as they would do if they were to enter into a Pagan temple full of idols; and others are continually making
approaches towards their use and veneration, in paintings, and altars, and such outward postures of worship as are used in the
religious service of them. But that they do sensibly affect the minds of men carnal and superstitious, cannot be denied; and as they
suppose, it is with a love unto Christ himself. However, certain it is in general, and confessed on all hands, that the beholding of Christ
is the most blessed means of exciting all our graces, spiritualizing all our affections, and transforming our minds into his likeness. And
