PURITAN GOLD -- Lectures to My Students by Charles Spurgeon: Full Audiobook, Chapter 19 of 28
Posture, Action, Gesture (Part 1)


Lectures to My Students. By Charles Spurgeon.

Chapter 19. Posture, Action, Gesture (Part 1).

LECTURE XIX
POSTURE, ACTION, GESTURE, ETC.
The subjects of this lecture are to be "Posture, Gesture, and Action in
the Delivery of a Sermon." I shall not attempt to draw any hard and
fast line of division between the one and the other; for it would need
a very highly discriminating mind to keep them separate; indeed, it
could not be done at all, for they naturally merge into each other. As

I have, after a fair trial, found it impossible to keep even "posture"
and "gesture" in an absolutely unmingled state in my own mind, I
have allowed them to run together; but I hope that no confusion will
appear in the result.
The sermon itself is the main thing: its matter, its aim, and the spirit
in which it is brought before the people, the sacred anointing upon
the preacher, and the divine power applying the truth to the hearer:
these are infinitely more important than any details of manner.
Posture and action are comparatively small and inconsiderable
matters; but still even the sandal in the statue of Minerva should be
correctly carved, and in the service of God even the smallest things
should be regarded with holy care. Life is made up of little incidents,
and success in it often depends upon attention to minor details.
Small flies make the apothecary's ointment to stink, and little foxes
spoil the vines, and therefore small flies and little foxes should be
kept out of our ministry. Doubtless, faults in even so secondary a
matter as posture have prejudiced men's minds, and so injured the
success of what would otherwise have been most acceptable
ministries, A man of more than average abilities may, by ridiculous
action, be thrown into the rear rank and kept there. This is a great
pity, even if there were only one such case, but it is to be feared that
many are injured by the same cause. Little oddities and absurdities
of mode and gesture which wise men would endeavour not to notice
are not overlooked by the general public; in fact, the majority of
hearers fix their eyes mainly upon those very things, while those who
come to scoff observe nothing else. Persons are either disgusted or
diverted by the oddities of certain preachers, or else they want an
excuse for inattention, and jump at this convenient one: there can be
no reason why we should help men to resist our own endeavours for
their good. No minister would willingly cultivate a habit which would
blunt his arrows, or drift them aside from the mark; and, therefore,
since these minor matters of movement, posture, and gesture may
have that effect, you will give them your immediate attention.

We very readily admit that action in preaching is an affair of minor
consequence; for some who have succeeded in the highest sense have
been exceedingly faulty from the rhetorician's point of view. At the
present moment there is in Boston, U.S.A., a preacher of the very
highest order of power, of whom a friendly critic writes: "In the
opening sentences one or the other of his arms shakes at his side in a
helpless fashion, as if it were made of caudal vertabrae loosely
jointed. He soon exhibits a most engaging awkwardness, waddling
about in a way to suggest that each leg is shorter than the other, and
shaking his head and shoulder in ungainly emphasis. He raises one
eyebrow in a quite impossible fashion. No one else can squint so."
This is an instance of mind overcoming matter, and the excellence of
the teaching condoning defects in utterance; but it would be better if
no such drawbacks existed. Are not apples of gold all the more
attractive for being placed in baskets of silver? Why should powerful
teaching be associated with waddling and squinting? Still it is
evident that proper action is, to say the least, not essential to success.
Homer would appear to have considered the entire absence of
gesture to be no detriment to eminent power in speech, for he
pictures one of his greatest heroes as entirely abjuring it, though not
without some sense of censure from his audience.
"But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,
His modest eyes he fixed upon the ground;
As one unskilled or dumb, he seemed to stand,
Nor rais'd his head, nor stretched his sceptred hand.
But when he speaks, what elocution flows!
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,
The copious accents fall, with easy art;
Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
Wondering we hear, and, fixed in deep surprise,
Our ears refute the censures of our eyes."
Nor need we go back to the ancients for proof that an exceedingly
quiet action may be connected with the highest power of eloquence,
for several instances occur to us among the moderns. One may

suffice: our own supremely gifted Robert Hall had no oratorical
action, and scarcely any motion in the pulpit, except an occasional
lifting or waving of the right hand, and in his most impassioned
moments an alternate retreat and advance.
It is not so much incumbent upon you to acquire right pulpit action
as it is to get rid of that which is wrong. If you could be reduced to
motionless dummies, it would be better than being active and even
vigorous incarnations of the grotesque, as some of our brethren have
been. Some men by degrees fall into a suicidal style of preaching, and
it is a very rare thing indeed to see a man escape when once he has
entangled himself in the meshes of an evil mannerism. No one likes
to tell them of their queer antics, and so they are unaware of them;
but it is surprising that their wives do not mimic them in private and
laugh them out of their awkwardness. I have heard of a brother who
in his earlier days was most acceptable, but who afterwards dropped
far behind in the race because he by degrees fell into bad habits: he
spoke with a discordant whine assumed most singular attitudes and
used such extraordinary mouthings that people could not hear him
with pleasure. He developed into a man to be esteemed and
honoured, but not to be listened to. Excellent Christian men have
said that they did not know whether to laugh or to cry when they
were hearing him preach: they felt as if they must laugh at the
bidding of nature, and then they felt that they ought to cry from the
impulse of grace when they saw so good a preacher utterly ruined by
absurd affectations. If you do not care to cultivate proper action, at
least be wise enough to steer clear of that which is grotesque or
affected. There is a wide range between the fop, curling and
perfuming his locks, and permitting one's hair to hang in matted
masses like the mane of a wild beast. We should never advise you to
practise postures before a glass, nor to imitate great divines, nor to
ape the fine gentleman; but there is no need, on the other hand, to be
vulgar or absurd. Postures and attitudes are merely a small part of
the dress of a discourse, and it is not in dress that the substance of
the matter lies: a man in fustian is "a man for a' that," and so a
sermon which is oddly delivered may be a good sermon for all that;

but still, as none of you would care to wear a pauper's suit if you
could procure better raiment, so you should not be so slovenly as to
clothe truth like a mendicant when you might array her as a prince's
daughter.
Some men are naturally very awkward in their persons and
movements I suppose we must blame what the countryman called
their "broughtens up." The rustic's gait is heavy, and his walk is
slouching You can see that his natural habitat is a ploughed field. On
the pavement or the carpet he is suspicious of his footing, but down a
muddy lane, with a mule's burden of earth on each boot, he
progresses with ease, if not with elegance. There is a lumpishness
and lubberliness innate in the elements of some men's constitutions.
You could not make them elegant if you brayed them in a mortar
among wheat with a pestle. The drill-sergeant is of the utmost use in
our schools, and those parents who think that drill exercise is a waste
of time are very much mistaken. There is a shape and handiness, a
general propriety of form, which the human body acquires under
proper drill which seldom comes in any other manner. Drill brings a
man's shoulders down keeps his arms from excessive swinging
expands the chest, shows him what to do with his hands, and, in a
word, teaches a man how to walk uprightly, and to bring himself into
something like ship-shape, without any conscious effort to do so,
which effort would be a sure betrayal of his awkwardness. Very
spiritual people will think me trifling, but indeed I am not. I hope the
day will come when it will be looked upon as an essential part of
education to teach a young man how to carry himself, and move
without clumsiness.
It may happen that awkward gestures arise from feeble utterance,
and a nervous consciousness of lack of power in that direction.
Certain splendid men of our acquaintance are so modest as to be
diffident, and hence they become hesitating in speech, and
disarranged in manner. Perhaps no more notable instance of this can
be mentioned than the late beloved Dr. James Hamilton. He was the
most beautiful and chaste of speakers, with an action painful to the

last degree. His biographer says: "In mental resources and
acquirements he was possessed of great wealth; but in the capacity to
utter his thoughts, with all the variation of tone and key which their
nature required, yet so as to be thoroughly heard in a great edifice,
he was far less gifted. In this department, accordingly, he was always
pained by a conscious shortcoming from his own ideal. It is certain
that lack of vocal force, and ready control over his intonations,
largely detracted from the power and popularity of his preaching. In
delicacy of conception, in the happy choice of idioms, in the
command of striking and original imagery, and in the glow of
evangelical fervour that pervaded all, he had few equals. These, rare
qualities, however, were shorn of half their strength, in as far as his
public preaching was concerned, by the necessity under which he
constantly lay of straining to make himself audible, by standing on
his tip-toes, and throwing out his words in handfuls, if so be they
might reach the far-distant aisles. If the muscles of his chest had
been such as to enable him to stand solidly at ease, while his lips
performed the task of articulation without the aid of auxiliary blasts
from over-inflated lungs, James Hamilton would certainly have been
followed by greater crowds, and obtained access for his message to a
wider and more varied circle. But we do not know what
counterbalancing evil might have come in along with such external
success. Although with all his prayers and pains this thorn was still
left in the flesh, the grand compensation remained: 'My grace is
sufficient for thee; my strength is perfect in thy weakness.' What
talents the Lord saw meet to bestow, he laid out with marvellous skill
and diligence in the giver's service, and if some of the talents were
withheld, the Withholder knows why. He hath done all things well."
In this sentiment we heartily concur, but we should be sorry for any
young man to submit at discretion to a similar defect, and ascribe it
to the hand of the Lord. Dr. Hamilton did not so. He earnestly
endeavoured to overcome his natural disadvantage, and to our
knowledge took lessons of more than one professor of elocution. He
did not take refuge in the sluggard's plea, but laboured hard to
master the difficulty, and only failed because it was a physical defect
beyond all remedy. Let us wherever we see awkwardness, which is

evidently unavoidable, take little or no notice of it, and take care to
commend the brother that he does so well under the circumstances;
counting it no small achievement for a divine to cover by richness of
thought and fitness of language the ungainliness of his outer man,
thus making the soul triumph over the body. Yet should we ourselves
be afflicted with any fault of manner, let us resolve to overcome it,
for it is not an impossible task. Edward Irving was a striking instance
of a man's power to improve himself in this respect. At first his
manner was awkward, constrained, and unnatural; but by diligent
culture his attitude and action were made to be striking aids to his
eloquence.
Pulpits have much to answer for in having made men awkward.
What horrible inventions they are! If we could once abolish them we
might say concerning them as Joshua did concerning Jericho-"Cursed be he that buildeth this Jericho." for the old-fashioned
pulpit has been a greater curse to the churches than is at first sight
evident. No barrister would ever enter a pulpit to plead a case at the
bar How could he hope to succeed while buried alive almost up to his
shoulders? The client would be ruined if the advocate were thus
imprisoned. How manly, how commanding is the attitude in which
Chrysostom is usually represented! Forgetting his robes for the
moment one cannot but feel that such a natural posture is far more
worthy of sublime truth than that of a person crouching over a sheet
of paper, looking up very occasionally, and then revealing no more
than his head and shoulders. Austin in his Chironomia very properly
says, "Freedom is also necessary to gracefulness of action. No
gestures can be graceful which are either confined by external
circumstances or restrained by the mind. If a man were obliged to
address an assembly from a narrow window, through which he could
not extend his arms and his head, it would be in vain for him to
attempt graceful gesture. Confinement in every lesser degree must be
proportionally injurious to grace; thus the crowded bar is injurious
to the action of the advocate, and the enclosed and bolstered pulpit,
which often cuts off more than half of his figure, is equally injurious
to the graceful action of the preacher."

The late Thomas Binney was unable to endure a platform, and: was
known to fetch gowns and other materials to hang over the rail of an
open rostrum, if he found himself placed in one: this must have
arisen solely from the force of habit, for there can be no real
advantage in being enclosed in a wooden pen. This feeling will no
doubt retain the close pulpit in its place for awhile longer, but in ages
to come men will find an argument for the divinity of our holy faith
in the fact that it survived pulpits.
Ministers cannot be blamed for ungainly postures and attitudes
when only a very small part of their bodies can be seen during a
discourse. If it was the custom to preach as Paul did at Athens public
speakers would become models of propriety. By the way, it is
interesting to note that Raphael in his representation of Paul at
Athens evidently had in his mind the apostle's utterance, "God
dwelleth not in temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with
man's hands": hence he delineates him as lifting his hands. I am
indebted for this hint to G W. Hervey, M.A., who has written a very
able and comprehensive "System of Rhetoric."
Remarkable are the forms which pulpits have assumed according to
the freaks of human fancy and folly. Twenty years ago they had
probably reached their very worst. What could have been their
design and intent it would be hard to conjecture. A deep wooden
pulpit of the old sort might well remind a minister of his mortality,
for it is nothing but a coffin set on end: but on what rational ground
do we bury our pastors alive? Many of these erections resemble
barrels, others are of the fashion of egg cups and wine glasses; a third
class were evidently modelled after corn bins upon four legs; and yet
a fourth variety can only be likened to swallows' nests stuck upon the
wall. Some of them are so high as to turn the heads of the occupants
when they dare to peer into the awful depths below them, and they
give those who look up to the elevated preacher for any length of
time a crick in the neck. I have felt like a man at the mast-head while
perched aloft in these "towers of the flock." These abominations are
in themselves evils, and create evils.

While I am upon pulpits I will make a digression, and remark tor the
benefit of deacons and churchwardens that I frequently notice in
pulpits a most abominable savour of gas, which evidently arises from
leakage in the gas-pipes, and is very apt to make a preacher feel half
intoxicated, or to sicken him. We ought to be spared this infliction.
Frequently, also, a large lamp is placed close to each side of the
minister's head, thus cramping all his movements and placing him
between two fires. If any complaints are made of the hot-headedness
of our ministers, it is readily to be accounted for, since the apparatus
for the purposes is arranged with great care. Only the other night I
had the privilege, when I sat down in the pulpit, to feel as if some one
had smitten me on the top of my head,, and as I looked up there was
an enormous Argand burner with a reflector placed immediately
above me, in order to throw a light on my Bible: a very considerate
contrivance no doubt, only the inventor had forgotten that his
burners were pouring down a terrible heat upon a sensitive brain.
One has no desire to experience an artificial coup de soleil while
preaching; it we must suffer from such a calamity let it come upon us
during our holidays, and let it befall us from the sun himself. No one
in erecting a pulpit seems to think of the preacher as a man of like
feelings and senses with other people; the seat upon which you are to
rest at intervals is often a mere ledge, and the door handle runs into
the small of your back, while when you stand up and would come to
the front there is often a curious gutta-percha bag interposed
between you and your pulpit. This gummy depositary is charitably
intended for the assistance of certain deaf people, who are I hope
benefited; they ought to be, for every evil should have a
compensating influence, You cannot bend forward without forcing
this contrivance to close up, and I for my own part usually deposit
my pocket-handkerchief in it, which causes the deaf people to take
the ends of the tubes out of their ears and to discover that they hear
me well enough without them.
No one knows the discomfort of pulpits except the man who has been
in very many, and found each one worse than the last. They are
generally so deep that a short person like myself can scarcely see over

the top of them, and when I ask for something to stand upon they
bring me a hassock. Think of a minister of the gospel poising himself
upon a hassock while he is preaching: a Boanerges and a Blondin in
one person. It is too much to expect us to keep the balance of our
minds and the equilibrium of our bodies at the same time. The
tippings up, and overturnings of stools and hassocks which I have
had to suffer while preaching rush on my memory now, and revive
the most painful sensations. Surely we ought to be saved such petty
annoyances, for their evil is by no means limited by our discomfort;
if it were so, it would be of no consequence; but, alas! these little
things often throw the mind out of gear, disconnect our thoughts,
and trouble our spirit. We ought to rise superior to such trifles, but
though the spirit truly is willing the flesh is weak. It is marvellous
how the mind is affected by the most trifling matters: there can be no
need to perpetuate needless causes of discomfort. Sydney Smith's
story shows that we have not been alone in our tribulation. "I can't
bear," said he, "to be imprisoned in the true orthodox way in my
pulpit, with my head just peeping above the desk. I like to look down
upon my congregation--to fire into them. The common people say I
am a bould preacher, for I like to have my arms free, and to thump
the pulpit. A singular contretemps happened to me once, when, to
effect this, I had ordered the clerk to pile up some hassocks for me to
stand on. My text was, 'We are perplexed, but not in despair;
persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed.' I had
scarcely uttered these words, and was preparing to illustrate them,
when I did so practically, and in a way I had not at all anticipated.
My fabric of hassocks suddenly gave way; down I fell, and with
difficulty prevented myself from being precipitated into the arms of
my congregation, who, I must say, behaved very well, and recovered
their gravity sooner than I could have expected."
But I must return to my subject, and I do so by repeating the belief
that boxed-up pulpits are largely accountable for the ungainly
postures which some of our preachers assume when they are out of
their cages and are loose upon a platform. They do not know what to
do with their legs and arms, and feel awkward and exposed, and

hence drop into ridiculous attitudes. When a man has been
accustomed to regard himself as an "animated bust" he feels as if he
had become too long when he is made to appear at full length.
There can be no doubt that many men are made awkward through
fear. It is not the man's nature, nor his pulpit, but his nervousness
which makes a guy of him. To some it is a display of great courage
even to stand before an audience, and to speak is an ordeal indeed:
no wonder that their attitude is constrained, for they are twitching
and trembling all over. Every nerve is in a state of excitement, and
their whole body is tremulous with fear. Especially are they
perplexed what to do with their hands, and they move them about in
a restless, irregular, meaningless manner; if they could have them
strapped down to their sides they might rejoice in the deliverance.
One of the clergy of the Church of England, in pleading for the use of
the manuscript, makes use of the remarkable argument that a
nervous man by having to turn over the leaves of his discourse thus
keeps his hands occupied; whereas, if he had no paper before him, he
would not know what to do with them. It is an ill wind that blows no
one any good, and it must be a very bad practice indeed which has
not some remote and occasional advantages. For nervousness,
however, there must be a more effectual treatment; the preacher
should try to conquer the evil rather than look for a mode of
concealing its outward manifestations. Practice is a great remedy,
and faith in God is a still more potent cure. When the minister
becomes accustomed to the people he stands at ease because he is at
ease, he feels at home, and as to his hands or legs, or any other part
of his person, he has no thought: he goes to work with all his heart,
and drops into the positions most natural to an earnest man, and
these are the most appropriate. Unstudied gestures, to which you
never turned your thoughts for a moment, are the very best, and the
highest result of art is to banish art, and leave the man as free to be
graceful as the gazelle among the mountains.
Occasional oddities of posture and gesture may arise from the
difficulty of finding the next word. An American observer some

years ago said, "It is interesting, sometimes, to see the different ways
in which different individuals get out of the same dilemma. Mr.
Calhoun is not often at a loss for a word, but occasionally one sticks
in his throat, in the pronunciation, like Macbeth's 'Amen.' In such a
case be gives a petulant twitch or two at his shirt collar, and runs his
bony fingers through his long grey hair, till it fairly bristles again.
Webster, when bothered for a word, or snarled up in a sentence,
almost invariably scratches the inner corner of his left eye carefully
with the third finger of his right hand. Failing in this, he rubs his
nose quite fiercely with the bent knuckle of his thumb. As a dernier
ressort, he springs his knees apart until his legs resemble an ellipsis,
then plunging his hands deep into his pockets, he throws the upper
section of his body smartly forward, and the word is 'bound to
come.'" A man ought to be forgiven for what he does when he is in an
agony, but it would be a great gain if he never suffered such
embarrassments, and so escaped from the consequent contortions.
Habit also frequently leads speakers into very singular movements,
and to these they become so wedded that they cannot speak without
them. Tugging at a button at the back of the coat, or twiddling the
fingers, will be often seen, not as a part of the preacher's oratory, but
as a sort of free accompaniment to it. Addison, in the Spectator,
relates an amusing incident of this kind. "I remember, when I was a
young man, and used to frequent Westminster Hall, there was a
counsellor who never pleaded without a piece of packthread in his
hand, which he used to twist about a thumb or a finger all the while
he was speaking: the wags of those days used to call it the thread of
his discourse, for he was not able to utter a word without it. One of
his clients, who was more merry than wise, stole it from him one day
in the midst of his pleading, but he had better have let it alone, for he
lost his cause by his jest." Gentlemen who are as yet free from such
little peculiarities should be upon their guard lest they should
gradually yield to them; but, so long as they are mere trifles,
observed only by the few, and not injurious to the preacher's efforts,
no great stress needs to be laid upon them.

The posture of the minister should be natural, but his nature must
not be of a coarse type; it should be graceful, educated nature. He
should avoid especially those positions which are unnatural to a
speaker, because they hamper the organs of utterance, or cramp his
lungs. He should use his common sense, and not make it difficult for
him to speak by leaning forward over the Bible or book-board.
Bending over as if you were speaking confidentially to the persons
immediately below may be tolerated occasionally, but as a customary
position it is as injurious as it is ungraceful. Who thinks of stooping
when he speaks in the parlour? What killing work it would be to
conduct a long conversation while pressing the breathing apparatus
against the edge of a table! Stand upright, get a firm position, and
then speak like a man. A few orators even err in the other direction,
and throw their heads far back as though they were addressing the
angels, or saw a handwriting upon the ceiling. This also cometh of
evil, and unless the occasional sublime apostrophe requires it, is by
no means to be practised. John Wesley well says, "The head ought
not to be held up too high, nor clownishly thrust too forward, neither
to be cast down and hang, as it were, on the breast; nor to lean
always on one or the other side; but to be kept modestly and decently
upright, in its natural state and position. Further, it ought neither to
be kept immovable, as a statue, nor to be continually moving and
throwing itself about. To avoid both extremes, it should be turned
gently, as occasion is, sometimes one way, sometimes the other; and
at other times, remain, looking straight forward, to the middle of the
auditory."
Too many men assume a slouching attitude, lolling and sprawling as
if they were lounging on the parapet of a bridge and chatting with
somebody down in a boat on the river. We do not go into the pulpit
to slouch about, and to look free and easy, but we go there upon very
solemn business, and our posture should be such as becomes our
mission. A reverent and earnest spirit will not be indicated by a
sluggish lounge or a careless slouch. It is said that among the Greeks
even the ploughmen and herdsmen take up graceful attitudes
without any idea that they are doing so. I think it is also true of the

Italians, for wherever I have seen a Roman man or woman--no
matter whether they are sleeping upon the Spagna steps, or sitting
upon a fragment of the baths of Caracalla, or carrying a bundle on
their heads, or riding a mule, they always look like studies for an
artist; yet this is the last thing which ever crosses their minds. Those
picturesque peasants have never taken lessons in calisthenics, nor do
they trouble their heads as to how they appear to the foreigner; pure
nature, delivered from mannerism, primness, and affectation,
moulds their habits into gracefulness. We should be foolish to
imitate Greeks or Italians, except in their freedom from all imitation,
but it were well if we could copy their unconstrained and natural
action. There is no reason why a Christian should be a clown, and
there are a great many reasons why a minister should not be a boor.
As Rowland Hill said that he could not see why Satan should have
the best tunes, so neither can I see why he should have the most
graceful speakers!
Now, leaving posture, let us more distinctly notice action in
preaching; this also is a secondary and yet an important item. Our
first observation shall be, it should never be excessive. In this matter
bodily exercise profiteth little. We cannot readily judge when action
is excessive, for what would be excessive in one man may be most
fitting and proper in another. Different races employ different action
in speaking. Two Englishmen will talk very quietly and soberly to one
another compared with a couple of Frenchmen. Notice our Gallic
neighbours: they talk all over, and shrug their shoulders, and move
their fingers, and gesticulate most vehemently. Very well, then, we
may allow a French preacher to be more demonstrative in preaching
than an Englishman, because he is so in ordinary speech. I am not
sure that a French divine is so as a matter of fact, but if he were so it
could be accounted for by the national habit. If you and I were to
converse in the Parisian fashion we should excite ridicule, and, in the
same way, if we were to become violent and vehement in the pulpit
we might run the same risk; for if Addison be an authority, English
orators use less gestures than those of other countries. As it is with
races so is it with men: some naturally gesticulate more than others,

and if it be really natural, we have little fault to find. For instance, we
cannot censure John Gough's marvellous gesticulation and
perambulation, for he would not have been Gough without them. I
wonder how many miles he walks in the course of one of his lectures!
Did we not see him climb the sides of a volcano in pursuit of a
bubble? How we pitied him as we saw him ankle deep in the hot
ashes! Then he was away, away at the other end of the platform at
Exeter Hall, apostrophising a glass of water; but he only stopped
there a moment, and anon made another rush over the corns of the
temperance brethren in the front row. Now, this was right enough for
John Gough: but if you, John Smith or John Brown, commence these
perambulations you will soon be likened to the wandering Jew, or to
the polar bear, at the Zoological Gardens, which for ever goes
backwards and forwards in its den. Martin Luther was wont to smite
with his fist at such a rate that they show, at Eisenach, a board--I
think a three-inch board--which he broke while hammering at a text.
The truth of the legend has been doubted, for it has been asserted
that those delicate hands, which could play so charmingly upon the
guitar, could hardly have been treated so roughly; but if the hand be
an index of its owner's character, we can well believe it, for strength
and tenderness were marvellously combined in Luther. There was
much delicacy and sensitiveness about Luther's mind, yet these
never diminished, but rather increased, its tremendous energy. It is
by no means difficult to believe that he could smash up a plank, from
the style in which he struck out at the Pope; and yet we can well
imagine that he would touch the strings of his guitar with a maiden's
hand; even as David could play skilfully upon the harp, and yet a bow
of steel was broken by his arms. John Knox is said at one time to
have been so feeble that, before he entered the pulpit, you would
expect to see him drop down in a fainting fit; but once before the
audience be seemed as though he would "ding the pulpit in blads,"
which, being interpreted, means in English that he would knock it
into shivers. That was evidently the style of the period when
Protestants were fighting for their very existence, and the Pope and
his priests and the devil and his angels were aroused to special fury:
yet I do not suppose that Melancthon thought it needful to be quite

so tremendous, nor did Calvin hammer and slash in a like manner.
At any rate, you need not try to break three-inch boards, for there
might be a nail in one of them; neither need you ding a pulpit into
"blads," for you might find yourself without a pulpit if you did. Come
upon consciences with a crash, and aim at breaking hard hearts by
the power of the Spirit, but these require spiritual power; physical
energy is not the power of God unto salvation.
It is very easy to overdo the thing so much as to make yourself
appear ridiculous. Perhaps it was a keen perception of this danger
which led Dr. Johnson to forbid action altogether, and to commend
Dr. Watts very highly because "he did not endeavour to assist his
eloquence by any gesticulations; for as no corporeal actions have any
correspondence with theological truth, he did not see how they could
enforce it." The great lexicographer's remark is nonsense, but if it
should be thought weighty enough to reduce a preacher to absolute
inaction, it will be better than overwrought posturing. When Nathan
addressed David, I suppose that he delivered his parable very quietly,
and that when the time came to say, "Thou art the man," he gave the
king a deeply earnest look; but younger ministers imagine that the
prophet strode into the middle of the room and, setting his right foot
forward, pointed his finger like a pistol between the royal eyes, and
giving a loud stamp of the foot, shouted, "THOU ART THE MAN."
Had it been so done it is to be feared that the royal culprit would
have had his thoughts turned from himself to the insane prophet,
and would have called for his guard to clear the hall. Nathan was too
solemnly in earnest to be indecently violent; and as a general rule we
may here note that it is the tendency of deep feeling rather to subdue
the manner than to render it too energetic. He who beats the air, and
bawls, and raves, and stamps, means nothing; and the more a man
really means what he says the less of vulgar vehemence will there be.
John Wesley in his Directions concerning Pronunciation and
Gesture cramps the preacher too much when he says, "He must
never clap his hands, nor thump the pulpit. The hands should
seldom be raised higher than the eyes:" but he probably had his eye
upon some glaring case of extravagance. He is right, however, when

he warns his preachers that "the hands should not be in perpetual
motion, for this the ancients called the babbling of the hands."
Russell very wisely says: "True vehemence never degenerates into
violence and vociferation. It is the force of inspiration,--not of frenzy.
It is not manifested in the screaming and foaming, the stamping and
the contortions, of vulgar excess. It is ever manly and noble, in its
intensest excitement: it elevates,--it does not degrade. It never
descends to the bawling voice, the guttural coarseness, the shrieking
emphasis, the hysteric ecstacy of tone, the bullying attitude, and the
clinched fist of extravagant passion."
When your sermon seems to demand of you a little imitative action,
be peculiarly watchful lest you go too far, for this you may do before
you are aware of it. I have heard of a young divine who in
expostulation with the unconverted, exclaimed, "Alas, you shut your
eyes to the light (here he closed both eyes); you stop your ears to the
truth (here he put a finger into each ear); and you turn your backs
upon salvation" (here he turned his back on the people). Do you
wonder that when the people saw a man standing with his back to
them and his fingers in his ears they all fell to laughing? The action
might be appropriate, but it was overdone, and had better have been
left undone. Violent gesture, even when commended by some, will be
sure to strike others from its comic side. When Burke in the House of
Commons flung down the dagger to show that Englishmen were
making weapons to be used against their own countrymen, his action
seems to me to have been striking and much to the purpose, and yet
Sheridan said, "The gentleman has brought us the knife, where is the
fork?" and Gilray wickedly caricatured him. The risks of too little
action are by no means great, but you can plainly see that there are
great perils in the other direction. Therefore, do not carry action too
far, and if you feel that you are naturally very energetic in your
delivery, repress your energies a little. Wave your hands a little less,
smite the Bible somewhat more mercifully, and in general take
matters rather more calmly.

Perhaps a man is nearest to the golden mean in action when his
manner excites no remark either of praise or censure, because it is so
completely of a piece with the discourse that it is not regarded as a
separate item at all. That action which gains conspicuous notice is
probably' out of proportion, and excessive. Mr. Hall once spent an
evening with Mrs. Hannah More, and his judgment upon her
manners might well serve as a criticism upon the mannerisms of
ministers. "Nothing striking, madam, certainly not. Her manners are
too perfectly proper to be striking. Striking manners are bad
manners, you know, madam. She is a perfect lady, and studiously
avoids those eccentricities which constitute striking manners."
In the second place, action should be expressive and appropriate.
We cannot express so much by action as by language, but one may
express a few things with even greater force. Indignantly to open a
door and point to it is quite as emphatic as the words, "Leave the
room!" To refuse the hand when another offers his own is a very
marked declaration of ill-will, and will probably create a more
enduring bitterness than the severest words. A request to remain
silent upon a certain subject could be well conveyed by laying the
finger across the lips. A shake of the head indicates disapprobation in
a very marked manner. The lifted eyebrows express surprise in a
forcible style; and every part of the face has its own eloquence of
pleasure and of grief. What volumes can be condensed into a shrug of
the shoulders, and what mournful mischief that same shrug has
wrought! Since, then, gesture and posture can speak powerfully, we
must take care to let them speak correctly. It will never do to imitate
the famous Grecian who cried, "O heaven!" with his finger pointing
to the earth; nor to describe dying weakness by thumping upon the
book-board. Nervous speakers appear to fire at random with their
gestures, and you may see them wringing their hands while they are
dilating upon the joys of faith, or grasping the side of the pulpit
convulsively when they are bidding the believer hold all earthly
things with a loose hand. Even when no longer timorous, brethren do
not always manage their gestures so as to make them run parallel
with their words. Men may be seen denouncing with descending fist

the very persons whom they are endeavouring to comfort. No brother
among you would, I hope, be so stupid as to clasp his hands while
saying--"the gospel is not meant to be confined to a few. Its spirit is
generous and expansive. It opens its arms to men of all ranks and
nations." It would be an equal solecism if you were to spread forth
your arms and cry, "Brethren, concentrate your energies! Gather
them up, as a commander gathers his troops to the royal standard in
the day of battle." Now, put the gestures into their proper places and
see how diffusion may be expressed by the opened arms, and
concentration by the united hands.
Action and tone together may absolutely contradict the meaning of
the words. The Abbé Mullois tells us of a malicious wag who on
hearing a preacher pronounce those terrible words, "Depart, ye
cursed," in the blandest manner, turned to his companion and said,
"Come here, my lad, and let me embrace you; that is what the parson
has just expressed." This is a sad business, but by no means an
uncommon one. What force may the language of Scripture lose
through the preacher's ill-delivery! Those words which the French
preacher pronounced in so ill a manner are very terrible, and I felt
them to be so when a short while ago I heard them hissed forth in
awful earnest, by an insane person who thought himself a prophet
sent to curse myself and my congregation. "Depart, ye cursed" came
forth from his lips like the mutterings of thunder, and the last word
seemed to bite into the very soul, as with flaming eye and
outstretched hand the fanatic flashed it upon the assembly.
Too many speakers appear to have taken lessons from Bendigo, or
some other professor of the noble art of self-defence, for they hold
their fists as if they were ready for a round. It is not pleasant to watch
brethren preaching the gospel of peace in that pugnacious style; yet it
is by no means rare to hear of an evangelist preaching a free Christ
with a clinched fist. It is amusing to see them putting themselves into
an attitude and saying, "Come unto me," and then, with a revolution
of both fists, "and I will give you--rest." Better not suggest such
ridiculous ideas, but they have been suggested more than once by

men who earnestly desired above all things to make their hearers
think of better things. Gentlemen, I am not at all surprised at your
laughing, but it is infinitely better that you should have a hearty
laugh at these absurdities here than that your people should laugh at
you in the future. I am giving you no imaginary sketch, but one
which I have seen myself and fear I may yet see again. Those
awkward hands, if once brought into subjection, become our best
allies. We can talk with them almost as well as with our tongues, and
make a sort of silent music with them which will add to the charm of
our words. If you have never read Sir Charles Bell on The Hand, be
sure to do so, and note well the following passage: "We must not
omit to speak of the hand as an instrument of expression. Formal
dissertations have been written on this. But were we constrained to
seek authorities, we might take the great painters in evidence, since
by the position of the hands, in conformity with the figure, they have
expressed every sentiment. Who, for example, can deny the
eloquence of the hands in the Magdalens of Guido; their expression
in the cartoons of Raphael, or in the "Last Supper," by Leonardo da
Vinci? We see there expressed all that Quinctilian says the hand is
capable of expressing. 'For other parts of the body,' says he, 'assist
the speaker, but these, I may say, speak themselves. By them we ask,
we promise, we invoke, we dismiss, we threaten, we intreat, we
deprecate, we express fear, joy, grief, our doubts, our assent, our
penitence: we show moderation, or profusion; we mark number and
time."
The face, and especially the eyes, will play a very important part in all
appropriate action. It is very unfortunate when ministers cannot look
at their people. It is singular to hear them pleading with persons
whom they do not see. They are entreating them to look to Jesus
upon the cross! You wonder where the sinners are. The preacher's
eyes are turned upon his book, or up to the ceiling, or into empty
space. It seems to me that you must fix your eyes upon the people
when you come to exhortation. There are parts of a sermon in which
the sublimity of the doctrine may call for the uplifted gaze, and there
are other portions which may allow the eyes to wander as you will;

but when pleading time has come, it will be inappropriate to look
anywhere but to the persons addressed. Brethren who never do this
at all lose a great power. When Dr. Wayland was ill, he wrote,
"Whether I am to recover my former health I know not. If, however, I
should be permitted to preach again, I will certainly do what is in my
power to learn to preach directly to men, looking them in their faces,
and not looking at the paper on the desk."
The man who would be perfect in posture and gesture must regulate
his whole frame, for in one case a man's most suitable action will be
that of his head, and in another that of his hands, and in a third that
of his trunk alone. Quinctilian says-"The sides should bear their part
in the gesture. The motion, also, of the whole body contributes much
to the effect in delivery: so much so that Cicero is of opinion that
more can be done by its gesture than even by the hands themselves.
Thus he says in his work De Oratore: 'There will be no affected
motions of the fingers, no fall of the fingers to suit the measured
cadence of the language; but he will produce gestures by the
movements of his whole body and by the manly inflexion of his side."
I might multiply illustrations of what I mean by appropriate action,
but these must suffice. Let the gesture tally with the words, and be a
sort of running commentary and practical exegesis upon what you
are saying. Here I must make a pause, hoping to continue the subject
in my next lecture. But so conscious am I that many may think my
subject so secondary as to be of no importance whatever, that I close
by giving an instance of the careful manner in which great painters
take heed to minute details, only drawing this inference, that if they
are thus attentive to little things, much more ought we to be. Vigneul
Marville says: "When I was at Rome I frequently saw Claude, who
was then patronised by the most eminent persons in that city; I
frequently met him on the banks of the Tiber, or wandering in the
neighbourhood of Rome, amidst the venerable remains of antiquity.
He was then an old man, yet I have seen him returning from his walk
with his handkerchief filled with mosses, flowers, stones, etc., that he
might consider them at home with that indefatigable attention which

rendered him so exact a copier of nature. I asked him one day by
what means he arrived at such an excellency of character among
painters, even in Italy. 'I spare no pains whatever, even in the
minutest trifles,' was the modest reply of this venerable genius."
