PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 14
Preparatory Direction I: Consider the Dangerous Symptoms of Sin


Chapter 9

PREPARATORY DIRECTIONS
Dangerous Symptoms
For the practical aspects of mortification of sin, we are considering three main heads:
I. What it is to mortify any sin, and that both negatively (ch. 5) and positively (ch. 6), that we
be not mistaken in the foundation.
II. General rules without which it will be utterly impossible for anyone to get any sin truly
and spiritually mortified (ch. 7 and 8).
III. Particular directions and actions whereby this is to be done. 67
Now we come to the third head. Having considered the foregoing general rules, we will now
propose particular directions to the soul for its guidance when under a disquieting lust or distemper, being the main thing I aim at. Now, of these some are previous and preparatory, and
68
in some of them the work itself is contained. Of the first sort are the following.

1. Consider Dangerous Symptoms
The first direction is this:
Consider if your lust has dangerous symptoms attending or accompanying it: whether it
has any deadly mark on it or not.
If it has, extraordinary remedies are to be used; an ordinary course of mortification will not do
it. You will say, “What are these dangerous marks and symptoms, the desperate attendants of
an indwelling lust that you intend?” Some of them I shall name as follows.

a. Inveterateness

69

Your distemper is dangerous if your lust has lain long corrupting in your heart, if you have
suffered it to abide in power and prevalence, without attempting vigorously the killing of it
and the healing of the wounds you have received by it for some long season. Have you permitted worldliness, ambition, or greediness of study to eat up other duties, the duties wherein you
ought to hold constant communion with God, for some long season? Or uncleanness to defile
your heart with vain, foolish, and wicked imaginations for many days? If so, your lust has a
dangerous symptom.
67

This opening is adapted from chapter five by the editors in order to assist the reader.
Chapters 9-13 are devoted to considering nine vital “preparatory” directions. Chapter 14 then presents directions for the actual accomplishment of mortification.
69
inveterateness – obstinacy confirmed by time.
68

42

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

So was the case with David: “My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness”
(Psa 38:5). When a lust has lain long in the heart, corrupting, festering, cankering, it brings
the soul to a woeful condition. In such a case, an ordinary course of humiliation will not do
the work. Whatever it be, it will by this means gradually make its way more or less into all the
faculties of the soul, and make the affections comfortable with its company and society. It
grows familiar to the mind and conscience so that they do not startle at it as a strange thing,
but are bold with it as that to which they are accustomed. It will get such advantage by this
means as oftentimes to exert and put forth itself without having any notice taken of it at all, as
it seems to have been with Joseph in his swearing by the life of Pharaoh (Gen 42:15-16). Unless
some extraordinary course be taken, such a person has no ground in the world to expect that
his latter end shall be peace.
For, first, how will he be able to distinguish between the long abode of an unmortified lust,
and the dominion of sin, which cannot befall a regenerate person (Rom 6)? Secondly, how can
he promise himself that it shall ever be otherwise with him, or that his lust will cease disturbing and seducing, when he sees it fixed and abiding, having done so for many days and having
gone through a variety of conditions with him? It may be the sin has been tested by mercies
and afflictions, and those possibly so remarkable that the soul could not avoid taking special
notice of them. It may be it has weathered out many a storm and passed under much variety of
gifts in the administration of the Word. It never proves an easy thing to dislodge a resident
who is pleading title to a property after long dwelling there. Old neglected wounds are often
mortal, and always dangerous. Indwelling distempers grow rusty and stubborn by continuance
in ease and quiet. Lust is such a resident as, if it can plead time and some right by length of
occupation, will not easily be ejected. As it never dies of itself, so if it be not daily killed it will
always gather strength.

b. Secret pleas
Secret pleas of the heart for its own defense, and to keep up its peace—notwithstanding the
abiding of a lust, without a vigorous gospel attempt for its mortification—is another dangerous symptom of a deadly distemper in the heart. Now, there are several ways whereby this may
be done, and I shall name some of them.
1). Searching for the good instead of mortifying the sin
It is a dangerous symptom of a deadly lust in the heart when a man has perplexing thoughts
about sin, and instead of applying himself to the destruction of it, he searches his heart to see
what evidences he can find of a good condition, notwithstanding that sin and lust, so that it
may go well with him.
For a man to gather up his experiences of God—to call them to mind, to collect, consider,
try, and improve them—is an excellent thing. It is a duty practiced by all the saints and commended in the Old Testament and the New. This was David’s work when he communed with
his own heart and called to remembrance the former loving-kindness of the Lord (Psa 77:6-9).
This is the duty that Paul sets us to practice (2Co 13:5). As it is in itself excellent, so it has
beauty added to it by a proper season of self-examination during a time of trial, temptation, or
disquietness of the heart about sin. It is a picture of silver to set off this golden apple, as Solomon speaks (Pro 25:11).

9. Preparatory Direction 1: Dangerous Symptoms

43

But to do it in order to satisfy conscience, which cries and calls for another purpose, is a
desperate device of a heart in love with sin. When a man’s conscience shall deal with him,
when God shall rebuke him for the sinful distemper of his heart, if he—instead of applying
himself to get that sin pardoned in the blood of Christ and mortified by His Spirit—shall relieve himself by any such other evidences as he has, or thinks himself to have, and so disentangle himself from under the yoke that God was putting on his neck, his condition is very
dangerous, his wound hardly curable. Thus the Jews, under the convictions of their own consciences and the convincing preaching of our Savior, supported themselves with this: that they
were “Abraham’s children,” and on that account accepted with God (Joh 8:39), and so countenanced themselves in all abominable wickedness to their utter ruin.
This is, in some degree, a blessing of a man’s self, and saying that upon one account or other he shall have peace, although he adds “drunkenness to thirst” (Deu 29:19). Love of sin and
undervaluation of peace and of all tastes of love from God, are wrapped in such a frame. Such a
one plainly shows that, if he can but keep up hope of escaping the “wrath to come” (Mat 3:7),
he can be well content to be unfruitful in the world, at any distance from God that is not final
separation. What is to be expected from such a heart?
2). Applying grace to an unmortified sin
This deceit is carried on by applying grace and mercy to an unmortified sin, or one not sincerely endeavored to be mortified. This is a sign of a heart greatly entangled with the love of
sin. When a man has secret thoughts in his heart—not unlike those of Naaman about his worshipping in the house of Rimmon (2Ki 5:18), saying in effect, “In all other things I will walk
with God; but in this thing, God be merciful unto me”—his condition is sad.
It is true, indeed, that a man’s being resolved to indulge himself in any sin on the account
of mercy seems to be, and doubtless in any course is, altogether inconsistent with Christian
sincerity—and is a badge of a hypocrite, and is the “turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness” (Jude 1:4). Yet I doubt not but, through the craft of Satan and their own remaining
unbelief, the children of God may themselves sometimes be ensnared with this deceit of sin—
or else Paul would never have so cautioned them against it as he does (Rom 6:1-2). Yea, indeed, there is nothing more natural than for fleshly reasonings to grow high and strong upon
this account. The flesh would gladly be indulged upon the account of grace and every word
that is spoken of mercy. It stands ready to catch at and to pervert mercy to its own corrupt
aims and purposes. To apply mercy, then, to a sin not vigorously mortified is to fulfil the end
of the flesh upon the gospel.
These and many other ways and wiles a deceitful heart will sometimes make use of to comfort itself in its abominations. Now, when a man with his sin is in this condition—that there is
a secret liking of the sin prevalent in his heart, and though his will be not wholly set upon it,
yet he has an imperfect velleity 70 towards it—he would practice it were it not for such and
such considerations, and hereupon relieves himself in other ways than by the mortification
and pardon of it in the blood of Christ. That man’s “wounds stink and are corrupt” (Psa 38:5),
and he will, without speedy deliverance, be at the door of death.

70

velleity – mere wish, unaccompanied by any effort to attain it.

44

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

c. Frequent success
Frequency of success in sin’s seduction, in obtaining the prevailing consent of the will unto
it, is another dangerous symptom. This is what I mean: When the sin spoken of gets the consent of the will with some delight, even though it be not actually outwardly acted upon, yet it
has success. Upon outward considerations a man may not be able to go along with sin to that
which James calls the “finishing” of it (Jam 1:14-15) in outward acts of sin; yet, when the will
of sinning may be actually obtained, then, I say, it has success. Now, if any lust be able thus far
to prevail in the soul of any man, as his condition may possibly be very bad and himself be unregenerate, so it cannot possibly be very good, but dangerous.
And it is all the same whether this falling into sin be done by the choice of the will or carelessly, for even carelessness is chosen, in a manner of speaking. When we are careless and negligent in areas where we are obligated to watchfulness and carefulness, that carelessness does
not reduce the voluntariness of what we do; for although men do not choose and resolve to be
negligent and careless, yet if they choose the things that will make them so, they choose carelessnesss itself—because a thing may be chosen by choosing the cause of it. Let not men think
that the evil of their hearts is in any measure excused because they seem for the most part to
be surprised into that consent which they seem to give unto it; for it is negligence of their duty in watching over their hearts that betrays them into that surprisal. 71

d. Legal arguments
When a man fights against his sin only with arguments from the consequences or punishment due unto it, this is a sign that sin has taken great possession of the will and that in the
heart there is a “superfluity 72 of naughtiness” (Jam 1:21). Such a man who does not oppose the
seduction of sin and lust in his heart except for fear of shame among men or hell from God, is
sufficiently resolved to do the sin if there were no punishment attending it. How this differs
from living in the practice of sin I know not!
Those who are Christ’s and act in their obedience upon gospel principles have the death of
Christ, the love of God, the detestable nature of sin, the preciousness of communion with God,
and a deep-grounded abhorrence of sin as sin to oppose to any seduction of sin, to all the
workings, strivings, and fightings of lust in their hearts. Joseph acted in this way: he said,
“How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?”—that is, my good and gra73
cious Lord (Gen 39:9). And so did Paul, “The love of Christ constraineth us” (2Co 5:14); and,
“Having [received] these promises, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit” (2Co 7:1). But now, if a man be so under the power of his lust that he has nothing but
law to oppose it with—if he cannot fight against it with gospel weapons, but deals with it altogether with hell and judgment, which are the proper arms of the Law—it is most evident that
sin has possessed his will and affections to a very great prevalence and conquest.
Such a person has cast off, as to the particular spoken of, the conduct of renewing grace,
and is kept from ruin only by restraining grace; 74 and to the degree he is so, he is fallen from
71

surprisal – being taken by surprise.
superfluity of naughtiness – overflow of wickedness.
73
constraineth us – causes us to act.
74
renewing grace…restraining grace – Renewing grace is life-giving, fruit-bearing power God gives His people through the Spirit; restraining grace merely keeps men from sin.
72

9. Preparatory Direction 1: Dangerous Symptoms

45

grace and is returned under the power of the Law. And can it be thought that this is not a
great provocation to Christ, that men should cast off His easy, gentle yoke and rule (Mat
11:29-30) and cast themselves under the iron yoke of the Law merely out of indulgence to
their lusts?
Try yourself by this also: When you are driven by sin to make a stand, so that you must either serve it and rush at the command of it into folly, like the horse into the battle, or stand
against it to suppress it, what do you say to your soul? How do you argue with yourself? Is this
all: “Hell will be the end of this course; vengeance will meet with me and find me out”? It is
time for you to look about yourself; evil lies at the door (Gen 4:7). Paul’s main argument to
convince that sin shall not have dominion over believers is that they “are not under the law,
but under grace” (Rom 6:14). If your contention against sin be all on legal accounts, from legal
principles and motives, what assurance can you have that sin shall not have dominion over you,
which will be your ruin?
Yea, know that this reserve will not long hold out. If your lust has driven you from stronger
gospel forts, it will speedily prevail against this also. Do not suppose that such considerations
will deliver you, when you have voluntarily given up to your enemy those helps and means of
preservation which have a thousand times their strength. Rest assuredly in this: that unless
you recover yourself with speed from this condition, the thing that you fear will come upon
you. What gospel principles do not do, legal motives cannot do.

e. Sense of punishment
Another dangerous symptom is when it is probable that there is, or may be, some judiciary
75
hardness, or at least chastening punishment, in the lust that is distressing you. That God
sometimes leaves even those of His own under the perplexing power at least of some lust or
sin to correct them for former sins, negligence, and folly, I no way doubt. Hence was that
complaint of the church: “Why hast thou…hardened our heart from thy fear?” (Isa 63:17).
That this is His way of dealing with unregenerate men no man questions.
But how shall a man know whether there be anything of God’s chastening hand in his being
left to the evil effects of his condition? Answer: Examine your heart and ways. What was the
state and condition of your soul before you fell into the entanglements of that sin which now
you so complain about? Have you been negligent in duties? Have you lived inordinately to
yourself? Is there the guilt of any great sin lying upon you unrepented of? A new sin may be
permitted, as well as a new affliction sent, to bring an old sin to remembrance.
Have you received any eminent mercy, protection, or deliverance that you did not make
good use of in a right manner, nor were thankful for? Or have you been exercised with any affliction without laboring to apply what God intended for it? Or have you been negligent of the
opportunities for glorifying God in your generation that, in His good providence, He had graciously afforded to you? Or have you conformed yourself to the world and the men of it,
through the abounding of temptations in the days wherein you live? If you find this to have
been your state, awake, call upon God. You are fast asleep in a storm of God’s anger round
about you!
75

judiciary hardness – severe punishment from God in which He is said to harden the hearts of men in their
sins and to their ruin.

46

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

f. Resisting chastening
A final dangerous symptom of lust or sin is when it has already withstood particular dealings from God against it. This condition is described: “For the iniquity of his covetousness was
I wroth, and smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly 76 in the way of his
heart” (Isa 57:17). God had dealt with them about their prevailing lust, and that in several
ways by affliction and desertion; but they held out against all. This is a sad condition, which
nothing but mere sovereign grace 77 (as God expresses it in the next verse) can relieve a man in,
and which no man ought to promise himself or bear himself upon.
In His providential actions, God oftentimes meets with a man and speaks particularly to the
evil of his heart, as He did to Joseph’s brethren in their selling of him into Egypt. This makes
the man reflect on his sin and judge himself in particular for it. God makes it to be the voice of
the danger, affliction, trouble, or sickness that he is in or under. Sometimes in reading of the
Word God makes a man stay on something that cuts him to the heart and shakes him as to his
present condition. More frequently He meets with men in the hearing of the Word preached,
His great ordinance for conviction, conversion, and edification. God often hews men by the
sword of His Word in that ordinance, strikes directly on their bosom-beloved lust, startles the
sinner, and makes him engage unto the mortification and relinquishment of the evil of his
heart. Now, if his lust has taken such hold on him as to force him to break these bands of the
Lord, and to cast these cords from him; if it overcomes these convictions and gets again into
its old posture; if it can cure the wounds it so receives—that soul is in a sad condition.
Unspeakable are the evils that attend such a frame of heart. Every particular warning to a
man in such a state is an inestimable mercy. How then does he despise God when he holds out
against them! And what infinite patience is this in God, that He does not cast off such a one,
and swear in His wrath that he shall never enter into His rest (Heb 3:11)!

g. A caution
These and many other evidences are there of a lust that is dangerous, if not mortal. As our
Savior said of the evil spirit, “This kind goeth not out but by fasting and prayer” (Mat 17:21),
so say I of lusts of this kind. An ordinary course of mortification will not do it; extraordinary
ways must be used. This is the first particular direction: Consider whether the lust or sin you
are contending with has any of these dangerous symptoms attending it.
Before I proceed, I must give you one caution by the way, lest any be deceived by what has
been spoken. Whereas I say the things and evils above-mentioned may befall true believers, let
not anyone who finds the same things in himself conclude that he is a true believer. These are
the evils that believers may fall into and be ensnared with, not the things that constitute a believer. A man may as well conclude that he is a believer because he is an adulterer, since David
fell into adultery as a believer, as conclude it from the signs previously mentioned, which are
the evils of sin and Satan in the hearts of believers.
The seventh chapter of Romans contains the description of a regenerate man. He that shall
consider what is spoken of a believer’s dark side, of the unregenerate part, of the indwelling
power and violence of sin remaining in him, and, because he finds the like in himself, con76
77

frowardly – stubbornly; backsliding or turning away.
sovereign grace – God’s unmerited favor freely shown according to His will, as by a king (Rom 9:15-18).

9. Preparatory Direction 1: Dangerous Symptoms

47

clude that he is a regenerate man, will be deceived in his reckoning. It is the same as if you
should argue: A wise man may be sick and wounded, yea, do some things foolishly; therefore,
everyone who is sick and wounded and does things foolishly is a wise man. Or as if a foolish
person, hearing one speak of a beautiful person that had a mark or a scar which much disfigured him, should conclude that because he himself has scars, moles, and warts, he also is
beautiful. If you will have evidences of your being believers, it must be from those things that
constitute men to be believers. He that has these dangerous symptoms in himself may safely
conclude, “If I am a believer, I am a most miserable one.” When any man is so, he must look
for other evidences if he will have peace about salvation.
