PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 14
Preparatory Direction III: Load the Conscience with Sin's Guilt

---

Chapter 11

PREPARATORY DIRECTIONS
Five Others
3. Load Your Conscience with the Guilt of Sin
This is my third direction for the mortification of sin:
Load your conscience with the guilt of it. Not only consider that it has guilt, but load your
conscience with the guilt of its actual eruptions and disturbances.
For the right improvement of this rule, I shall give some particular directions.

a. Begin with general aspects of your guilt
Take God’s method in it and begin with general aspects, and then descend to particular aspects.
1). Guilt from the holiness of the Law
Charge your conscience with the guilt that appears in it from the righteousness and holiness of the Law. Bring the holy Law of God into your conscience, lay your corruption to it,
pray that you may be affected with it. Consider the holiness, spirituality, fiery severity, inwardness, absoluteness of the Law, and see how you can stand before it. Be much, I say, in affecting
your conscience with the terror of the Lord in the Law, and how righteous it is that every one
82
of your transgressions should receive a just punishment.
Perhaps your conscience will invent shifts and evasions to keep off the power of this consideration—such as, that the condemning power of the Law does not belong to you, that you are
set free from it, and the like—and so, though you have not fulfilled the Law, yet you need not
to be so much troubled by it. However,
a). Tell your conscience that it cannot manage any evidence to the purpose that you are
free from the condemning power of sin while your unmortified lust lies in your heart; because,
perhaps, the Law may make good its plea against you for a full dominion, and then you are a
lost creature. Wherefore it is best to ponder to the utmost what it has to say.
Some plead in the most secret reserve of their hearts that they are freed from the condemning power of the Law. They do this in order to secretly countenance themselves in giving small
allowances to sins and lusts. Those who do so are surely not able, on gospel grounds, to manage any evidence unto any tolerable spiritual security that indeed they are in a due manner
freed from what they so pretend to be delivered.
82

See Holiness by J. C. Ryle (1816-1900), The Law and the Saint by A. W. Pink (1886-1952), and A Just God
(gospel tract) by Charles Spurgeon (1834-1892); all available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.

11. Preparatory Directions 3-7

55

b). Whatever be the issue, yet the Law has commission from God to seize upon transgressors wherever it finds them, and so bring them before His throne, where they are to plead for
themselves. This is your present case: the Law has found you out, and it will bring you before
God. If you can plead a pardon, well and good; if not, the Law will do its work.
c). However, this is the proper work of the Law: to reveal the guilt of sin, to awaken and
humble the soul for it, to be a glass to represent sin in its colors. If you refuse to deal with it
on this account, it is not through faith, but through the hardness of your heart and the deceitfulness of sin.
This is a door at which too many professors have gone out unto open apostasy. 83 Such a deliverance from the Law they have pretended, as that they would consult its guidance and direction no more; they would measure their sin by it no more. By little and little, this principle has
insensibly, from the notion of it, proceeded to influence their practical understandings and,
having taken possession there, has turned the will and affections loose to all manner of abominations.
By such ways as these, then, persuade your conscience to hearken diligently to what the
Law speaks, in the name of the Lord, unto you about your lust and corruption. Oh, if your ears
be open, it will speak with a voice that shall make you tremble, that shall cast you to the
ground and fill you with astonishment. If ever you will mortify your corruptions, you must tie
up your conscience to the Law and shut it from all shifts and exceptions until it owns its guilt
with a clear and thorough apprehension—so that thence, as David speaks, your iniquity may
ever be before you (Psa 51:3).
2). Guilt from gospel light
Bring your lust to the gospel, not for relief, but for further conviction of its guilt. Look on
Him Whom you have pierced, and be in bitterness (Zec 12:10). Say to your soul, “What have I
done? What love, what mercy, what blood, what grace have I despised and trampled on! Is this
the return I make to the Father for His love, to the Son for His blood, to the Holy Ghost for
His grace? Do I repay the Lord in such a way? Have I defiled the heart that Christ died to wash,
that the blessed Spirit has chosen to dwell in? And can I keep myself out of the dust?
“What can I say to the dear Lord Jesus? How shall I hold up my head with any boldness before Him? Do I account communion with Him of so little value, that for this vile lust’s sake I
have scarce left Him any room in my heart? How shall I escape if I neglect so great salvation
(Heb 2:3)? In the meantime, what shall I say to the Lord? Love, mercy, grace, goodness, peace,
joy, consolation—I have despised them all, and esteemed them as a thing of naught, that I
might harbor a lust in my heart! Have I obtained a view of God’s fatherly countenance so that I
might behold His face, and then provoke Him to His face? Was my soul washed so that room
might be made for new defilements? Shall I endeavor to disappoint the purpose of the death of
Christ? Shall I daily grieve that Spirit whereby I am sealed to the day of redemption?”
Entertain your conscience daily with this entreaty. See if it can stand before this aggravation of its guilt. If this make it not soften and sink in some measure, I fear your case is dangerous.

83

apostasy – abandoning the faith one had professed.

56

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

b. After general aspects of guilt, focus on the particulars
Now descend to particulars. Just as, under the general head of the gospel, all the benefits of
it are to be considered, such as redemption, justification, and the like; so, in particular, consider the management of the love of them towards your own soul, for the aggravation of the
guilt of your corruption. As,
1). The infinite patience of God
Consider the infinite patience and forbearance of God toward you in particular. Consider
what advantages He might have taken against you, to have made you a shame and a reproach
in this world, and an object of wrath forever. Consider how you have dealt treacherously and
falsely with Him from time to time: flattered Him with your lips, but broken all promises and
engagements, and that by the means of that sin you are now in pursuit of—and yet He has
spared you from time to time, although you seem boldly to have put Him to the test to see
how long He could hold out. And will you yet sin against Him? Will you yet weary Him, and
make Him to serve with your corruptions (Isa 43:24)?
Have you not often been ready to conclude that it was utterly impossible that He should
bear any longer with you; that He would cast you off and be gracious no more; that all His forbearance was exhausted, and hell and wrath was prepared for you? And yet, above all your expectation, He has returned with visitations of love—and will you yet abide in the provocation
of the eyes of His glory?
2). The recovering grace of God
How often have you been at the door of being hardened by the deceitfulness of sin and, by
the infinite, rich grace of God, have been recovered to communion with Him again?
Have you not found grace decaying; delight vanishing in duties, ordinances, prayer, and
meditation; inclinations to loose, careless walking thriving; and they who before were entangled, almost beyond recovery? Have you not found yourself engaged in such ways, societies,
and companies as God abhors—and that with delight? And will you venture any more to the
brink of hardness?
3). All God’s gracious dealings
All God’s gracious dealings with you in providential dispensations, deliverances, afflictions,
mercies, enjoyments—all ought here to take a place. By these and the like means, I say, load
your conscience. Leave not this undertaking until your conscience be thoroughly affected with
the guilt of your indwelling corruption—until it is sensible of its wound and lies in the dust
before the Lord. Unless this be done to the purpose, all other endeavors are to no purpose.
While the conscience has any means to alleviate the guilt of sin, the soul will never vigorously
attempt its mortification.

4. Constantly Long for Deliverance
My fourth direction for the mortification of sin is:
Being thus affected with your sin, in the next place get a constant longing and breathing
after deliverance from the power of it.
Suffer not your heart one moment to be contented with your present frame and condition.
In things natural and civil, longing desires after anything are of no value or consideration any

11. Preparatory Directions 3-7

57

further than as they incite and stir up the person (in whom they are) to a diligent use of means
for the bringing about the thing aimed at. In spiritual things it is otherwise. Longing, breathing, and panting after deliverance is a grace in itself, which has a mighty power to conform the
soul into the likeness of the thing longed after. Hence the apostle, describing the repentance
and godly sorrow of the Corinthians, reckons this as one eminent grace that was then set at
work: “vehement desire” (2Co 7:11). And in this case of indwelling sin and the power of it,
what frame does he express himself to be in? His heart breaks out with longings into a most
passionate expression of desire for deliverance (Rom 7:24). Now, if this be the frame of saints
upon the general consideration of indwelling sin, how is it to be heightened and increased
when added to it is the perplexing rage and power of any particular lust and corruption! Assure
yourself, unless you long for deliverance, you shall not have it.
This will make the heart watchful for all opportunities of advantage against its enemy, and
ready to close with any assistance that is afforded for its destruction. Strong desires are the
very life of that “praying always” which is enjoined us in all conditions (Eph 6:18), and in none
is more necessary than in this. They set faith and hope at work, and are the soul’s moving after
the Lord.
Get your heart, then, into a panting and breathing frame: long, sigh, cry out. You know the
example of David (Psa 38, 42, etc.). I shall not need to dwell anymore upon it.

5. Consider Your Particular Temperament
The fifth direction for the mortification of your sin is:
Consider whether the distemper with which you are perplexed be not rooted in your nature, and cherished, encouraged, and heightened from your constitution.
A propensity to some sins may doubtless lie in the natural temperament and disposition of
men. In this case, consider the following.

a. Not a lessening of your guilt
This is not in the least a lessening of the guilt of your sin. Some, with an open contempt for
God, will ascribe gross enormities to their natural temperament and disposition; and whether
others may not relieve themselves from the pressing guilt of their distempers by the same
84
consideration, I know not. It is from the Fall, when our natures originally fell into depravity,
that the instigation and nourishment of any sin abides in our natural temper. David reckons
his being shaped in iniquity and conception in sin (Psa 51:5) as an aggravation of his following
sin, not a lessening or excusing of it. That you are peculiarly inclined to any sinful distemper is
but a peculiar breaking out of original lust in your nature, which should peculiarly humble
you.

b. Greater threat
In reference to your walking with God, what you have to fix upon is that so great an advantage is given to sin, as also to Satan, by your temperament and disposition that without extraordinary watchfulness, care, and diligence they will assuredly prevail against your soul.
84

Fall – The entire human race fell from the blessings of God’s presence into the condition and curse of sin
and death when Adam violated God’s command in the Garden of Eden (Gen 3:1-6).

58

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

Thousands have been on this account hurried headlong to hell, who otherwise, at least, might
have gone at a more gentle, less provoking, less mischievous rate.

c. Bringing the body into subjection
For the mortification of any distemper so rooted in the nature of a man, unto all other ways
and means already named (or further to be insisted on), there is one expedient peculiarly suited: this is that of the apostle, “I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection” (1Co 9:27).
The bringing of the very body into subjection is an ordinance of God tending to the mortification of sin. This gives check to the natural root of the distemper, and withers it by taking away
its fatness of soil.
The papists—men ignorant of the righteousness of Christ, the work of His Spirit, and the
whole business in hand—have laid the whole weight and stress of mortification in voluntary
services and penances, leading to the subjection of the body, knowing indeed the true nature
neither of sin nor mortification. Perhaps because of this, it may be a temptation to others to
neglect some means of humiliation that are owned and appointed by God Himself. The bringing of the body into subjection in the case insisted on, by cutting short the natural appetite—
by fasting, watching, and the like—is doubtless acceptable to God, as long as it is done with
the following limitations.
1). Not good in itself
The outward weakening and impairing of the body should not be looked upon as a thing
good in itself, or as if any mortification is actually contained in it—such would again bring us
under carnal ordinances. It should be looked upon only as a means for the end proposed: the
weakening of any distemper in its natural root and seat. A man may have leanness of both body
and soul together.
2). Not able to produce mortification by itself
The means whereby bodily subjection is to be done—namely, by fasting, watching, and the
like—should not be looked upon as things that in themselves, and by virtue of their own power, can produce true mortification of any sin. If they could, sin might be mortified without any
help of the Spirit in any unregenerate person in the world. They are to be looked upon only as
ways whereby the Spirit may, and sometimes does, put forth strength for the accomplishing of
His own work, especially in the case mentioned. Lack of a right understanding and due use of
these and the like considerations, has raised a mortification among the papists that may be
better applied to horses and other beasts of the field, than to believers.
This is the sum of what has been spoken: If the distemper complained of seems to be rooted
in the natural temperament and constitution, then when applying our souls to a participation
of the blood and Spirit of Christ, we must labor in God’s way to restrain the natural root of
that distemper.

6. Watch against Sin’s Advantages
The sixth direction for mortification is:
Consider what occasions, what advantages, your distemper has taken to exert and put
forth itself, and watch against them all.

11. Preparatory Directions 3-7

59

This is one part of that duty which our blessed Savior recommends to His disciples under
the name of watching: “I say unto all, Watch” (Mar 13:37); which in Luke 24:34 is, “Take heed
to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged”—that is, watch against all eruptions of your corruptions. I mean here the duty that David professed himself to be exercised
unto. “I have,” he said, “kept myself from mine iniquity” (2Sa 22:24). He watched all the ways
and workings of his iniquity, to prevent them and to rise up against them. This is that which
we are called unto under the name of “considering our ways.”
Consider what ways, what companies, what opportunities, what studies, what businesses,
and what conditions have at any time given, or do usually give, advantages to your distempers,
and set yourself heedfully against them all. Men will do this with respect to their bodily infirmities and distempers. The seasons, the diet, and the air that have proved offensive are carefully avoided. Are the things of the soul of less importance? Know that he who dares to dally with
occasions of sin will dare to sin. He that will venture upon temptations unto wickedness will
venture upon wickedness.
Hazael thought he should not be so wicked as the prophet told him he would be. To convince him, the prophet tells him no more but, “Thou shalt be king over Syria” (2Ki 8:13). If he
will venture on temptations unto cruelty, he will be cruel. Tell a man he shall commit such
and such sins, he will startle at it. If you can convince him that he will venture on such occasions and temptations of them, he will have little ground left for his confidence.
Particular directions belonging to this head are many, not now to be insisted on. But because this head is of no less importance than the whole doctrine here handled, I have dealt
85
with it in depth in another treatise about entering into temptations.

7. Rise at the First Evidence of Sin
The seventh direction for mortification is:
Rise mightily against the first actings of your distemper, its first conceptions; suffer it not
to get the least ground.
Do not say, Thus far it shall go, and no farther (Job 38:11). If it have allowance for one step,
it will take another. It is impossible to fix bounds to sin. It is like water in a channel: if it once
break out, it will have its course. Its not acting is easier to be compassed than its bounding.
Therefore James gives the gradation and process of lust (Jam 1:14-15), so that we may stop at
the entrance.
Do you find your corruption begins to entangle your thoughts? Rise up with all your
strength against it, with no less indignation than if it had fully accomplished what it aims at.
Consider what an unclean thought would have: it would have you roll yourself in folly and
filth. Ask envy what it would have: murder and destruction is at the end of it. Set yourself
against it with no less vigor than if it had utterly debased you to wickedness. Without this
course you will not prevail. As sin gets ground in the affections to delight in it, it gets also upon the understanding to slight it.

85

See Owen’s related classic on this subject: Of Temptation.