PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 10
Keeping the Heart Against Revenge and Provocation

---

Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 6. Keeping the Heart Against Revenge and Provocation.

that he took no notice of the soldiers when they entered his very
study with drawn swords; a fervent cannot be a vagrant heart.
Help 3. Beg of God a mortified fancy. A working fancy, saith one,
how much soever it be extolled among men, is a great snare to the
soul: except it work in fellowship with right reason, and a sanctified
heart: The phantasy is a power of the soul placed between the senses
and the understanding, it is that which first stirs itself in the soul,
and by its motions the other powers are stirred; it is the common
shop where thoughts are first forged and framed, and as this is, so
are they; if imaginations be not first cast down, it is impossible that
every thought of the heart should be brought into obedience to
Christ, 2 Cor. 10:5. The fancy is naturally the wildest and most
untameable power in the soul. Some Christians, especially such as
are of hot and dry constitutions, have much to do with it.
And truly, the more spiritual the heart is, the more it is troubled
about the vanity and wildness of it. O what a sad thing it is! that thy
nobler soul must lackey up and down after a vain and roving fancy,
that such a beggar should ride on horse-back, and such a prince run
after on foot; that it should call off the soul from attendance upon
God, when it is most sweetly engaged in communion with him, to
prosecute such vanities as it will start at such times before it! beg
earnestly of God that the power of sanctification may once come
upon it. Some Christians have attained such a degree of
sanctification of their fancies, that they have had much sweetness left
upon their hearts by the spiritual workings of it in the night-season:
When thy fancy is more mortified, thy thoughts will be more orderly
and fixed.
Help 4. If thou wouldst keep thy heart from those vain excursions,
realize to thyself by faith, the holy and awful presence of God in
duties.
If the presence of a grave man will compose us to seriousness, how
much more the presence of an holy God? Thinkest thou thy soul

durst be so gay and light, if the sense of a divine eye were upon it?
Remember the place where thou art is the place of his feet, Isa.
60:13. act faith upon the omnisciency of God. "All the churches shall
know that I am he that searcheth the heart, trieth the reins, and I will
give to every one of you according to your works," Rev. 2:23. "All
things are naked and open to the eyes of him with whom we have to
do," Heb. 4:12. Realize his infinite holiness; into what a serious,
composed frame did the sight of God, in his holiness, put the spirit of
the prophet? Isa. 6:5. Labour also to get upon thy heart due
apprehensions of the greatness of God, such as Abraham had, Gen.
18:27. "I that am but dust and ashes have taken upon me to speak to
God." And lastly, remember the jealousy of God, how tender he is
over his worship, Lev. 10:3. "And Moses said to Aaron, This is that
the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh
me, and before all the people I will be glorified."
'A man that is praying (saith Bernard) should behave himself as if he
were entering into the court of heaven, where he sees the Lord upon
his throne, surrounded with ten thousand of his angels and saints
ministering unto him.' When thou comest from a duty in which thy
heart hath been toying and wandering, thou mayest say, Verily God
was in this place, and I knew it not. Suppose all the impertinencies
and vanities which have past through thine heart in duty were
written out, and interlined with thy petitions, couldest thou have the
face to present to God? Should thy tongue but utter all the thoughts
of thy heart in prayer, would not men abhor thee? Why thy thoughts
are vocal to God, Psal. 139:2. If thou wert petitioning the king for thy
life, would it not provoke him to see thee playing with thy
bandstrings, or catching at every fly that lights upon thy clothes,
whilst thou art speaking to him about such serious matters? O think
sadly upon that scripture, Psalm 87:7. "God is greatly to be feared in
the assemblies of his saints, and to be had in reverence of all them
that are round about him?" Why did God ascend in thunderings and
lightnings, and dark clouds upon Sinai? Exod. 19:16–18. Why did the
mountains smoke under him? The people quake and tremble round
about him, yea, Moses himself not exempted? but to teach the

people, that great truth, Heb. 12:28, 29. "Let us have grace whereby
we may serve him acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, for our
God is a consuming fire!" Present God thus before thee, and thy vain
heart will quickly be reduced to a more serious frame.
Help 5. Maintain a praying frame of heart in the intervals of duty.
What is the reason our hearts are so dull, careless and wandering,
when we come to hear or pray, but because there have been such
long intermissions in our communion with God; by reason whereof
the heart is out of a praying frame? If that spiritual warmth, those
holy impressions we carry from God in one duty, were but preserved
to kindle another duty, it would be of marvellous advantage to keep
the heart intent and serious with God.
To this purpose those intermediate ejaculations betwixt stated and
solemn duties, are of most sweet and excellent use; by these one duty
is as it were linked to another, and so the soul, as it were, wraps up
itself in a chain of duties. That Christian seldom misses his mark in
solemn duty, that shoots up many of these darts in the intervals of
duty. It is an excellent commendation Christ bestows upon the
spouse, Cant. 4:11. "Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb."
Upon which text one gives this sweet note; The honeycomb drops
actually but sometimes, but it always hangs full of sweet drops ready
to fall; If our ejaculations were more, our lamentations upon this
account would be fewer.
Help 6. Endeavour to engage and raise thy affections to God in duty,
if thou wouldest have thy distractions cured.
A dropping eye, and a melting heart, are seldom troubled as others
are upon this account: When the soul is intent upon any work, it
gathers in its strength, and bends all the thoughts about it; and when
it is deeply affected, it will be intent: the affections command the
thoughts to go after them; deadness causes distraction, and
distraction increases deadness; Could you but look upon duties as
the galleries of communion in which you walk with God, where your

souls may be filled with those ravishing and matchless delights that
are in his presence, your soul would not offer to stir from thence.
It is with the heart in duty as it is with those that dig for golden ore;
they try here, and finding none, try there; and so go from place to
place, till at last they hit upon the rich vein, and there they sit down.
If thy heart could but once hit the rich vein in duty, it would dwell
and abide there with delight and constancy. "O how I love thy law, it
is my meditation day and night!" Psal. 119:97. The soul could dwell
day and night upon its knees, when once its delights, loves, and
desires are engaged. What is the reason your hearts are so shuffling,
especially in secret duties! Why are you ready to be gone, almost as
soon as you are come into the presence of God, but because your
affections are not engaged?
Help 7. Mourn over the matter to God, and call in assistance from
heaven, when vain thoughts assault thy heart in duty.
When the messenger of Satan buffeted Paul by wicked injections, as
is supposed, he goes to God, and mourns over it before him, 2 Cor.
12:8 never slight wandering thoughts in duty as small matters: follow
every vain thought with a deep sigh, turning thee to God with such
words as these: Lord, I came hither to speak with thee, and here a
busy devil and a vain heart conspiring together have set upon me. O
my God! what an heart have I? Shall I never wait upon thee without
distraction! when shall I enjoy an hour of free communion with thee?
Help me, my God, this once; do but display thy glory before mine
eye, and my heart shall quickly be recovered; Thou knowest I came
hither to enjoy thee, and shall I go away without thee? See how the
heart of thy poor child works towards thee! strives to get near thee,
but cannot: My heart is aground, "come thou north-wind, blow
south-wind," O for a fresh gale now from thy Spirit, to set my
affections a-float! Couldst thou but thus affectionately bewail thy
distractions to God, thou mightest obtain help and deliverance from
them: He would say to Satan and thine imperious lusts, as Ahasuerus

said of Haman, What, will he force the queen before my face? Who
are these that set upon my child in my work and presence?
Help 8. Look upon the success and sweetness of thy duties, as very
much depending upon the keeping of thy heart close with God in
them.
These two things, the success and sweetness of duty, are as dear to a
Christian as his two eyes; and both of these must necessarily be lost,
if the heart be lost in duty. Job 35:13. "Surely God heareth not vanity,
neither doth the Almighty regard it." The promise is made to an
heart engaged, Jer. 29:13. "Then shall ye seek me, and find me, when
ye shall search for me with all your hearts." Well then, when thou
findest thy heart under the power of deadness and distraction, say to
thy soul, O what do I lose by a careless heart now! my praying times
are the choicest parts, the golden spots of all my time: Could I but get
up this heart with God, I might now obtain such mercies as would be
matter for a song to all eternity.
Help 9. Look upon it as a great discovery of the sincerity or hypocrisy
of your hearts, according as you find them careful or careless in this
matter.
Nothing will startle an upright heart more than this: What, shall I
give way to a customary wandering of heart from God? Shall the spot
of the hypocrite appear upon my soul? They indeed can drudge on in
the round of duty, never regarding the frames of their hearts, Ezek.
33:31, 32 but shall I do so? When men come into the presencechamber, and the king is not there, they bow to the empty chair. O
never let me be satisfied with empty duties! never let me take my
leave of a duty "until mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of
hosts."
Help 10. Lastly, It will be of special use to keep thine heart with God
in duties, to consider what influence all thy duties have into thy
eternity.

These are your seed-times, and what you sow in your duties in this
world, you must look to reap the fruits of it in another world, Gal.
6:7, 8. If you sow to the flesh, of that you shall reap corruption; but if
to the Spirit, life everlasting. O my soul, answer seriously, wouldst
thou be willing to reap the fruit of vanity in the world to come?
Darest thou say, when thy thoughts are roving to the ends of the
earth in duty, when thou scarce mindest what thou sayest or hearest;
now, Lord, I am sowing to the Spirit; now I am providing and laying
up for eternity; now I am seeking for glory, honour, and immortality;
now I am striving to enter in at the strait gate; now I am taking the
kingdom of heaven by an holy violence? O such a consideration as
this should make the multitudes of vain thoughts that press in upon
the heart in duty, to fly seven ways before it. And thus I have shewn
you how to keep your hearts in the times of duty.

Keeping the Heart from Revengeful
Motions, Under the Greatest Injuries and
Abuses From Men
Season 7. 'The seventh season calling for more than common
diligence to keep the heart, is, when we receive injuries and abuses
from men. Such is the depravedness and corruption of man in his
collapsed state, that homo homini lupus, one man is become a wolf, a
tyger, to another: They are, as the prophet complains, Hab. 1:14. As
the fishes of the sea, and as the creeping things, that have no ruler
over them;" and as wicked men are cruel and oppressive one to
another, so they conspire together to abuse and wrong the people of
God, as the same prophet complains, ver. 13. "The wicked devoureth
the man that is more righteous than he." Now when we are thus
abused and wronged, it is hard to keep the heart from revengeful
motions: to make it meekly and quietly to commit the cause to him
that judgeth righteously; to exercise no other affection but pity
towards them that abuse us. Surely the spirit that is in us lusteth to
revenge, but it must not be so; you have choice helps in the gospel to

keep down your hearts from such sinful motions against your
enemies, and to sweeten your embittered spirits.' The seventh case
then shall be this,
Case 7. How a Christian may keep his heart from revengeful motions,
under the greatest injuries and abuses from men.
The gospel, indeed, allows a liberty to vindicate our innocency, and
assert our rights, but not to vent our corruptions, and invade God's
right. When therefore thou findest thy heart begin to be inflamed by
revengeful motions, presently apply the following remedies; and the
first is this,
Remedies
Remedy 1. Urge upon thy heart the severe prohibitions of revenge by
the law of God. Remember that this is forbidden fruit, how pleasant
and luscious soever it be to our vitiated appetites. O, saith nature,
revenge is sweet: O but, saith God, the effects thereof shall be bitter.
How plainly hath God interdicted this flesh-pleasing sin, Prov.
20:22. "Say not I will recompense evil." Prov. 24:29. "Say not I will
do so to him as he hath done to me." Rom. 12:17. "Recompence to no
man evil for evil." And ver. 19. "Avenge not yourselves, but rather
give place to wrath." Nay, that is not all; but Prov. 25:21. "If thine
enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink." The word feed
him, as critics observe, signifies to feed cheerfully, and tenderly, as
birds do their young ones: The scripture is a great friend to the peace
and tranquillity of human society, which can never be preserved if
revenge be not deposed. It was wont to be an argument urged by the
Christians to prove their religion to be supernatural and pure that
forbids revenge, which is so sweet to nature; and verily it is a
thousand pities such an argument should be lost. Well, then, awe
your hearts with the authority of God in these scriptures, and when
carnal reason saith, mine enemy deserves to be hated, let conscience
reply, but doth God deserve to be disobeyed? Thus and thus hath he
done, and so he hath wronged me; but what hath God done that I

should wrong him? If he dare be so bold to break the peace, shall I be
so wicked to break the precept? If he fears not to wrong me, shall not
I fear to wrong God? O let the fear of God's threatenings repress such
sinful motions.
Remedy 2. Set before your eyes the most eminent patterns of
meekness and forgiveness, that your souls may fall in love with them.
This is the way to cut off those common pleas of the flesh for
revenge: As thus no man would bear such an affront: Yes, such and
such have borne as bad and worse. I shall be reckoned a coward, a
fool, if I pass by this: No matter, as long as I follow the examples of
the wisest and holiest of men; never did any suffer more and greater
abuses from men than Christ did, and never did any carry it more
peaceably and forgivingly, Isa. 53:7. "He was oppressed, and he was
afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he was brought as a lamb to
the slaughter," &c. This pattern of our Lord the apostle sets before
you for your imitation, 1 Pet. 2:21, 22, 23. "For even hereunto are you
called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that
we should follow his steps: Who when he was reviled, reviled not
again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judgeth righteously." To be of a meek, forgiving spirit, is
Christ-like, God-like; "then shall you be the children of your Father
which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise upon the evil and
upon the good, and sendeth rain on the just and unjust," Matth. 5:45.
How eminently also did the Spirit of Christ rest upon his apostles?
Never were there such men upon earth for true excellency of spirit.
None were ever abused more, or suffered their abuses better. "Being
reviled (say they) we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being
defamed, we entreat," 1 Cor. 4:12, 13. Mr. Calvin, though a man of a
quick spirit, yet had attained such a degree of this Christ-like
forgiveness, that when Luther had used some opprobrious language
of him, the good man said no more but this, 'Although he should call
me devil, yet I will acknowledge him to be an eminent servant of
Jesus Christ.'

I have often heard it reported of holy Mr. Dod, that when one,
enraged at his close, convincing doctrine, picked a quarrel with him,
smote him on the face, and dashed out two of his teeth; this meek
servant of Christ spit out the teeth and blood into his hand, and said,
See, here, you have knocked out two of my teeth, and that without
any just provocation; but on condition I might do your soul good, I
would give you leave to dash out all the rest. Here is the excellency of
a Christian's spirit, above all the attainments of moral heathens:
Though they were excellent in many other things, yet they could
never attain this forgiving spirit. It is the first office of justice, said
Tully, to hurt no body, unless first provoked by an injury; whereupon
Lactantius, O quam simplicem veramque sententiam, duorum
verberam adjectione, corrupit! What a dainty sentence spoiled the
orator, by adding those two last words! Strive then for this excellency
of spirit, which is the proper excellency of Christians; do some
singular thing that others cannot do, and then you will have a
testimony in their consciences. When Moses out-did the magicians,
they were forced to confess the finger of God in that business.
Remedy 3. Consider well the quality of the person that hath wronged
thee: either he is a good man, or a wicked man, that hath done thee
the injury: If he be a good man, there is light and tenderness in his
conscience, and that will bring him at last to a sense of the evil he
hath done; however, Christ hath forgiven him greater injuries than
these, and why shouldst not thou? Will Christ not upbraid him with
any of those wrongs done to him, but frankly forgive them all; and
wilt thou take him by the throat for some petty abuse that he hath
done to thee?
Or is he a wicked man? If so, truly you have more need to exercise
pity, than revenge towards him, and that upon a double account: For,
(1.) He is beside himself, so indeed is every unconverted sinner, Luke
15:17. Should you go into Bedlam, and there hear one rail at you,
another mock you, and a third threaten you; would you say I will be
revenged upon them? No, you would rather go away pitying them!

Alas, poor creatures! they are out of their wits, and know not what
they do. Besides,
(2.) There is a day coming, if they repent not, when they will have
more misery than you can find in your hearts to wish them; you need
not study to revenge, God's vengeance sleepeth not, and will shortly
take place upon them, and is not that enough? Have they not an
eternity of misery coming? If they repent not, this must be the
portion of their cup; and if ever they do repent, they will be ready to
make you reparation.
Remedy 4. Keep down thy heart by this consideration, that by
revenge thou canst but satisfy a lust, but by forgiveness thou shalt
conquer a lust.
Suppose by revenge thou shouldst destroy one enemy, I will shew
thee how, by forgiving, thou shalt conquer three, thine own lust, the
devil's temptation, and thine enemy's heart; and is not this a more
glorious conquest? If by revenge thou overcome thine enemy, yet (as
Bernard saith) Infelix victoria, ubi superans virum secumbit vitio:
Unhappy victory, when, by overcoming another man, thou art
overcome by thine own corruption. But this way you may obtain a
glorious conquest indeed. What an honourable and dry victory, did
David this way obtain over Saul, 1 Sam. 24:16, 17. "And it came to
pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words, that
Saul lifted up his voice, and wept; and he said to David, thou art
more righteous than I."
It must be a very disingenuous nature indeed, upon which meekness
and forgiveness will not work; a stony heart, which this fire will not
melt. To this sense is that, Prov. 25:21. "If thine enemy hunger, feed
him; if he thirst, give him drink; for in so doing thou shalt heap coals
of fire upon his head." Some will have it a sin-punishing fire, but
others a heart-melting fie. To be sure it will either melt his heart, or
aggravate his misery. Augustine thinks that Stephen's prayer for his
enemies was the great means of Paul's conversion.

Remedy 5. Seriously propound this question to thy oxen heart, have I
got any good by the wrongs and injuries received, or have I not? If
they have done you no good, turn the revenge upon yourselves: O
that I should have such a bad heart, that can get no good out of such
troubles! O that my spirit should be so unlike to Christ's! The
patience and meekness of other Christians, have turned all the
injuries thrown at them into precious stones; the spirits of others
have been raised in blessing God, when they have been loaded with
reproaches from the world, they have bound them as an ornament to
their necks. Superbus fio (said Luther) quod video nomen pessimum
mihi crescere. I could even be proud upon it, that I have a bad name
among wicked men. To the same purpose Jerom said sweetly, Gratia
ago Deo meo quod dignus sum quem mundus orderit; I thank my
God that I am worthy to be hated of the world. Thus their hearts
were provoked by injuries to magnify God, and bless him for them; if
it work contrary with me, I have cause enough to be filled with selfdispleasancy.
If you have got any good by them; if the reproaches and wrongs you
have received, have made you search your hearts the more, watch
your ways the more narrowly; if their wronging you, has made you
see how you have wronged God, then let me say for them, as Paul did
himself, Pray forgive them this wrong.
What! can you not find an heart to forgive one that hath been
instrumental of so much good to you! That is strange! what though
they meant it for evil? yet if God hath turned it to good, you have no
more reason to rage against the instrument than he had who received
a wound from his enemy which only brake, and let out that
imposthume which otherwise had been his death.
Remedy 6. It is of excellent use to keep the heart from revenge, to
look up, and eye the first cause by which all our troubles are ordered.
This will calm and meeken our spirits quickly: never did a wicked
tongue try the patience of a saint, more than David's was tried by

that railing Shimei; yet the spirit of this good man was not at all
poisoned with revenge, though he goes along cursing, and casting
stones at him, all the way. Yea, though Abishai offered David, if he
pleased, the head of that enemy; yet the king said, "What have I to do
with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? So let him curse, because the Lord hath
said unto him, curse David: who then shall say, Wherefore hast thou
done so?" It may be, God uses him as his rod, to lash me, because I,
by my sin, made his enemies to blaspheme him; and shall I be angry
with the rod? How irrational were that? This also was it that quieted
Job; he doth not rail, and vow revenge upon the Chaldeans and
Sabeans, but eyes God as the orderer of those troubles, and is quiet;
"The Lord hath taken away, blessed be his name," Job 1:21.
Objection. But you will say, To turn aside the right of a man, to
subvert a man in his cause, the Lord approveth not, Lam. 3:36.
Answer. True: but though it fall not under his approving, yet it doth
under his permitting will, and there is a great argument for quiet
submission in that; nay, he hath not only the permitting, but the
ordering of all those troubles. Did we see more of an holy God, we
should shew less of a corrupt nature in such trials.
Remedy 7. Consider how you daily wrong God, and you will not be so
easily inflamed with revenge against others that have wronged you.
You are daily grieving, and wronging God, and yet he bears, forgives,
and will not take vengeance upon you; and will you be so quick in
avenging yourselves upon others? O what a sharp and terrible rebuke
is that! Mat. 18:32, 33. "O thou wicked and slothful servant! I forgave
thee all that debt because thou desirest me, shouldst not thou also
have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had pity on
thee?" None should be so filled with bowels of pity, forbearance, and
mercy, to such as wrong them, as those should be that have
experienced the riches of mercy themselves: methinks the mercy of
God to us should melt our very bowels into mercy over others; it is
impossible we can be cruel to others, except we forget how kind

Christ hath been to us. Those that have found mercy, should shew
mercy: if kindness cannot work, methinks fear should. "If you forgive
not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you your
trespasses," Mat. 6:15.
Remedy 8. Lastly, Let the consideration of the day of the Lord, which
draweth nigh, withhold your hands from anticipating it by acts of
revenge.
Why are you so quick? Is not the Lord at hand, to avenge all his
abused servants? "Be patient therefore, my brethren, unto the
coming of the Lord. Behold the husbandman waiteth, &c. Be ye also
patient, for the coming of the Lord draws nigh: Grudge not one
against another, brethren, lest ye be condemned. Behold the Judge
standeth at the door," Jam. 5:7, 8, 9. This text affords three
arguments against revenge: (1.) The Lord's near approach. (2.) The
example of the husbandman's patience. (3.) The danger we draw
upon ourselves by anticipating God's judgment; Vengeance is mine,
saith the Lord; he will distribute justice more equally, and
impartially, than you can: they who believe they have a God to right
them, will not so much wrong themselves, as avenge their own
wrongs.
Objection 1. But flesh and blood are not able to bear such abuses.
Solution. If you resolve to consult flesh and blood in such cases, and
do no more but what that will enable you to do; never pretend to
religion: Christians must do singular and supernatural things.
Object. 2. But if I put up such abuses, I shall be reckoned a fool, and
every one will trample upon me.
Sol. (1.) You may be reckoned so among fools, but God and good men
will account it your wisdom, and the excellency of your spirits. (2.) It
must be a base spirit indeed that will trample upon a meek and
forgiving Christian: and thus learn to keep your hearts from revenge
under all provocations.

Keeping the Heart When We Meet with
Great Crosses and Provocations
Season 8. 'The next season in which we are in danger of losing our
hearts is, when we meet with great crosses and provocations; then
sinful passion is apt to transport the heart. It is the fault of many
good men to be of hasty and quick spirits, when provoked, though
they dare not concoct anger into malice; for that would be a note of
wickedness: yet are they very incident to sudden anger, which is a
sign of weakness."* Beza, in the life of Calvin, observes, that he was
of a keen and hasty spirit;' and he that writes the life of the great
Cameron,* saith, 'that his anger was soon stirred towards his near
and familiar friends, but then he would easily depose it and
acknowledge his weakness.' Alas! when provocations and trials of our
patience come, we know not what spirit we are of. The eighth case
therefore is this,
Case 8. How the heart may be kept meek and patient under great
crosses and provocations.
There are three sorts of anger, natural, holy, and sinful anger. (1.)
Natural, which is nothing else but the motion of the irascible
appetive towards an offensive object; and this in itself is no sin, they
are propassions, rather than passions; the infelicities, rather than the
sins of nature, as Jerom calls them. Reason, saith Plutarch, is the
driver, the soul is the chariot, and the two horses that draw it on in
all its motions, are the concupiscible and irascible appetites; whilst
these are rightly managed by reason, they are not only lawful, but
very useful to the soul. God would not have us to be stupid and
insensate, though he would have us to be meek and patient. In Eph.
4:26. he allows the natural motion, but forbids the sinful
exorbitancy. (2.) Holy anger, which is a pure flame, kindled by an
heavenly spark of love to God, and in scripture is called zeal, which
is, as one saith, the dagger which love draws in God's quarrel. Such
was Lot's against the Sodomites, and that of Moses against the