PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 11
The Sovereignty of God in Administration

---

The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 3. The Sovereignty of God in Administration.

3. The Sovereignty of God in Administration

25

Having shown, in brief, the imperative need for God to reign over our world, let us now observe still further the fact that God does rule, actually rule, and that His government extends
to and is exercised over all things and all creatures.

B. God’s Rule over Inanimate Matter
That God governs inanimate matter, that inanimate matter performs His bidding and fulfills His decrees, is clearly shown on the very frontispiece of divine revelation. God said, “Let
there be light,” and we read, “There was light.” God said, “Let the waters under the heaven be
gathered together unto one place, and let the dry land appear,” and “it was so.” And again,
“God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding
fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth: and it was so.” And the psalmist declares, “He spake and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast” (Psa 33:9).
What is stated in Genesis chapter one is afterwards illustrated all through the Bible. After
the creation of Adam, sixteen centuries went by before ever a shower of rain fell upon the
earth, for before Noah “there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the
3
ground” (Gen 2:6). But, when the iniquities of the antediluvians had come to the full, then
God said, “And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh,
wherein is the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing that is in the earth shall die”;
and in fulfillment of this we read, “In the six hundredth year of Noah’s life, in the second
month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the fountains of the great
deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened. And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights” (Gen 6:17; 7:11-12).
Witness God’s absolute (and sovereign) control of inanimate matter in connection with the
plagues of Egypt. At His bidding the light was turned into darkness and rivers into blood; hail
fell, and death came down upon the godless land of the Nile, until even its haughty monarch
was compelled to cry out for deliverance. Note particularly how the inspired record here emphasizes God’s absolute control over the elements: “And Moses stretched forth his rod toward
heaven: and the LORD sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; and the
LORD rained hail upon the land of Egypt. So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail,
very grievous, such as there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
And the hail smote throughout all the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both man and
beast; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and brake every tree of the field. Only in the
land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail” (Exo 9:23-26). The same
distinction was observed in connection with the ninth plague: “And the LORD said unto Moses, Stretch out thine hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt,
even darkness which may be felt. And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven; and there
was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days: They saw not one another, neither
rose any from his place for three days: but all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings” (Exo 10:21-23).
The above examples are by no means isolated cases. At God’s decree fire and brimstone descended from heaven and the cities of the plain were destroyed, and a fertile valley was converted into a loathsome sea of death. At His bidding the waters of the Red Sea parted asunder
3

antediluvians – people who lived before the Genesis Flood.

26

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

so that the Israelites passed over dry shod, and at His word they rolled back again and destroyed the Egyptians who were pursuing them. A word from Him and the earth opened her
mouth, and Korah and his rebellious company were swallowed up. The furnace of Nebuchadnezzar was heated seven times beyond its normal temperature, and into it three of God’s children were cast, but the fire did not so much as scorch their clothes, though it slew the men
who cast them into it.
What a demonstration of the Creator’s governmental control over the elements was furnished when He became flesh and tabernacled among men! Behold Him asleep in the boat. A
storm arises. The winds roar and the waves are lashed into fury. The disciples who are with
Him, fearful lest their little craft should founder, awake their master, saying, “Carest thou not
that we perish?” And then we read, “And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea,
Peace, be still. And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm” (Mar 4:39). Mark again, the
sea, at the will of its Creator, bore Him up upon its waves. At a word from Him, the fig-tree
withered; at His touch disease fled instantly.
The heavenly bodies are also ruled by their Maker and perform His Sovereign pleasure.
Take two illustrations. At God’s bidding the sun went back ten degrees on the dial of Ahaz to
help the weak faith of Hezekiah. In New Testament times, God caused a star to herald the incarnation of His Son, the star that appeared unto the wise men of the East. This star, we are
told, “went before them till it came and stood over where the young child was” (Mat 2:9).
What a declaration is this: “He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very swiftly. He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoar frost like ashes. He casteth
forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold? He sendeth out his word, and melteth
them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow” (Psa 147:15-18). The mutations of the
elements are beneath God’s sovereign control. It is God who withholds the rain, and it is God
who gives the rain when He wills, where He wills, as He wills, and on whom He wills. Weather
bureaus may attempt to give forecasts of the weather, but how frequently God mocks their calculations! Sun spots, the varying activities of the planets, the appearing and disappearing of
comets (to which abnormal weather is sometimes attributed), atmospheric disturbances, are
merely secondary causes, for behind them all is God Himself. Let His Word speak once more:
“And also I have withholden the rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest: and I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city: one
piece was rained upon, and the piece whereon it rained not withered. So two or three cities
wandered unto one city, to drink water; but they were not satisfied: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. I have smitten you with blasting and mildew: when your gardens and
your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees increased, the palmerworm devoured
them: yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the LORD. I have sent among you the pestilence
after the manner of Egypt: your young men have I slain with the sword, and have taken away
your horses; and I have made the stink of your camps to come up into your nostrils: yet have ye
not returned unto me, saith the LORD” (Amo 4:7-10).
Truly, then, God governs inanimate matter. Earth and air, fire and water, hail and snow,
stormy winds and angry seas, all perform the word of His power and fulfill His sovereign pleasure. Therefore, when we complain about the weather, we are in reality murmuring against God.

3. The Sovereignty of God in Administration

27

C. God’s Rule over Irrational Creatures
What a striking illustration of God’s government over the animal kingdom is found in Genesis 2:19. “And out of the ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl
of the air: and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam
called every living creature, that was the name thereof.” Should it be said that this occurred in
Eden, and took place before the fall of Adam and the consequent curse that was inflicted on
every creature, then our next reference fully meets the objection: God’s control of the beasts
was again openly displayed at the Flood. Mark how God caused to “come unto” Noah every
specie of living creature: “of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort shalt thou bring
into the ark, to keep them alive with thee; they shall be male and female. Of fowls after their
kind, of every creeping thing after his kind: two of every sort shall come unto thee” (Gen 6:1920)—all were beneath God’s sovereign control. The lion of the jungle, the elephant of the forest, the bear of the polar regions; the ferocious panther, the untameable wolf, the fierce tiger;
the high-soaring eagle and the creeping crocodile—see them all in their native fierceness, and
yet, quietly submitting to the will of their Creator, and coming two by two into the ark!
We referred to the plagues sent upon Egypt as illustrating God’s control of inanimate matter, let us now turn to them again to see how they demonstrate His perfect rulership over irrational creatures. At His Word the river brought forth frogs abundantly, and these frogs entered
the palace of Pharaoh and the houses of his servants and, contrary to their natural instincts,
they entered the beds, the ovens and the kneading troughs (Exo 8:13). Swarms of flies invaded
the land of Egypt, but there were no flies in the land of Goshen! (Exo 8:22). Next, the cattle
were stricken, and we read,
Behold, the hand of the LORD is upon the asses, upon the camels, upon the oxen, and
upon the sheep: there shall be a very grievous murrain. And the LORD shall sever between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt: and there shall nothing die of all that is
the children’s of Israel. And the LORD appointed a set time, saying, To morrow the
LORD shall do this thing in the land. And the LORD did that thing on the morrow, and
all the cattle of Egypt died: but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one (Exo
9:3-6).
In like manner God sent clouds of locusts to plague Pharaoh and his land, appointing the time
of their visitation, determining the course and assigning the limits of their depredations.
Angels are not the only ones who do God’s bidding. The brute beasts equally perform His
pleasure. The sacred ark, the ark of the covenant, is in the country of the Philistines. How is it
to be brought back to its home land? Mark the servants of God’s choice, and how completely
they were beneath His control:
And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners saying, What shall we do to the
ark of the Lord? tell us wherewith we shall send it to his place. And they said...Now
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath come no yoke,
and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their calves home from them: And take the ark of
the Lord, and lay it upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof, and send it away that it may go. And see,
if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this

28

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

great evil: but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a
chance that happened to us (1Sa 6:2-11).
And what happened? How striking the sequel! “And the kine took the straight way to the way
of Bethshemesh, and went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the
right hand or to the left” (1Sa 6:12).
Equally striking is the case of Elijah: “And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying,
Get thee hence, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. And it shall be,
that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there” (1Ki
17:2-4). The natural instinct of these birds of prey was held in subjection and, instead of consuming the food themselves, they carried it to Jehovah’s servant in his solitary retreat.
Is further proof required? Then it is ready at hand. God makes a dumb ass to rebuke the
prophet’s madness. He sends forth two she-bears from the woods to devour forty and two of
Elisha’s tormentors. In fulfillment of His word, He causes the dogs to lick up the blood of the
wicked Jezebel. He seals the mouths of Babylon’s lions when Daniel is cast into the den,
though, later, He causes them to devour the prophet’s accusers. He prepares a great fish to
swallow the disobedient Jonah and then, when His ordained hour struck, compelled it to vomit
him forth on dry land. At His biding a fish carries a coin to Peter for tribute money, and in order to fulfill His word He makes the cock crow twice after Peter’s denial. Thus we see that God
reigns over irrational creatures: beasts of the field, birds of the air, fishes of the sea, all perform His sovereign bidding.

D. God’s Rule over the Children of Men
We fully appreciate the fact that this is the most difficult part of our subject, and, accordingly, it will be dealt with at greater length in the pages that follow; but at present we consider
the fact of God’s government over men in general, before we attempt to deal with the problem
in detail.
Two alternatives confront us, and between them we are obliged to choose: either God governs, or He is governed; either God rules, or He is ruled; either God has His way, or men have
theirs.
And is our choice between these alternatives hard to make? Shall we say that in man we behold a creature so unruly that he is beyond God’s control? Shall we say that sin has alienated
the sinner so far from the thrice Holy One that he is outside the pale of His jurisdiction? Or,
shall we say that man has been endowed with moral responsibility, and therefore God must
leave him entirely free, at least during the period of his probation? 4 Does it necessarily follow
because the natural man is an outlaw against heaven, a rebel against the divine government,
that God is unable to fulfill His purpose through him? We mean not merely that He may overrule the effects of the actions of evil-doers, nor that He will yet bring the wicked to stand before His judgment-bar 5 so that sentence of punishment may be passed upon them—
multitudes of non-Christians believe these things—but we mean that every action of the most
lawless of His subjects is entirely beneath His control, yea that the actor is, though unknown to
4

probation – time of physical life on earth for which each person will be judged, whether or not he trusted in
Jesus Christ.
5
judgment-bar – court of justice.

3. The Sovereignty of God in Administration

29

himself, carrying out the secret decrees of the Most High. Was it not thus with Judas? and is it
possible to select a more extreme case? If then the arch-rebel was performing the counsel of
God, is it any greater tax upon our faith to believe the same of all rebels?
Our present object is no philosophic inquiry nor metaphysical casuistry, 6 but to ascertain
the teaching of Scripture upon this profound theme. To the Law and the Testimony, for there
only can we learn of the divine government—its character, its design, its modus operandi, 7 its
scope. What then has it pleased God to reveal to us in His blessed Word concerning His rule
over the works of His hands, and particularly, over the one who originally was made in His
own image and likeness?
“In him we live, and move, and have our being” (Act 17:28). What a sweeping assertion is
this! These words, be it noted, were addressed, not to one of the churches of God, not to a
company of saints who had reached an exalted plane of spirituality, but to a heathen audience,
to those who worshipped “the unknown God” and who “mocked” when they heard of the resurrection of the dead. And yet, to the Athenian philosophers, to the Epicureans and Stoics, the
apostle Paul did not hesitate to affirm that they lived and moved and had their being in God—
which signified not only that they owed their existence and preservation to the One Who made
the world and all things therein, but also that their very actions were encompassed, and therefore controlled, by the Lord of heaven and earth. Compare Daniel 5:23, last clause!
“The disposings [margin] of the heart, and the answer of the tongue is from the LORD” (Pro
16:1). Mark that the above declaration is of general application—it is of “man,” not simply of
believers, that this is predicated. 8 “A man’s heart deviseth his way: but the LORD directeth his
steps” (Pro 16:9). If the Lord directs the steps of a man, is it not proof that he is being controlled or governed by God? Again, “There are many devices in a man’s heart; nevertheless the
counsel of the LORD, that shall stand” (Pro 19:21). Can this mean anything less than that, no
matter what man may desire and plan, it is the will of his Maker that is executed? As an illustration, take the “Rich Fool.” The “devices” of his heart are made known to us—“And he
thought within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my
fruits? And he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns, and build greater; and there I will
bestow all my fruits and my goods. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid
up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.” Such were the “devices” of his
heart, nevertheless it was “the counsel of the Lord” that stood. The “I will’s” of the rich man
came to nought, for “God said unto him, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of
thee” (Luk 12:17-20).
“The king’s heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers of water: he turneth it whithersoever he will ” (Pro 21:1). What could be more explicit? Out of the heart are “the issues of life”
(Pro 4:23), for as a man “thinketh in his heart, so is he” (Pro 23:7). If then the heart is in the
hand of the Lord, and if He “turneth it whithersoever he will,” then is it not clear that men—
yea, governors and rulers, and so all men—are completely beneath the governmental control
of the Almighty!
No limitations must be placed upon the above declarations. To insist that some men, at
least, do thwart God’s will and overturn His counsels, is to repudiate other Scriptures equally
6

metaphysical casuistry – highly abstract reasoning to derive right and wrong.
modus operandi – mode of operation; normal procedure.
8
predicated – asserted; declared.
7

30

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

explicit. Weigh well the following: “But he is one mind, and who can turn him? and what his
soul desireth, even that he doeth” (Job 23:13). “The counsel of the LORD standeth for ever, the
thoughts of his heart to all generations” (Psa 33:11). “There is no wisdom nor understanding
nor counsel against the LORD” (Pro 21:30). “For the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who
shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?” (Isa 14:27). “Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is none else! I am God, and there is
none like me, Declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that
are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure” (Isa 46:9-10).
There is no ambiguity in these passages. They affirm in the most unequivocal and unqualified
terms that it is impossible to bring to naught the purpose of Jehovah.
We read the Scriptures in vain if we fail to discover that the actions of men, evil men as well
as good, are governed by the Lord God. Nimrod and his fellows determined to erect the tower
of Babel, but ere their task was accomplished God frustrated their plans. God called Abraham
“alone” (Isa 51:2), but his kinsfolk accompanied him as he left Ur of the Chaldees. Was then
the will of the Lord defeated? Nay, verily. Mark the sequel. Terah died before Canaan was
reached (Gen 11:32), and though Lot accompanied his uncle into the land of promise, he soon
separated from him and settled down in Sodom. Jacob was the child to whom the inheritance
was promised, and though Isaac sought to reverse Jehovah’s decree and bestow the blessing
upon Esau, his efforts came to naught. Esau again swore vengeance upon Jacob, but when
next they met they wept for joy instead of fighting in hate. The brethren of Joseph determined
his destruction, but their evil counsels were overthrown. Pharaoh refused to let Israel carry
out the instructions of Jehovah, and perished in the Red Sea for his pains. Balak hired Balaam
to curse the Israelites, but God compelled him to bless them. Haman erected a gallows for
Mordecai, but was hanged upon it himself. Jonah resisted the revealed will of God, but what
became of his efforts?
Ah, the heathen may “rage” and the people imagine a “vain thing”; the kings of earth may
“set themselves,” and the rulers take counsel together against the Lord and against His Christ,
saying, “Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us” (Psa 2:1-3). But
is the great God perturbed or disturbed by the rebellion of his puny creatures? No, indeed: “He
that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the LORD shall have them in derision” (v. 4). He is infinitely exalted above all; the greatest confederacies are earth’s pawns; and their most extensive
and vigorous preparations to defeat His purpose are, in His sight, altogether purile. He looks
upon their puny efforts, not only without any alarm, but He “laughs” at their folly; He treats
their impotency with “derision.” He knows that He can crush them like moths when He pleases, or consume them in a moment with the breath of His mouth. Ah, it is but “a vain thing”
for the potsherds 9 of the earth to strive with the glorious Majesty of heaven. Such is our God;
worship ye Him!
Mark, too, the sovereignty that God displayed in His dealings with men. Moses, who was
slow of speech—and not Aaron, his elder brother, who was not slow of speech—was the one
chosen to be His ambassador in demanding from Egypt’s monarch the release of His oppressed
people. Moses again, though greatly beloved, utters one hasty word and was excluded from Canaan; whereas Elijah passionately murmurs and suffers but a mild rebuke, and was afterwards
taken to heaven without seeing death! Uzzah merely touched the ark and was instantly slain,
9

potsherds – fragments of broken pottery; therefore, things of little worth.

3. The Sovereignty of God in Administration

31

whereas the Philistines carried it off in insulting triumph and suffered no immediate harm.
Displays of grace that would have brought a doomed Sodom to repentance, failed to move an
highly privileged Capernaum. Mighty works that would have subdued Tyre and Sidon, left the
upbraided cities of Galilee under the curse of a rejected gospel. If they would have prevailed over
the former, why were they not wrought there? If they proved ineffectual to deliver the latter,
then why perform them? What exhibitions are these of the sovereign will of the Most High!

E. God’s Rule over Angels
The angels are God’s servants, His messengers, His chariots. They ever hearken to the word
of His mouth and do His commands. “And God sent an angel unto Jerusalem to destroy it: and
as he was destroying, the LORD beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the angel
that destroyed. It is enough, stay now thine hand...And the LORD commanded the angel; and
he put his sword again into the sheath thereof” (1Ch 21:15, 27). Many other Scriptures might
be cited to show that the angels are in subjection to the will of their Creator and perform his
bidding. “And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that the Lord
hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of Herod” (Act 12:11). “And the
Lord God of the holy prophets sent his angel to shew unto his servants the things which must
shortly be done” (Rev 22:6). So it will be when our Lord returns: “The Son of man shall send
forth his angels and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them
which do iniquity” (Mat 13:41). Again, we read, “He shall send his angels with a great sound of
a trumpet, and they shall gather together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other” (Mat 24:31).
The same is true of evil spirits: they, too, fulfill God’s sovereign decrees. An evil spirit is sent
by God to stir up rebellion in the camp of Abimelech: “Then God sent an evil spirit between
Abimelech and the men of Shechem,” which aided him in the killing of his brethren (Jdg
9:23). Another evil spirit He sent to be a lying spirit in the mouth of Ahab’s prophets: “Now
therefore, behold, the LORD hath put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and
the LORD hath spoken evil concerning thee” (1Ki 22:23). And yet another was sent by the Lord
to trouble Saul: “But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from the
LORD troubled him” (1Sa 16:14). So, too, in the New Testament: a whole legion of the demons
go not out of their victim until the Lord gave them permission to enter the herd of swine.
It is clear from Scripture, then, that the angels, good and evil, are under God’s control, and
willingly or unwillingly carry out God’s purpose. Yea, Satan himself is absolutely subject to
God’s control. When arraigned in Eden, he listened to the awful sentence but answered not a
word. He was unable to touch Job until God granted him leave (Job 1:12). So, too, he had to
gain our Lord’s consent before he could “sift” Peter (Luk 22:31). When Christ commanded
him to depart—“Get thee hence, Satan”—we read, “Then the devil leaveth him” (Mat 4:11).
And, in the end, he will be cast into the Lake of Fire, which has been prepared for him and his
angels (Rev 20:10).
“The Lord God omnipotent reigneth” (Rev 19:6). His government is exercised over inanimate matter, over the brute beasts, over the children of men, over angels good and evil, and
over Satan himself. No revolving world, no shining of the star, no storm, no creature moves,
no actions of men, no errands of angels, no deeds of devil—nothing in all the vast universe can
come to pass otherwise than God has eternally purposed. Here is a foundation of faith. Here is

32

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

a resting place for the intellect. Here is an anchor for the soul, both sure and steadfast. It is
not blind fate, unbridled evil, man or devil—but the Lord Almighty Who is ruling the world,
ruling it according to His own good pleasure and for His own eternal glory. 10 
Ten thousand ages ere the skies;
Were into motion brought;
All the long years and worlds to come,
Stood present to His thought:
There’s not a sparrow nor a worm,
But’s found in His decrees,
He raises monarchs to their thrones
And sings as He may please.

10

Questions for study and discussion appear at the end of chapter 4.

4
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD
IN SALVATION
“O the depths of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out.”—Romans 11:33

A. Salvation Is of the Lord
“Salvation is of the LORD” (Jon 2:9); but the Lord does not save all. Why not? He does save
some; then if He saves some, why not others? Is it because they are too sinful and depraved?
No, for the apostle wrote, “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief ” (1Ti 1:15). Therefore, if God
saved the “chief ” of sinners, none are excluded because of their depravity. Why then does not
God save all? Is it because some are too stony-hearted to be won? No, because it is written that
God will “take the stony heart out of their flesh, 1 and will give them an heart of flesh” (Eze
11:19). Then is it because some are so stubborn, so intractable, so defiant that God is unable to
woo them to Himself ? Before we answer this question, let us ask another: let us appeal to the
experience of the Christian reader.
Friend, was there not a time when you walked in the counsel of the ungodly, stood in the
way of sinners, sat in the seat of the scorners, and with them said, “We will not have this man
to reign over us” (Luk 19:14)? Was there not a time when you “would not come to Christ that
you might have life” (Joh 5:40)? Yea, was there not a time when you mingled your voice with
those who said unto God, “Depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. What
is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we pray unto
him?” (Job 21:14-15)? With shamed face you have to acknowledge there was! But how is it that
all is now changed? What was it that brought you from haughty self-sufficiency to a humble
suppliant; from one that was at enmity with God to one that is at peace with Him; from lawlessness to subjection; from hate to love? And as one “born of the Spirit” you will readily reply,
“By the grace of God I am what I am” (1Co 15:10). Then do you not see that it is due to no lack
of power in God, nor to His refusal to coerce man, that other rebels are not saved too? If God
was able to subdue your will and win your heart, and that without interfering with your moral
1

out of their flesh – Flesh in Scripture sometimes speaks an unrenewed, carnal, sinful state (Rom 7:18),
sometimes for the body (Psa 38:3), sometimes for the whole man (Luk 3:6; Rom 3:20)—and thus in this
place speaks the persons and whole man. “An heart of flesh”: not like the old, hard and stony, but counsellable, tractable, that will hear, consider, obey, do commanded good, and forbear forbidden evils, submit
to my law, and reform on admonitions.—Matthew Poole (1624-1679)

34

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

responsibility, then is He not able to do the same for others? Assuredly He is. Then how inconsistent, how illogical, how foolish of you, in seeking to account for the present course of the
wicked and their ultimate fate, to argue that God is unable to save them, that they will not let
Him. Do you say, “But the time came when I was willing, willing to receive Christ as my Saviour”? True, but it was the Lord who made you willing (Psa 110:3; Phi 2:13); why then does He
not make all sinners willing? Why, but for the fact that He is Sovereign and does as He pleases!
But to return to our opening inquiry.
Why is it that all are not saved, particularly all who hear the gospel? Do you still answer,
Because the majority refuse to believe? Well, that is true, but it is only a part of the truth. It is
the truth from the human side. But there is a divine side too, and this side of the truth needs
to be stressed or God will be robbed of His glory. The unsaved are lost because they refuse to
believe; the others are saved because they believe. But why do these others believe? What is it
that causes them to put their trust in Christ? Is it because they are more intelligent than their
fellows, and quicker to discern their need of salvation? Perish the thought—“Who maketh thee
to differ from another? And what hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received it?” (1Co 4:7). It is God Himself Who
maketh the difference between the elect and the non-elect, for of His own it is written, “And
we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know
him that is true” (1Jo 5:20).
Faith is God’s gift, and “all men have not faith” (2Th 3:2); therefore, we see that God does
not bestow this gift upon all. Upon whom then does He bestow this saving favor? And we answer, upon His own elect—“As many as were ordained to eternal life believed” (Act 13:48).
Hence it is that we read of “the faith of God’s elect” (Ti 1:1). But is God partial in the distribution of His favors? Has He not the right to be? Are there still some who murmur against the
Goodman of the house? Then His own words are sufficient reply—“Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with mine own?” (Mat 20:15). God is sovereign in the bestowment of His gifts, both
in the natural and in the spiritual realms. So much then for a general statement, and now to
particularize.

B. The Eternal Purpose of the Father in Election
1. Romans 9:21-23
“Hath not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor? What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, endured with much longsuffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: And that he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had afore prepared unto glory?”
Perhaps the one Scripture that most emphatically of all asserts the absolute sovereignty of
God in connection with His determining the destiny of His creatures, is the ninth of Romans.
We shall not attempt to review here the entire chapter, but will confine ourselves to verses 2123. These verses represent fallen mankind as inert and impotent as a lump of lifeless clay. This
Scripture evidences that there is “no difference,” in themselves, between the elect and the
non-elect; they are clay of “the same lump”—which agrees with Ephesians 2:3, where we are
told that all are by nature “children of wrath.” It teaches us that the ultimate destiny of every