PURITAN GOLD -- The Sovereignty of God by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 11
Introduction

---

The Sovereignty of God. By Arthur W. Pink.

Chapter 1. Introduction.

Introduction

9

sist upon them. And conditions will not improve; instead, the more sure Word of Prophecy
makes known to us that they will grow worse and worse. Nor do we expect to be able to stem
the tide—it has already risen much too high for that. All we can now hope to do is warn our
fellow-saints against the spirit of the age, and thus seek to counteract its baneful 3 influence
upon them.

B. What Saith the Scriptures?
Who is regulating affairs on this earth today: God or the devil? What saith the Scriptures? If
we believe their plain and positive declarations, no room is left for uncertainty. They affirm,
again and again, that God is on the throne of the universe; that the scepter is in His hands;
that He is directing “all things after the counsel of his own will” (Eph 1:11). They affirm, not
only that God created all things, but also that God is ruling and reigning over all the works of
His hands. They affirm that God is the “Almighty,” that His will is irreversible, that He is absolute sovereign in every realm of all His vast dominions. And surely it must be so. Only two alternatives are possible: God must either rule, or be ruled; sway, or be swayed; accomplish His
own will, or be thwarted by His creatures. Accepting the fact that He is the “Most High,” the
only Potentate and King of kings, vested with perfect wisdom and illimitable power, and the
conclusion is irresistible that He must be God in fact as well as in name.
It is in view of what we have briefly referred to above, that we say present-day conditions
call loudly for a new examination and new presentation of God’s omnipotency, God’s sufficiency, and God’s sovereignty. From every pulpit in the land it needs to be thundered forth that
God still lives, that God still observes, that God still reigns. Faith is now in the crucible, it is
being tested by fire, and there is no fixed and sufficient resting-place for the heart and mind
but in the throne of God. What is needed now, as never before, is a full, positive, constructive
setting forth of the Godhood of God. Drastic diseases call for drastic remedies. People are wea4
ry of platitudes and mere generalizations—the call is for something definite and specific.
Soothing-syrup may serve for peevish children, but an iron tonic is better suited for adults,
and we know of nothing that is more calculated to infuse spiritual vigor into our frames than a
scriptural apprehension of the full character of God. It is written, “The people that do know
their God shall be strong and do exploits” (Dan 11:32).
Without a doubt a world-crisis is at hand and everywhere men are alarmed. But God is not!
He is never taken by surprise. It is no unexpected emergency that now confronts Him, for He
is the One who “worketh all things after the counsel of his own will” (Eph 1:11). Hence,
though the world is panic-stricken, the word to the believer is: “Fear not!” “All things” are
subject to His immediate control; “all things” are moving in accord with His eternal purpose;
and therefore “all things” are working “together for good to them that love God, to them who
are the called according to his purpose” (Rom 8:28). It must be so, for “of him, and through
him, and to him are all things” (Rom 11:36). Yet how little is this realized today, even by the
people of God! Many suppose that He is little more than a far-distant spectator, taking no immediate hand in the affairs of earth. It is true that man is endowed with power, but God is allpowerful. It is true that, speaking generally, the material world is regulated by law, but behind
that law is the Law-Giver and Law-Administrator. Man is but the creature; God is the Crea3
4

baneful – exceedingly harmful.
platitudes – flat, dull, or trite remarks, uttered as if they were fresh and profound.

10

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

tor—and endless ages before man first saw the light, “the mighty God” (Isa 9:6) existed and,
ere the world was founded, made His plans. Being infinite in power and man only finite, His
purpose and plan cannot be withstood or thwarted by the creatures of His own hands.
We readily acknowledge that life is a profound problem and that we are surrounded by mystery on every side; but we are not like the beasts of the field: ignorant of their origin, and unconscious of what is before them. No: “We have also a more sure word of prophecy,” of which
it is said ye do well that ye “take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts” (2Pe 1:19). And it is to this word of prophecy we
indeed do well to “take heed,” to that Word which had not its origin in the mind of man but in
the mind of God, “For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of
God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost” (2Pe 1:21). We say again, it is to this “Word”
we do well to take heed.
1. Our method
As we turn to this Word and are instructed thereat, we discover a fundamental principle
that must be applied to every problem: Instead of beginning with man and his world and working back to God, we must begin with God and work down to man—“In the beginning God…!”
Apply this principle to the present situation. Begin with the world as it is today and try and
work back to God, and everything will seem to show that God has no connection with the
world at all. But begin with God and work down to the world, and light, much light, is cast on
the problem. Because God is holy His anger burns against sin; because God is righteous His
judgments fall upon those who rebel against Him; because God is faithful the solemn threatenings of His Word are fulfilled; because God is omnipotent none can successfully resist Him,
still less overthrow His counsel; and because God is omniscient, no problem can master Him
and no difficulty baffle His wisdom. It is just because God is who He is and what He is that we
are now beholding on earth what we do: the beginning of His outpoured judgments. In view of
5
His inflexible justice and immaculate holiness, we could not expect anything other than what
is now spread before our eyes.
2. Faith required
But let it be said very emphatically that the heart can only rest upon and enjoy the blessed
truth of the absolute sovereignty of God as faith is in exercise. Faith is ever occupied with God.
That is the character of it; that is what differentiates it from intellectual theology. Faith endures “as seeing him who is invisible” (Heb 11:27); endures the disappointments, the hardships, and the heartaches of life by recognizing that all comes from the hand of Him Who is
too wise to err and too loving to be unkind. But so long as we are occupied with any other object than God Himself there will be neither rest for the heart nor peace for the mind. But when
we receive all that enters our lives as from His hand, then, no matter what may be our circumstances or surroundings—whether in a hovel, a prison, a dungeon, or a martyr’s stake—we
shall be enabled to say, “The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places” (Psa 16:6). But that is
the language of faith, not of sight or of sense.
But if instead of bowing to the testimony of Holy Writ, if instead of walking by faith, we follow the evidence of our eyes, and reason therefrom, we shall fall into a quagmire of virtual
atheism. Or, if we are regulated by the opinions and views of others, peace will be at an end.
5

immaculate – spotless; undefiled; in the case of Christ, free from original sin.

Introduction

11

Granted that there is much in this world of sin and suffering that appalls and saddens us;
granted that there is much in the providential dealings of God that startle and stagger us—
that is no reason why we should unite with the unbelieving worldling who says, “If I were God,
I would not allow this or tolerate that,” etc. Better far, in the presence of bewildering mystery,
to say with one of old, “I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it” (Psa 39:9).
Scripture tells us that God’s judgments are “unsearchable,” and His ways “past finding out”
(Rom 11:33). It must be so if faith is to be tested, confidence in His wisdom and righteousness
strengthened, and submission to His holy will fostered.
Here is the fundamental difference between the man of faith and the man of unbelief. The
unbeliever is “of the world,” judges everything by worldly standards, views life from the standpoint of time and sense, and weighs everything in the balances of his own carnal 6 making. But
the man of faith brings in God, looks at everything from His standpoint, estimates values by
spiritual standards, and views life in the light of eternity. Doing this, he receives whatever
comes as from the hand of God. Doing this, his heart is calm in the midst of the storm. Doing
this, he “rejoices in hope of the glory of God” (Rom 5:2).

C. Summary
In these opening paragraphs, we have indicated the lines of thought followed out in this
book. Our first postulate 7 is that because God is God, He does as He pleases, only as He pleases,
always as He pleases; that His great concern 8 is the accomplishment of His own pleasure and
the promotion of His own glory; that He is the supreme Being, and therefore sovereign 9 of the
universe. Starting with this postulate we have contemplated:
• the exercise of God’s sovereignty,
- first in Creation,
- second in governmental administration over the works of His hands,
- third in the salvation of His own elect,
10
- fourth in the reprobation of the wicked, and
- fifth in operation upon and within men.
• Next we have viewed the sovereignty of God as it relates to the human will in particular and
human responsibility in general, and have sought to show what is the only becoming attitude for the creature to take in view of the majesty of the Creator.
• A separate chapter has been set apart for a consideration of some of the difficulties that are
involved, and to answering the questions that are likely to be raised in the minds of our
readers;
• while one chapter has been devoted to a more careful yet brief examination of God’s sovereignty in relation to prayer.
• Finally, we have sought to show that the sovereignty of God is a truth revealed to us in
Scripture for the comfort of our hearts, the strengthening of our souls, and the blessing
6

carnal – fleshly; sensual, as opposed to spiritual.
postulate – basic principle from which other things are discussed.
8
concern – something to which one is devoted and interested.
9
sovereign – monarch or king who rules with absolute authority.
10
reprobation – judgment and condemnation.
7

12

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

of our lives. A due apprehension of God’s sovereignty promotes the spirit of worship, provides an incentive to practical godliness, and inspires zeal in service. It is deeply humbling
to the human heart, but in proportion to the degree that it brings man into the dust before his Maker, to that extent is God glorified.
We are well aware that what we have written is in open opposition to much of the teaching
that is current both in religious literature and in the representative pulpits of the land. We
freely grant that the postulate of God’s sovereignty with all its corollaries 11 is at direct variance
with the opinions and thoughts of the natural man; but the truth is, we are quite unable to
think upon these matters: we are incompetent for forming a proper estimate of God’s character and ways. It is because of this that God has given us a revelation of His mind, and in that
revelation He plainly declares, “my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, saith the LORD. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher
than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts” (Isa 55:8-9). In view of this scripture, it
is only to be expected that much of the contents of the Bible conflicts with the sentiments of
the carnal mind, which is enmity against God. Our appeal then is not to the popular beliefs of
the day, nor to the creeds of the churches, but to the Law and Testimony of Jehovah (Isa 8:20).
All that we ask for is an impartial and attentive examination of what we have written, and that
made prayerfully in the light of the lamp of truth. May the reader heed the divine admonition
to “prove all things; hold fast that which is good” (1Th 5:21). 

11

corollaries – logical consequences deduced from a fact or assumption.

1
GOD’S SOVEREIGNTY DEFINED
“Thine, O LORD, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory,
and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in the heaven
and in the earth is thine; thine is the kingdom, O LORD,
and thou art exalted as head above all.”
—1 Chronicles 29:11

A. Definition
The sovereignty of God is an expression that once was generally understood. It was a phrase
commonly used in religious literature; it was a theme frequently expounded in the pulpit. It
was a truth which brought comfort to many hearts, and gave virility and stability to Christian
character. But today, to make mention of God’s sovereignty is, in many quarters, to speak in
an unknown tongue. Were we to announce from the average pulpit that the subject of our discourse would be the sovereignty of God, it would sound very much as though we had borrowed
a phrase from one of the dead languages. Alas! that it should be so. Alas! that the doctrine
1
which is the key to history, the interpreter of providence, the warp and woof of Scripture, and
the foundation of Christian theology should be so sadly neglected and so little understood.
The “sovereignty of God”—what do we mean by this expression? We mean the supremacy of
God, the kingship of God, the Godhood of God. To say that God is sovereign is to declare that
God is God. To say that God is sovereign is to declare that He is the Most High, doing according to His will in the army of heaven and among the inhabitants of the earth, so that none can
stay His hand or say unto Him, “What doest thou?” (Dan 4:35). To say that God is sovereign is
to declare that He is the Almighty, the possessor of all power in heaven and earth, so that none
can defeat His counsels, thwart His purpose, or resist His will (Psa 115:3). To say that God is
sovereign is to declare that He is “the governor among the nations” (Psa 22:28), setting up
kingdoms, overthrowing empires, and determining the course of dynasties as pleaseth Him
best. To say that God is sovereign is to declare that He is the “only Potentate, the King of
kings, and Lord of lords” (1Ti 6:15). Such is the God of the Bible.

B. Difference in Modern Christianity
How different is the God of the Bible from the god of modern Christendom! The conception
of deity that prevails most widely today, even among those who profess to give heed to the
Scriptures, is a miserable caricature, a blasphemous travesty of the truth. The god of the twentieth century is a helpless, effeminate being who commands the respect of no really thoughtful
1

warp and woof – underlying structure on which something is built.

14

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

man. The god of the popular mind is the creation of maudlin 2 sentimentality. The god of many
a present-day pulpit is an object of pity rather than of awe-inspiring reverence. To say that God
the Father has purposed the salvation of all mankind, that God the Son died with the express
intention of saving the whole human race, and that God the Holy Spirit is now seeking to win
the world to Christ—when, as a matter of common observation, it is apparent that the great
majority of our fellowmen are dying in sin, and passing into a hopeless eternity—is to say that
God the Father is disappointed, that God the Son is dissatisfied, and that God the Holy Spirit
is defeated. We have stated the issue baldly, 3 but there is no escaping the conclusion. To argue
that God is “trying His best” to save all mankind, but that the majority of men will not let Him
save them, is to insist that the will of the Creator is impotent, and that the will of the creature
is omnipotent. To throw the blame, as many do, upon the devil, does not remove the difficulty,
for if Satan is defeating the purpose of God, then, Satan is almighty and God is no longer the
Supreme Being.
To declare that the Creator’s original plan has been frustrated by sin, is to dethrone God. To
suggest that God was taken by surprise in Eden and that He is now attempting to remedy an
unforeseen calamity, is to degrade the Most High to the level of a finite, erring mortal. To argue that man is a free moral agent and the determiner of his own destiny, and that therefore
he has the power to checkmate his Maker, is to strip God of the attribute of omnipotence. To
say that the creature has burst the bounds assigned by his Creator, and that God is now practically a helpless spectator before the sin and suffering entailed by Adam’s fall, is to repudiate
the express declaration of Holy Writ, namely, “Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the
remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain” (Psa 76:10). In a word, to deny the sovereignty of God
is to enter upon a path which, if followed to its logical terminus, is to arrive at blank atheism.
The sovereignty of the God of Scripture is absolute, irresistible, and infinite. When we say
that God is sovereign, we affirm His right to govern the universe that He has made for His own
glory, just as He pleases. We affirm that His right is the right of the potter over the clay (Isa
64:8), i.e., that He may mold that clay into whatsoever form He chooses, fashioning out of the
same lump one vessel unto honor and another unto dishonor. We affirm that He is under no
rule or law outside of His own will and nature, that God is a law unto Himself, and that He is
under no obligation to give an account of His matters to any.

C. Sovereignty in God’s Whole Being
Sovereignty characterizes the whole being of God. He is sovereign in all His attributes.
1. Power
He is sovereign in the exercise of His power. His power is exercised as He wills, when He
wills, where He wills. This fact is evidenced on every page of Scripture. For a long season that
power appears to be dormant, and then it is put forth in irresistible might. Pharaoh dared to
hinder Israel from going forth to worship Jehovah in the wilderness—what happened? God
exercised His power, His people were delivered, and their cruel task-masters slain. But a little
later, the Amalekites dared to attack these same Israelites in the wilderness, and what happened? Did God put forth His power on this occasion and display His hand as He did at the Red
2
3

maudlin – weakly emotional.
baldly – performed without adornment; plainly.

1. God’s Sovereignty Defined

15

Sea? Were these enemies of His people promptly overthrown and destroyed? No, on the contrary, the Lord swore that He would “have war with Amalek from generation to generation”
(Exo 17:16). Again, when Israel entered the land of Canaan, God’s power was signally displayed. The city of Jericho barred their progress—what happened? Israel did not draw a bow
nor strike a blow: the Lord stretched forth His hand and the walls fell down flat. But the miracle was never repeated! No other city fell after this manner; every other city had to be captured
by the sword!
Many other instances might be adduced 4 illustrating the sovereign exercise of God’s power.
Take one other example. God put forth His power and David was delivered from Goliath, the
giant; the mouths of the lions were closed and Daniel escaped unhurt; the three Hebrew children were cast into the burning fiery furnace and came forth unharmed and unscorched.
But God’s power did not always interpose for the deliverance of His people, for we read:
“And others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword;
they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented” (Heb
11:36-37). But why? Why were not these men of faith delivered like the others? Or, why were
not the others suffered to be killed like these? Why should God’s power interpose and rescue
some and not the others? Why allow Stephen to be stoned to death, and then deliver Peter
from prison?
God is sovereign in the delegation of His power to others. Why did God endow Methuselah
with a vitality which enabled him to outlive all his contemporaries? Why did God impart to
Samson a physical strength that no other human has ever possessed? Again, it is written, “But
thou shalt remember the LORD thy God: for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth” (Deu
8:18), but God does not bestow this power on all alike. Why not? Why has He given such power
5
to men like Morgan, Carnegie, Rockefeller? The answer to all of these questions is, Because
God is sovereign and, being sovereign, He does as He pleases.
2. Mercy
God is sovereign in the exercise of His mercy. Necessarily so, for mercy is directed by the
will of Him that showeth mercy. Mercy is not a right to which man is entitled. Mercy is that
adorable attribute of God by which He pities and relieves the wretched. But under the righteous government of God, no one is wretched who does not deserve to be so. 6 The objects of
mercy, then, are those who are miserable, and all misery is the result of sin, hence the misera-

4

adduced – brought forward for consideration.
J. P. Morgan (1837-1913) – American financier, banker, and philanthropist who
created General Electric and the United States Steel Corporation.
Andrew Carnegie (1835-1919) – Scottish American industrialist and philanthropist, led the enormous expansion of the American steel industry in the late 19th century.
John Davison Rockefeller Sr. (1839-1937) – American business magnate and philanthropist, co-founder of
the Standard Oil Company.
6
The author is commenting from the perspective that all men have totally depraved natures as a result of the
Fall, and therefore all men apart from Christ deserve hell. Yet God sometimes allows miserable circumstances in the lives of believers not because of sin, but in order that He might use trials to grow them in
faith (Jam 1:2-4).
5

16

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

ble are deserving of punishment, not mercy. To speak of deserving mercy is a contradiction of
terms!
God bestows His mercies on whom He pleases and withholds them as seemeth good unto
Himself. A remarkable illustration of this fact is seen in the manner that God responded to the
prayers of two men offered under very similar circumstances. Sentence of death was passed
upon Moses for one act of disobedience, and he besought the Lord for a reprieve. But was his
desire gratified? No; he told Israel, “The LORD was wroth with me for your sakes, and would
not hear me: and the LORD said unto me, Let it suffice thee” (Deu 3:26). Now mark the second
case: “In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz
came to him, and said unto him, Thus saith the LORD, Set thine house in order; for thou shalt
die, and not live. Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the LORD, saying, I beseech thee, O LORD, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore. And it came to
pass, afore Isaiah was gone out into the middle court, that the word of the LORD came to him,
saying, Turn again, and tell Hezekiah the captain of my people, Thus saith the LORD, the God
of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will heal thee: on
the third day thou shalt go unto the house of the LORD. And I will add unto thy days fifteen
years” (2Ki 20:1-6). Both of these men had the sentence of death in themselves, and both
prayed earnestly unto the Lord for a reprieve: the one wrote: “The Lord would not hear me,”
and died; but to the other it was said, “I have heard thy prayer,” and his life was spared. What
an illustration and exemplification of the truth expressed in Romans 9:15, “For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion”!
The sovereign exercise of God’s mercy (pity shown to the wretched) was displayed when Jehovah became flesh and tabernacled among men. Take one illustration. During one of the
feasts of the Jews, the Lord Jesus went up to Jerusalem. He came to the pool of Bethesda
where lay “a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the moving
of the water.” Among this “great multitude” there was “a certain man…which had an infirmity
thirty and eight years.” What happened? “When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been
now a long time in that case, he saith unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? The impotent man
answered him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool: but
when I am coming, another steppeth down before me. Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy
bed, and walk. And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked”
(Joh 5:3-9). Why was this one man singled out from all the others? We are not told that he
cried “Lord, have mercy on me.” There is not a word in the narrative which intimates that this
man possessed any qualifications which entitled him to receive special favor. Here then was a
case of the sovereign exercise of divine mercy, for it was just as easy for Christ to heal the
whole of that “great multitude” as this one “certain man.” But He did not. He put forth His
power and relieved the wretchedness of this one particular sufferer, and for some reason
known only to Himself, He declined to do the same for the others. Again, we say, what an illustration and exemplification of Romans 9:15, “I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion.”

1. God’s Sovereignty Defined

17

3. Love
God is sovereign in the exercise of His love. Ah! that is a hard saying, who then can receive
it? It is written, “A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from heaven” (Joh 3:27).
When we say that God is sovereign in the exercise of His love, we mean that He loves whom He
chooses. God does not love everybody; 7 if He did, He would love the devil. Why does not God
love the devil? Because there is nothing in him to love; because there is nothing in him to attract the heart of God. Nor is there anything to attract God’s love in any of the fallen sons of
Adam, for all of them are, by nature, “children of wrath” (Eph 2:3). If then there is nothing in
any member of the human race to attract God’s love, and if, notwithstanding, He does love
some, then it necessarily follows that the cause of His love must be found in Himself, which is
only another way of saying that the exercise of God’s love towards the fallen sons of men is according to His own good pleasure.
In the final analysis, the exercise of God’s love must he traced back to His sovereignty or,
otherwise, He would love by rule; and if He loved by rule, then is He under a law of love, and if
He is under a law of love then is He not supreme, but is Himself ruled by law. “But,” it may be
asked, “Surely you do not deny that God loves the entire human family?” We reply, it is written, “Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated” (Rom 9:13). If then God loved Jacob and hated
Esau, and that before they were born or had done either good or evil, then the reason for His
love was not in them, but in Himself.
That the exercise of God’s love is according to His own sovereign pleasure is also clear from
the language of Ephesians 1:3-5, where we read, “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Having predestinated 8 us unto the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his will.” It was “in love”
that God the Father predestined His chosen ones unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ
to Himself, “according”—according to what? According to some excellency He discovered in
them? No. What then? According to what He foresaw they would become? No; mark carefully
the inspired answer—“According to the good pleasure of his will.”
We are not unmindful of the fact that men have invented the distinction between God’s love
of complacency and His love of compassion, but this is an invention pure and simple. Scripture terms the latter God’s “pity” (see Mat 18:33), and “He is kind unto the unthankful and the
evil” (Luk 6:35)!
4. Grace
God is sovereign in the exercise of His grace. This of necessity, for grace is favor shown to
the undeserving, yea, to the hell-deserving. Grace is the antithesis of justice. Justice demands
the impartial enforcement of law. Justice requires that each shall receive his legitimate due,
neither more nor less. Justice bestows no favors and is no respecter of persons. Justice, as
such, shows no pity and knows no mercy. But after justice has been fully satisfied, grace flows
forth. Divine grace is not exercised at the expense of justice, but “grace reigns through righteousness” (Rom 5:21), and if grace “reigns,” then is grace sovereign.
7
8

John 3:16, “For God so loved the world…,” will be examined later.
predestinated – appointed beforehand by the eternal purpose of God.

18

T HE S OVEREIGNTY OF G OD

Grace has been defined as the unmerited favor of God; 9 and if unmerited, then none can
claim it as their inalienable right. If grace is unearned and undeserved, then none are entitled
to it. If grace is a gift, then none can demand it. Therefore, as salvation is by grace, the free gift
of God, then He bestows it on whom He pleases. Because salvation is by grace, the very chief of
sinners is not beyond the reach of divine mercy. Because salvation is by grace, boasting is excluded and God gets all the glory.
The sovereign exercise of grace is illustrated on nearly every page of Scripture. The Gentiles
are left to walk in their own ways while Israel becomes the covenant people of Jehovah. Ishmael the firstborn is cast out comparatively unblest, while Isaac the son of his parents’ old age
is made the child of promise. Esau the generous-hearted and forgiving-spirited is denied the
blessing, though he sought it carefully with tears, while the worm Jacob receives the inheritance and is fashioned into a vessel of honor. So in the New Testament: divine truth is hidden
from the wise and prudent, but is revealed to babes. The Pharisees and Sadducees are left to go
their own way, while publicans and harlots are drawn by the cords of love.
In a remarkable manner, divine grace was exercised at the time of the Saviour’s birth. The
incarnation of God’s Son was one of the greatest events in the history of the universe, and yet
its actual occurrence was not made known to all mankind; instead, it was specially revealed to
the Bethlehem shepherds and wise men of the East. And this was prophetic and indicative of
the entire course of this dispensation, 10 for even today Christ is not made known to all. It
would have been an easy matter for God to have sent a company of angels to every nation and
to have announced the birth of His Son. But He did not. God could have readily attracted the
attention of all mankind to the “star,” but He did not. Why? Because God is sovereign and dispenses His favors as He pleases. Note particularly the two classes to whom the birth of the Saviour was made known, namely, the most unlikely classes: illiterate shepherds and heathen
from a far country. No angel stood before the Sanhedrin and announced the advent of Israel's
Messiah! No “star” appeared unto the scribes and lawyers as they, in their pride and self-righteousness, searched the Scriptures! They searched diligently to find out where He should be
born, and yet it was not made known to them when He was actually come. What a display of
divine sovereignty: the illiterate shepherds singled out for peculiar honor, and the learned and
eminent passed by! And why was the birth of the Saviour revealed to these foreigners, and not
to those in whose midst He was born? See in this a wonderful foreshadowing of God’s dealings
with our race throughout the entire Christian dispensation—sovereign in the exercise of His
grace, bestowing His favors on whom He pleases, often on the most unlikely and unworthy. 11

9

An esteemed friend who kindly read through this book in its manuscript form, and to whom we are indebted for a number of excellent suggestions, has pointed out that grace is something more than “unmerited
favor.” To feed a tramp who calls on me is “unmerited favor,” but it is scarcely grace. But suppose that after robbing me I should feed this starving tramp—that would be grace. Grace, then, is favor shown where
there is positive demerit in the one receiving it.—A.W.P.
10
dispensation – age; period.
11
It has been pointed out to us that God’s sovereignty was signally displayed in His choice of the place where
His Son was born. Not to Greece or Italy did the Lord of Glory come, but to the insignificant land of Palestine! Not in Jerusalem—the royal city—was Immanuel born, but in Bethlehem, which was “little among
the thousands [of towns and villages] in Judah” (Mic 5:2)! And it was in despised Nazareth that He grew
up! Truly, God’s ways are not ours.—A.W.P.

1. God’s Sovereignty Defined

19

Questions for personal study and group discussion
The following questions are designed to reinforce understanding and application. There also is a separate study guide with complete questions covering all aspects of the text, which is available for correspondent, independent, or group study. Contact Mount Zion Bible Institute at the same address.

Introduction
1. If man is a “free agent,” who do most believe should rule their lives?
2. What are the only two possible alternatives regarding God’s reign.
3. What is the “first postulate” that serves as the basis for this book?
Chapter 1
4. Describe the meaning of “the sovereignty of God.”
5. How is God sovereign in exercising His power? Mercy? Love? Grace?

2
THE SOVEREIGNTY OF GOD
IN CREATION
“Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor and power:
for thou hast created all things, and for thy pleasure they
are and were created.”—Revelation 4:11
Having shown that sovereignty characterizes the whole being of God, let us now observe
how it marks all His ways and dealings.
In the great expanse of eternity that stretches behind Genesis 1:1, the universe was unborn
and creation existed only in the mind of the great Creator. In His sovereign majesty God dwelt
all alone. We refer to that far distant period before the heavens and the earth were created.
There were then no angels to hymn God’s praises, no creatures to occupy His notice, no rebels
to be brought into subjection. The great God was all alone amid the awful silence of His own
vast universe. But even at that time, if time it could be called, God was sovereign. He might
create or not create according to His own good pleasure. He might create this way or that way;
He might create one world or one million worlds, and who was there to resist His will? He
might call into existence a million different creatures and place them on absolute equality, endowing them with the same faculties and placing them in the same environment; or, He might
create a million creatures each differing from the others and possessing nothing in common
save their creaturehood—and who was there to challenge His right? If He so pleased, He
might call into existence a world so immense that its dimensions were utterly beyond finite
computation; and were He so disposed, He might create an organism so small that nothing
but the most powerful microscope could reveal its existence to human eyes. It was His sovereign right to create, on the one hand, the exalted seraphim to burn around His throne, and on
the other hand, the tiny insect that dies the same hour that it is born. If the mighty God chose
to have one vast gradation in His universe—from loftiest seraph to creeping reptile, from revolving worlds to floating atoms, from macrocosm to microcosm, instead of making everything uniform—who was there to question His sovereign pleasure?
Behold then the exercise of divine sovereignty long before man ever saw the light. With
whom took God counsel in the creation and disposition of His creatures? See the birds as they
fly through the air, the beasts as they roam the earth, the fishes as they swim in the sea, and
then ask, “Who was it that made them to differ?” Was it not their Creator, Who sovereignly
assigned their various locations and adaptations to them!
Turn your eye to the heavens and observe the mysteries of divine sovereignty that there
confront the thoughtful beholder. “There is one glory of the sun, and another glory of the