PURITAN GOLD -- Keeping the Heart by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 10
Keeping the Heart in Suffering and Approaching Death


Keeping the Heart. By John Flavel.

Chapter 8. Keeping the Heart in Suffering and Approaching Death.

customary sinning; a spot that is not the spot of God's children.
Hence the upright soul trembles; upon this it is ready to affirm, that
all its former humiliations for, and oppositions unto sin, were but
acts of hypocrisy. But stay, poor trembling heart.
Queries
Query 1. If this be so, how comes it to pass that Christ put such a
favourable construction upon the disciples sleeping the third time,
when he had as often reproved them for it? Mat. 26:40, 41. and how
is it that we find in scripture so many promises made to God's
people, not only upon their first sins, but upon their backslidings
also? Jer. 3:22. Hos. 14:4.
Query 2. Is not your repentance and care renewed as often as your
guilt is renewed? Yea, the oftener you sin, the more you are troubled;
it is not so in customary sinning, the rise whereof* Bernard
excellently discovers. 1. (Saith he) When a man accustomed to good,
sinneth grievously, it seems insupportable, yea, he seems to descend
alive into hell. 2. In process of time it seems not insupportable, but
heavy: and betwixt insupportable and heavy, there is no small
descent.
3. Next it becomes light, his conscience smites but faintly, and he
feels not the stripes of it. 4. Then there is not only a total
insensibleness of it, but that which was bitter and displeasing is now
become sweet and pleasing, in some degree. 5. Then it is turned into
custom, and not only pleases, but daily pleases. Lastly, Custom is
turned into nature; he cannot be pulled away from it, but defends
and pleads for it: This is customary sinning, this is the way of the
wicked; but the quite contrary is your condition.
Query 3. Are you sure, from scripture-grounds, that good men may
not relapse again and again into the same sin? It is true, as for gross
sins, they do not use to relapse into them: David committed adultery
no more: Paul persecuted the church no more: Peter denied Christ

no more: But I speak of ordinary infirmities. Job's friends were good
men, yet (saith he) chap. 19:3. "These ten times have ye reproached
me." So then, no such conclusions follow from this first ground of
doubting.
2. The second ground is the declining and withering of our affections
to spiritual things? O! (saith the upright soul) if ever I had been
planted a right seed, I should have been as a green olive tree in the
house of my God; but my branches wither, therefore my root is
naught. But stay,
Queries
Query 1. May you not be mistaken about the decay of grace, and
fading of your affections? What if they are not so quick and ravishing
as at first, may not that be recompensed in the spirituality and
solidity of them now? Phil. 1:9. "I pray God your love may abound
more and more in all judgment:" It may be more solid, though not so
fervent; or do not you mistake by looking forward to what you would
be, rather than backward to what once you were? It is a good note of
Ames, we discern the growth of grace, as the growth of plants, which
we perceive rather Crevisse quam crescere, to have grown, than to
grow.
Query 2. But grant it be so indeed, as you affirm, must it needs
follow, that the root of the matter is not in you? David's last ways are
distinguished from his first, 2 Chron. 17:3 and yet both first and last
a holy man. The church of Ephesus is charged by Christ for leaving
her first love, and yet a golden candlestick, many precious saints in
that church, Rev. 2:2, 3, 4.
3. A third ground of these sad conclusions is, the excess of your
affections to some creature-enjoyments. I fear I love the creature
more than God; and if so, my love is but hypocritical: I sometimes
feel stronger, and more sensible motions of my heart to earthly

comforts, than I do to heavenly objects, therefore my soul is not
upright in me. But stay, O soul,
Queries
Query 1. May not a man love God more solidly, and strongly, than the
creature, and yet his affections to the creature be sometimes moved
more violently, and sensibly, than towards God? As rooted malice
argues a stronger hatred, than a sudden, though more violent
passion: So we must measure our love, not by a violent motion of it,
now and then, but by the depth of the root, and constancy of its
actings. Because David was so passionately moved for Absalom, Joab
concludes, that if he had lived, and all the people died, "it would have
pleased him well," 2 Sam. 19:7. But that was argued more like a
soldier, than a logician.
Query 2. If you indeed love the creature for itself, if you make it your
end, and religion but a means, then the conclusion is rightly drawn
upon you. But if you love the creature in reference to God, and see
nothing in it separated from him, though sometimes your affections
offend in the excess; this is consistent with sincere love to God. To
love the creature inordinately, (i.e.) to put it in God's room, and
make it a man's end; this is the love of a carnal heart; to love it
immoderately, that is, to let out more affection to it than we ought, is
sometimes the sin of the best hearts.
Query 3. Have not many souls feared, as you do, that when Christ
and creatures shall stand as competitors in some eminent trial, they
should forsake Christ rather than the creature; and yet when brought
to that dilemma, have been able to cast all the world at their heels for
Christ? Many of the martyrs had such fears, and they were satisfied;
the prevalency of love is best seen at parting; there may be more love
to Christ in thy soul, than thou art now aware of; and if God bring
thee to such a pinch, thou mayest see it.

4. A fourth ground of these sad conclusions, is from hence, that we
find our hearts sometimes more straitened in private, than in public
duties. O! if my soul were sincere, its actings in duty would be
uniform. I fear I am but a Pharisee upon this ground. It is sad,
indeed, we should at any time find our hearts straitened in private.
But,
Queries
Query 1. Do not all thine enlargements in duty, whether public, or
private, depend upon the Spirit, who is the Lord of influences; and
according as he gives out, or holds back those influences, so art thou
enlarged, or straitened? And what if sometimes he pleases to give
that in a public, which he withholds in a private duty, as long as thy
soul is satisfied in neither, without communion with God, and the
straitness of thy heart is indeed its burden? Doth that argue thee to
be an hypocrite?
Query 2. Dost thou not make conscience of private duties, and set
thyself as before the Lord in them? Indeed, if thou live in the
constant neglect, or careless performance of them; if thou art curious
about public, and careless about private duties, that would be a sad
sign: but when you have conscientiously performed, and often met
with God in them, it will not follow that you are insincere, because
that communion is sometimes interrupted. Besides,
Query 3. May there not be something, at sometimes, in a public,
which is wanting in a private duty, to raise and advantage thine
affections? God may sometimes make use of the melting affections of
them with whom thou hearest, or prayest, as petty instruments to
move thy affections; this advantage is wanting in private; therefore
from hence (the case so standing) no such inference can be drawn.
5. Another ground is from those horrid injections of Satan with
which the soul is greatly perplexed; by these I may see what an heart
I have: Can grace be where those are?

Yes, grace may be where such thoughts are, though not where they
are lodged, and consented to. Dost thou cry out under the burden?
Enter thy protest in heaven against them, strive to keep up holy and
reverend thoughts of God; then it is violence, not a voluntary
prostitution.
6. The last ground of these sad conclusions, is the Lord's long silence,
and seeming denial of our long depending suits, and prayers. O if
God had any regard to my soul, he would have heard my cries before
now! But I have no answer from him, therefore no interest in him.
But stay, doubting soul,
Queries
Query 1. Have not many saints stumbled upon this stone, before
thee? Psal. 31:22. "I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine
eyes: nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplication." So
the church, Lam. 3:44. "Thou coverest thyself with a cloud, that our
prayers should not pass through." Jonah 2:4. "Then said I, I am cast
out of thy sight." And may not you be mistaken in this matter, as well
as they?
Query 2. Though God's abhorring, and final rejecting prayer, be an
argument of his abhorring the person that prays; yet dare we
conclude so from a mere suspension of the answer? God may bear
long with his own elect, that cry unto him day and night, Luke 18:7.
Query 3. Can you deny but that there are some signs appearing in
your souls, even whilst God suspends his answer, that argue your
prayers are not rejected by him? As, (1.) Though no answer come, yet
you are still resolved to wait: You dare not say as that profane wretch
did, 2 Kings 6:33. "This evil is of the Lord, why should I wait for him
any longer?" (2.) You can clear and justify God still, and lay the
reason and cause of his silence upon yourselves. So did David, Psal.
22:2, 3. "O my God, I cry in the day time, and thou nearest not; and
in the night, and am not silent, but thou art holy," &c. (3.) The

suspension of God's answer makes you inquisitive into your own
hearts, what evils are there that obstruct your prayers. So the church,
Lam. 3:8. "He shutteth out my prayer:" And how doth this work? You
may see, ver. 40. Let "us search and try our ways." Well, then,
neither from hence may you conclude that God hath no love for your
souls.
And thus I have shewn you how to keep your hearts, in a dark and
doubting season, from those desperate conclusions of unbelief. God
forbid any false heart should encourage itself from these things; it is
our unhappiness that when we give. saints and sinners their proper
portions, that each of them are so prone to take up the other's part.

Keeping the Heart When Sufferings for
Religion Come to an Height
Season 11. The eleventh special season calling for this diligence to
keep your hearts, is, when sufferings for religion come to an height,
then look to your hearts, Matth. 24:8, 9, 10. "All these are the
beginning of sorrows, and they shall deliver you up to be afflicted,
and shall kill you; and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's
sake; and then shall many be offended." When sufferings for religion
grow hot, then blessed is he that is not of fended in Christ, troubles
are then at an height. (1) When a man's nearest friends and relations
forsake and leave him, Mic. 7:5, 6. 2 Tim. 4:16. When a man is
engaged alone. (2.) When it comes to resisting to blood, Heb. 12:4.
(3.) When temptations are presented to us in our sufferings, Heb.
11:37. (4.) When eminent persons for profession turn aside, and
desert the cause, of Christ, 2 Tim. 2:19. (5.) When God hides his face
in a suffering hour, Jer. 17:17. (6.) When Satan falls upon us with
strong temptations, to question the grounds of our sufferings, or the
soul's interest in Christ: Now it is hard to keep the heart from
turning back, and the steps from declining God's ways." The eleventh
question, then, shall be this:

Case 11. How the heart may be kept from relapsing under the
greatest sufferings for religion? If the bitterness of sufferings at any
time cause thy soul to distaste the way of God, and take up thoughts
of forsaking it; stay thine heart under that temptation, by
propounding these eight questions solemnly to it.
Questions
Question 1. What reproach and dishonour shall I pour upon Christ,
and religion, by deserting him at such a time as this? This will
proclaim to all the world, that how much soever I have boasted of the
promises, yet, when it comes to the trial, I dare hazard nothing upon
the credit of them: And how will this open the mouths of Christ's
enemies to blaspheme? better had I never been born, than that
worthy name should be blasphemed through me! Shall I furnish the
triumphs of the uncircumcised? Shall I make mirth in hell? O if I did
but value the name of Christ, as much as many a wicked man values
his own name, I could never endure to see it exposed to such
contempt? Will proud dust and ashes venture death, yea, hell, rather
than a blot upon their names? And shall I venture nothing to salve
the honour and reputation of Christ?
Quest. 2. Dare I violate my conscience to save my flesh? Who shall
comfort me when conscience wounds me? What comfort is there in
life, liberty, or friends, when peace is taken away from the inner
man? When Constantius threatened to cut off Samosatenus'
righthand, if he would not subscribe somewhat that was against his
conscience, he held up both his hands to the messenger that was
sent, saying, he shall cut off both, rather than I will do it: Farewell all
peace, joy, and comfort, from that day forward. "Had Zimri peace,
that slew his master?" said Jezebel. So say I here, had Judas peace?
Had Spira peace? And shall you have peace, if you tread in their
steps? O consider what you do!
Quest. 3. Is not the public interest of Christ and religion, infinitely
more than any private interest of my own? It is a famous passage,

that of Terentius, captain to Adrian the emperor, he presented a
petition to Adrian, that the Christians might have a temple by
themselves, to worship God apart from the Arians: The emperor tore
his petition, and threw it away, bidding him to ask something for
himself, and it should be granted. But he modestly gathered up the
pieces of his petition again, and told him, 'If he could not be heard in
God's cause, he would never ask any thing for himself.' Yea, even
Tully, though an heathen could say, Ne immortalitatem quidem
contra rempublicam; he would not accept even of immortality itself,
against the common-wealth. O if we had more public, we should not
have such cowardly spirits!
Quest. 4. Did Jesus Christ serve me so, when, for my sake, he
exposed himself to far greater sufferings than can be, before me? His
sufferings were great indeed, he suffered from all hands, in all his
offices, in every member, not only in his body, but in his soul; yea,
the sufferings of his soul were the very soul of his sufferings: Witness
the bloody sweat in the garden; witness that heart-melting, and
heaven-rending out-cry upon the cross, "My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?" And yet he flinched not, "he endured the cross,
despising the shame." Alas! what are my sufferings compared with
Christ's? He hath drank up all that vinegar and gall that would make
my sufferings bitter. When one of the martyrs was asked why he was
so merry at his death? O, said he, it is because the soul of Christ was
so heavy at his death. Did Christ bear such a burden for me, with
unbroken patience, and constancy; and shall I shrink back from
momentary, and light afflictions, for him?
Quest. 5. Is not eternal life worth the suffering of a moment's pain? If
I suffer with him, I shall reign with him. O how will men venture life
and limb for a fading crown, swim through seas of blood to a throne!
and will I venture nothing? suffer nothing for the crown of glory that
fadeth not away? My dog will follow my horse's heels from morning
to night, take many a weary step through mire and dirt, rather than
leave me, though at night all he gets by it is but bones, and blows: If
my soul had any true greatness, any sparks of generosity in it, how

would it despise the sufferings of the way, for the glory of the end?
how would it break down all difficulties before it? whilst, by an eye of
faith, it sees the forerunner, who is already entered, standing, as it
were, upon the walls of heaven, with the crown in his hand, saying,
"He that over-cometh shall inherit all things." Come on, then, my
soul, come on, there is eternal life laid up for them that, by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, honour, and immortality,
Rom. 2:7.
Quest. 6. Can I so easily cast off the society and company of the
saints, and give the right-hand of fellowship to the wicked? How can
I part with such lovely companions as these have been? How often
have I been benefited by their counsels? Ezra 10:3 how often
refreshed, warmed, and quickened by their company? Eccl. 4:10, 11
how often have I fasted and prayed with them? What sweet counsel
have I taken with them, and gone to the house of God in company?
And shall I now shake hands with them, and say, Farewell all ye
saints for ever; I shall never be among you more: Come drunkards,
swearers, blasphemers, persecutors, you shall be my everlasting
companions? O rather let my body and soul be rent asunder, than
that ever I should say thus to the excellent of the earth, in whom is all
my delight.
Quest. 7. Have I seriously considered the terrible scripturecomminations against backsliders? O my heart! darest thou turn thy
back upon the very point of such threatenings as these? Jer. 17:5, 6.
"Thus saith the Lord, cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and
maketh flesh his arm; and whose heart departeth from the Lord; for
he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
cometh," i.e. The curse of God shall wither him root and branch. And
Heb. 10:26, 27. "If we sin wilfully, after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins,
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries." And again, ver. 38. "If any man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him:" As if he should
say, 'Take him, world, take him, devil, for your own, I have no delight

in him.' O who dare draw back when God has hedged up the way
with such terrible threats as these!
Quest. 8. Can I look Christ in the face at the day of judgment if I
desert him now?
"He that is ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and
sinful generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed when he
cometh in the glory of his Father, with the holy angels," Mark 8:38.
Yet a little while, and you shall see the sign of the Son of man coming
in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory; the last trump
shall sound, the dead, both small and great, even all that sleep in the
dust shall awake, and come before that great white throne, on which
Christ shall sit in that day. And now do but imagine thou sawest the
trembling knees and quivering lips of guilty sinners; imagine thou
heardest the dreadful sentence of the Judge upon them, "Go, ye
cursed," &c. and then a cry. Oh! the weeping, wailing, and wringing
of hands, that there shall be Wouldst thou desert Christ now, to
protract a poor, miserable life on earth? If the word of God be true, if
the sayings of Christ be sealed and faithful, this shall be the portion
of the apostate. It is an easy thing to stop the mouth of conscience
now, but will it be easy to stop the mouth of the Judge then? Thus
keep thy heart that it depart not from the living God.

Keeping the Heart When Sickness Warns
of Death Approaching
Season 12. The twelfth season of looking diligently to our hearts and
keeping them with greatest care, is the time of sickness: 'When a
child of God draws nigh to eternity, when there are but a few sands
more in the upper part of his glass to run down; now Satan, busily
bestirs himself; of him it may be said, as of the natural serpent,
nunquam nisi moriens producitur inlongum; he is never seen at his
full length till dying: And now his great design, since he cannot win
the soul from God, is to discourage, and make it unwilling to go to

God, though the gracious soul, with Jacob, should then rouse up
itself upon a dying bed, and rejoice that the marriage-day of the
Lamb is now almost come; though it should then say, with dying
Austin, vivere renuo ut Christo vivam; I despise life to be with Christ.
Or as dying Milius, when one asked him, whether he were willing to
die? O said he, illus est nolle mori, qui nolit ire ad Christum; let him
be unwilling to die who is unwilling to go to Christ. But O! what
shrinking from death? What lothness to depart, may sometimes
(indeed too frequently) be observed in the people of God? How loth
are some of them to take death by the cold hand? If such a liberty
were indulged to us, not to be dissolved till we dissolve ourselves;
when should we say with St. Paul, "I desire to be dissolved?" Well
then, the last case shall be this.
Case 12. How the people of God, in times of sickness, may get their
hearts loose from all earthly engagements, and persuade them into a
willingness to die.
And there are seven arguments, which I shall urge upon the people of
God at such a time as this, to make them cheerfully entertain the
messengers of death, and die as well as well as live, like saints. And
the first is this:
Arguments
Argument 1. First, The harmlessness of death to the people of God.
Though it keep its dart, it hath lost its sting: A saint (to allude to that,
Isa. 11:8.) "May play upon the hole of the asp, and put his "hand into
the cockatrice's den." Death is the cockatrice, or asp, the grave is his
hole or den; a saint need not fear to put his hand boldly into it: It
hath left and lost its sting in the sides of Christ, 1 Cor. 15:55. "O
death! where is thy sting?" Why art thou afraid, O saint, that this
sickness may be thy death, as long as thou knowest that the death of
Christ is the death of death? Indeed, if thou didst die in thy sins, as
John 8:21 if death, as a king, did reign over thee, Rom. 5:14. If it
could feed upon thee, as the lion doth upon the prey he hath taken,

as Psalm 49:14. If "hell followed the pale horse," as it is, Rev. 6:1 then
thou mightest well startle and shrink back from it; but when God
hath put away thy sins from thee, "as far as the east is from the west,"
Psal. 103:12 as long as there is no other evil left in death for thee to
encounter with but bodily pain; as long as the scriptures represent it
to thee under such harmless and easy notions, as the putting off thy
clothes, 2 Cor. 5:2. "And lying down to sleep upon thy bed," Isa. 57:2.
Why shouldst thou be afraid? There is as much difference betwixt
death to the people of God, and others, as betwixt the unicorn's horn,
when it is upon the head of that fierce beast, and when it is in the
apothecary's shops, where it is made salubrious and medicinal.
Arg. 2. Thy heart may be kept from shrinking back at such a time as
this, by considering the necessity of death, in order to the full fruition
of God.
Whether thou art willing to die or no, I assure thee there is no other
way to obtain the full satisfaction of thy soul, and complete its
happiness; till the hand of death do thee the kind office to draw aside
the curtain of the flesh, thy soul cannot see God: This animal life
stands betwixt him and thee, 2 Cor. 5:6. "Whilst we are at home in
the body, we are absent from the Lord." Thy body must be refined
and cast into a new mould, else that new wine of heavenly glory
would break it. Paul, in his highest rapture, 2 Cor. 12:4 when he
heard things unutterable, was then but as a stander-by, a looker-on,
not admitted into the company as one of them; but as the angels are
in our assemblies, so was Paul in that glorious assembly above, and
no otherwise; and yet even for this he must, as it were, be taken out
of the body, unclothed for a little time, to have a glimpse of that
glory, and then put on his clothes again. O then! who would not be
willing to die for a full sight and enjoyment of God? Methinks thy
soul should look and sigh, like a prisoner, through the grates of this
mortality: "O that I had wings like a dove, then would I fly away, and
be at rest:" Most men need patience to die, but a saint that
understands what death admits him to, should rather need patience
to live; methinks he should often look out, and listen on a death-bed

for his Lord's coming; and when he receives the news of his
approaching change, should say, "The voice of my beloved! behold,
he cometh leaping over the mountains, skipping upon the hills,"
Cant. 2:8.
Arg. 3. Another argument persuading to this willingness, is the
immediate succession of a more excellent and glorious life.
It is but a wink, and you shall see God: Your happiness shall not be
deferred till the resurrection; but as soon as the body is dead, the
gracious soul is swallowed up in life, Rom. 8:10, 11. When once you
have loosed from this shore, in a few moments, your souls will be
wafted over upon the wings of angels to the other shore of a glorious
eternity. Phil. 1:23. "I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ."
Did the soul and body die together, as Berilius taught; or did they
sleep till the resurrection, as others have groundlessly fancied; it had
been a madness for Paul to desire a dissolution for the enjoyment of
Christ: For if this were so, he enjoyed more of Christ whilst his soul
dwelt in its fleshly tabernacle, than he should out of it.
There are but two ways of the soul's living, known in scripture, viz.
the life of faith, and the life of vision, 1 Cor. 5:5. Those two divideth
all time, both present and future, betwixt them, 1 Cor. 13:12. If when
faith fails, sight should not immediately succeed, what would become
of the unbodied soul? But blessed be God, this great heartestablishing truth is evidently revealed in scripture, Luke 23:43. You
have Christ's promise, John 14:3. "I will come and receive you to
myself." O what a change will a few moments make upon your
condition? Rouse up, dying saint; when thy soul is come out a little
further; when it shall stand like Abraham at its tent-door, the angels
of God shall soon be with it: the souls of the elect are, as it were, put
out to the angels to nurse, and when they die, these angels carry
them home again to their Father's house: if an angel were caused to
fly swiftly to bring a saint the answer of his prayer, Dan. 9:22 how
much more will the angels come post from heaven to receive and
transfer the praying soul itself?

Arg. 4. Farther, It may much conduce to thy willingness to die, to
consider, that by death, God oftentimes hides his people out of the
way of all temptations and troubles upon earth, Rev. 14:13. "Write,
from henceforth, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord." It is
God's usual way, when some extraordinary calamities are coming
upon the world, to set his people out of harm's way before-hand, Isa.
57:1. "Merciful men are taken away from the evil to come." So Mic.
7:2 when such an evil time comes as is there described, "That they all
lie in wait for blood, and every man hunts his brother with a net:"
God, by an act of favour, houses his people beforehand. Dost thou
know what evil may be in the earth, which thou art so loth to leave?
Thy God removes thee for thy great advantage; thou art disbanded by
death, and called off the field; other poor saints must stand to it, and
endure a great fight of afflictions.
It is observed that Methuselah died the very year before the flood;
Augustine, a little before the sacking of Hippo; Pareus, just before
the taking of Heidelburgh: Luther observes, that all the apostles died
before the destruction of Jerusalem: and Luther himself died before
the wars broke out in Germany. It may be the Lord sees thy tender
heart cannot endure to see the misery, or bear the temptations that
are coming, and therefore will now gather thee to thy grave in peace;
and yet wilt thou cry, O spare me a little longer!
Arg. 5. If yet thy heart hang back, consider the great advantage you
will have by death, above all that ever you enjoyed on earth; and that,
(1.) As to your communion with God: (2.) As to your communion
with saints.
1. For your communion with God: the time of perfecting that is now
come: thy soul shall shortly stand before the face of God, and have
the immediate emanations and beamings forth of his glory upon it:
here thy soul is remote from God, the beams of his glory strike it but
obliquely and feebly, but shortly it will be under the line, and there
the sun shall stand still, as it did in Gibeon; there shall be no
