PURITAN GOLD -- Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices by Thomas Brooks: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 12
Satan Fills the Heart with Sad Thoughts of God

---

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices. By Thomas Brooks.

Chapter 11. Satan Fills the Heart with Sad Thoughts of God.

135

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Remedy (7). The seventh remedy against this device of Satan is, wisely to consider,
That as there is nothing in Christ to discourage the greatest sinners from believing in
him, so there is everything in Christ that may encourage the greatest sinners to believe
on him, to rest and lean upon him for all happiness and blessedness (Cant. 1:3). If you
look upon his nature, his disposition, his names, his titles, his offices as king, priest, and
prophet—you will find nothing to discourage the greatest sinners from believing in him—
but many things to encourage the greatest sinners to receive him, to believe in him.
(Col. 1:19; 2:3; Cant. 5:10.)
Christ is the greatest good, the choicest good, the chief good, the most suitable good,
the most necessary good. He is a pure good, a real good, a total good, an eternal good,
and a soul-satisfying good (Rev. 3:17, 18). Sinners, are you poor? Christ has gold to
enrich you. Are you naked? Christ has royal robes, he has white clothing to clothe you.
Are you blind? Christ has eye-salve to enlighten you. Are you hungry? Christ will be
manna to feed you. Are you thirsty? He will be a well of living water to refresh you. Are
you wounded? He has a balm under his wings to heal you. Are you sick? He is a
physician to cure you. Are you prisoners? He has laid down a ransom for you. Ah,
sinners! tell me, tell me, is there anything in Christ to keep you off from believing? No!
Is there not everything in Christ that may encourage you to believe in him? Yes! Oh,
then, believe in him, and then, Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as
snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool' (Is. 1:18). No, then, your
iniquities shall be forgotten as well as forgiven, they shall be remembered no more. God
will cast them behind his back, he will throw them into the bottom of the sea! (Is.
43:25; 38:17; Micah 7:19).
Remedy (8). The eighth remedy against this device of Satan Is, seriously to consider,
The absolute necessity of believing in Christ. Heaven is too holy to hold unbelievers;
their lodging is prepared in hell (Rev. 21:8): 'But the fearful and unbelieving etc. shall
have their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death.' 'If you believe not that I am he,' says Christ, 'you shall die in your sins' (John
8:24). And he who dies in his sins must go to judgment and to hell in his sins. Every
unbeliever is a condemned man: 'He who believes not,' says John, 'is condemned
already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And
he who believes not the Son, shall not see life—but the wrath of God abides on him'
(John 3:18, 36). Ah, sinners! the law, the gospel, and your own consciences, have
passed the sentence of condemnation upon you, and there is no way to reverse the
sentence but by believing in Christ. And therefore my counsel is this—Stir up yourselves
to lay hold on the Lord Jesus, and look up to him, and wait on him, from whom every
good and perfect gift comes, and give him no rest until he has given you that jewel
'faith'—which is more worth than heaven and earth, and which will make you happy in
life, joyful in death, and glorious in the day of Christ (Is. 64:7; James 1:17; Is. 62:7).
And thus much for the remedies against this first device of Satan, whereby he keeps off
thousands from believing in Christ.
DEVICE 2: By suggesting to sinners their unworthiness.
Ah! says Satan, as you are worthy of the greatest misery, so you are unworthy of the
least crumb of mercy. What! do you think, says Satan, that ever Christ will own,
receive, or embrace such an unworthy wretch as you are? No! No! if there were any
136

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
worthiness in you, then, indeed, Christ might be willing to be entertained by you. You
are unworthy to entertain Christ into your house, how much more unworthy are you to
entertain Christ into your heart.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider, That
God has nowhere in the Scripture required any worthiness in the creature before
believing in Christ. If you make a diligent search through all the Scripture, you shall not
find, from the first line in Genesis to the last line in the Revelation, one word that
speaks out God's requiring any worthiness in the creature before the soul's believing In
Christ, before the soul's leaning and resting upon Christ for happiness and blessedness;
and why, then, should that be a bar and hindrance to your faith, which God does
nowhere require of you before you come to Christ, that you may have life? (Matt. 19:8;
John 5:29). Ah, sinners! remember Satan objects your unworthiness against you only
out of a design to keep Christ and your souls asunder forever; and therefore, in the face
of all your unworthiness, rest upon Christ, come to Christ, believe in Christ, and you are
happy forever (John 6:40, 47).
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, wisely to consider, That
none ever received Christ, embraced Christ, and obtained mercy and pardon from
Christ—but unworthy souls. Pray, what worthiness was in Matthew, Zacchaeus, Mary
Magdalene, Manasseh, Paul, and Lydia, before their coming to Christ, before their faith
in Christ? Surely none! Ah, sinners! you should reason thus: Christ has bestowed the
choicest mercies, the greatest favors, the highest dignities, the sweetest privileges,
upon unworthy sinners, and therefore, O our souls, do not faint, do not despair—but
patiently and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. Who can tell but that free grace
and mercy may shine forth upon us, though we are unworthy, and give us a portion
among those blessed ones who are now triumphing in heaven.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, That if the soul will keep
off from Christ until it is worthy—it will never close with Christ, it will never embrace
Christ. It will never be one with Christ, it must lie down in everlasting sorrow (Is.
50:11). God has laid up all worthiness in Christ, that the creature may know where to
find it, and receive it. There is no way on earth to make unworthy souls worthy—but by
believing in Christ (James 2:23). Believing in Christ—of slaves, it will make you worthy
sons; of enemies, it will make you worthy friends. God will count none worthy, nor call
none worthy, nor carry it towards none as worthy—but believers, who are made worthy
by the worthiness of
Christ's person, righteousness, satisfaction, and intercession (Rev. 3:4).
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider,
That if you make a diligent search into your own hearts, you shall find that it is the pride
and folly of your own hearts which puts you upon bringing of a worthiness to Christ. Oh!
you would gladly bring something to Christ that might render you acceptable to him;
you are reluctant to come empty-handed. The Lord cries out, 'Come, everyone who is
thirsty, come to the waters; and you without money, come, buy, and eat! Come, buy
wine and milk without money and without cost! Why do you spend money on what is
not food, and your wages on what does not satisfy? Listen carefully to Me, and eat what
is good, and you will enjoy the choicest of foods!' (Is. 55:1, 2). Here the Lord calls upon
moneyless souls, upon penniless souls, upon unworthy souls—to come and partake of
137

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
his precious favors freely. But sinners are proud and foolish, and because they have no
money, no worthiness to bring, they will not come, though he sweetly invites them. Ah,
sinners! what is more just than that you should perish forever—who prefer husks among
swine, before the milk and wine, the sweet and precious things of the gospel, which are
freely and sweetly offered to you. Well, sinners! remember this, it is not so much the
sense of your unworthiness, as your pride, that keeps you off from a blessed closing
with the Lord Jesus.
DEVICE 3: By suggesting to sinners the lack of such and such preparations and
qualifications.
Says Satan, You are not prepared to entertain Christ; you are not thus and thus
humbled and justified; you are not heart-sick of sin; you have not been under horrors
and terrors as such and such; you must stay until you are prepared and qualified to
receive the Lord Jesus.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly to consider, That
such as have not been so and so prepared and qualified as Satan suggests, have
received Christ, believed in Christ, and been saved by Christ. Matthew was called,
sitting at the tax collector's booth, and there was such power went along with Christ's
call, that made him to follow Christ (Matt. 9:9). We read not of any horrors or terrors
that he was under before his being called by Christ. Reader! what preparations and
qualifications were found in Zacchaeus, Paul, the jailor, and Lydia, before their
conversion? (Luke 19:9, Acts 16:14, seq.). God brings in some by the sweet and still
voice of the gospel, and usually such that are thus brought into Christ are the sweetest,
humblest, choicest, and most fruitful Christians.
God is a free agent to work by law or gospel, by smiles or frowns, by presenting hell or
heaven to sinners' souls. God thunders from mount Sinai upon some souls, and
conquers them by thundering. God speaks to others in a still voice, and by that
conquers them. You who are brought to Christ by the law, do not you judge and
condemn those who are brought to Christ by the gospel; and you who are brought to
Christ by the gospel, do not you despise those who are brought to Christ by the law.
Some are brought to Christ by fire, storms, and tempests; others by more easy and
gentle gales of the Spirit. The Spirit is free in the works of conversion, and, as the wind,
it blows when, where, and how it pleases (John 3:8). Thrice happy are those souls that
are brought to Christ, whether it be in a winter's night or in a summer's day.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, solemnly To dwell upon
these following scriptures, which clearly evidence that poor sinners who are not such
and such prepared and qualified to meet with Christ, to receive and embrace the Lord
Jesus Christ; may, notwithstanding that, believe in Christ; and rest and lean upon him
for happiness and blessedness, according to the gospel. Read Prov. 1:20-33, and chap
8:1-11, and chap. 9:1-6; Ezek. 16:1-14; John 3:14-18, 36; Rev. 3:15-20. Here the
Lord Jesus Christ stands knocking at the Laodiceans' door; he would gladly have them
to sup with him, and that he might sup with them; that is, that they might have
intimate communion and fellowship one with another.
Now, tell me, what preparations or qualifications had these Laodiceans to entertain
Christ? Surely none; for they were lukewarm, they were 'neither hot nor cold,' they
138

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
were 'wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked'; and yet Christ, to show
his free grace and his condescending love, invites the very worst of sinners to open to
him, though they were not such and such prepared or qualified to entertain him.
Remedy (3). The third remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider,
That the Lord does not in all the Scripture, require such and such preparations and
qualifications before men come to Christ, before they believe in Christ, or entertain, or
embrace the Lord Jesus. Believing in Christ is the great thing that God presses upon
sinners throughout the Scripture, as all know that know anything of Scripture.
Obj. But does not Christ say, 'Come unto me all who labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest'? (Matt. 11:28). To this I shall give these three answers:
(1.) That though the invitation be to such that 'labor and are heavy laden,' yet the
promise of giving rest, it is made over to 'coming,' to 'believing.'
(2.) That all this scripture proves and shows is, that such as labor under sin as under a
heavy burden, and that are laden with the guilt of sin and sense of God's displeasure,
ought to come to Christ for rest; but it does not prove that only such must come to
Christ, nor that all men must be thus burdened and laden with the sense of their sins
and the wrath of God, before they come to Christ.
Poor sinners, when they are under the sense of sin and wrath of God, are prone to run
from creature to creature, and from duty to duty, and from ordinance to ordinance, to
find rest; and if they could find it in anything or creature, Christ would never hear of
them; but here the Lord sweetly invites them; and to encourage them, he engages
himself to give them rest: 'Come,' says Christ, 'and I will give you rest.' I will not show
you rest, nor barely tell you of rest—but 'I will give you rest.' I am faithfulness itself,
and cannot lie, 'I will give you rest.' I that have the greatest power to give it, the
greatest will to give it, the greatest right to give it, 'Come, heavy laden sinners, and I
will give you rest.' Rest is the most desirable good, the most suitable good, and to you
the greatest good. 'Come,' says Christ, that is, 'believe in me, and I will give you rest'; I
will give you peace with God, and peace with conscience; I will turn your storm into an
everlasting calm; I will give you such rest, which the world can neither give to you nor
take from you.
(3.) No one scripture speaks out the whole mind of God; therefore do but compare this
one scripture with those several scriptures that are laid down in the second remedy last
mentioned, and it will clearly appear, that though men are thus and thus burdened and
laden with their sins and filled with horror and terror, if they may come to Christ, they
may receive and embrace the Lord Jesus Christ.
Remedy (4). The fourth remedy against this device of Satan is, to consider, That all that
trouble for sin, all that sorrow, shame, and mourning which is acceptable to God, and
delightful to God, and prevalent with God, flows from faith in Christ, as the stream does
from the fountain, as the branch does from the root, as the effect does from the cause.
Zech. 12:10, 'They shall look on him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him.' All gospel mourning flows from believing; they shall first look, and then mourn. All
who know anything about the gospel, know this, that 'whatever is not of faith is sin'
(Rom. 14:33). Until men have faith in Christ, their best services are but splendid sins!
139

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

DEVICE 4: By suggesting to a sinner Christ's unwillingness to save.
It is true, says Satan. Christ is able to save you—but is he willing? Surely, though he is
able, yet he is not willing to save such a wretch as you are, who has trampled his blood
under your feet, and who has been in open rebellion against him all your days.
Remedy (1). First, The great journey that he has taken, from heaven to earth, on
purpose to save sinners, strongly demonstrates his willingness to save them. Matt.
9:13: 'I came not to call the righteous—but sinners to repentance.' 1 Tim. 1:15: 'This is
a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief.'
Secondly, His divesting himself of his glory in order to sinners' salvation, speaks out his
willingness to save them. He leaves his Father's bosom, he puts off his glorious robes,
and lays aside his glorious crown, and bids adieu to his glistering courtiers the angels;
and all this he does, that he may accomplish sinners' salvation. From the cradle to the
cross, his whole life was a life of sufferings.
Thirdly, That sea of sin, that sea of wrath, that sea of trouble, that sea of blood that
Jesus Christ waded through, that sinners might be pardoned, justified, reconciled, and
saved, strongly evidences his willingness to save sinners (2 Cor. 5:19, 20).
Fourthly, His sending his ambassadors, early and late, to woo and entreat sinners to be
reconciled to him, does with open mouth show his readiness and willingness to save
sinners.
Fifthly, His complaints against such as refuse him, and who turn their backs upon him,
and who will not be saved by him, strongly declares his willingness to save them (John
1:11): 'He came to his own, and his own received him not.' So in John 5:40, 'But you
will not come to me, that you may have life.'
Sixthly, The joy and delight that he takes at the conversion of sinners demonstrates his
willingness that they should be saved (Luke 15:7): 'I tell you that in the same way there
will be more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine
righteous persons who do not need to repent.' God the Father rejoices at the return of
his prodigal son; Christ rejoices to see the travail of his soul; the Spirit rejoices that he
has another temple to dwell in; and the angels rejoice that they have another brother to
delight in (Is. 53:11).
DEVICE 5: By working a sinner to mind more the secret decrees and counsels of God,
than his own duty.
What need you to busy yourself about receiving, embracing, and entertaining of Christ?
says Satan; if you are elected, you shall be saved; if not, all that you can do will do you
no good. No, he will work the soul not only to doubt of its election—but to conclude that
he is not elected, and therefore, let him do what he can, he shall never be saved.
Remedy (1). The first remedy against this device of Satan is, seriously to consider, That
not all the angels in heaven, nor all the men an earth, nor all the devils in hell, cannot
140

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
tell to the contrary—but that you may be an elect person, a chosen vessel. You may be
confident of this, that God never made Satan one of his privy council, God never
acquainted him with the names of such that he has set his love upon to eternity.
Remedy (2). The second remedy against this device of Satan is, To meddle with that
which you have to do. 'Secret things belong to the Lord—but revealed things belong to
you' (Deut. 29:29). Your work, sinner, is, to be peremptory in believing, and in
returning to the Lord; your work is to cast yourself upon Christ, lie at his feet, to wait on
him in his ways; and to give him no rest until he shall say, Sinner, I am your portion, I
am your salvation—and nothing shall separate between you and me.

141

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

APPENDIX 2: SEVEN CHARACTERISTICS OF FALSE TEACHERS
Satan labors might and main, by false teachers, which are his emissaries, to deceive,
delude, and forever undo the precious souls of men (Jer. 23:13) 'I have seen folly in the
prophets of Samaria; they prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.'
Micah 3:5: 'The prophets make my people to err.' They seduce them, and carry them
out of the right way into by-paths and blind thickets of error, blasphemy, and
wickedness, where they are lost forever. 'Beware of false prophets, for they come to
you in sheep's clothing—but inwardly they are ravening wolves' (Matt. 7:15). These lick
and suck the blood of souls (Phil. 3:2), 'Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers.' These
kiss and kill; these cry, Peace, peace, until souls fall into everlasting flames! (Prov. 7).
(Acts. 20:28-30; 2 Cor. 11:13-15; Eph. 4:14; 2 Tim. 3:4-6; Titus 1:11, 22; 2 Peter
2:18,19.)
Now the best way to deliver poor souls from being deluded and destroyed by these
messengers of Satan is, to discover them in their colors, that so, being known, poor
souls may shun them, and fly from them as from hell itself.
Now you may know them by these characters following:
[1.] False teachers are men-pleasers.
Such are not true teachers; Gal. 1:10, 1 Thess. 2:1-4. They preach more to please the
ear than to profit the heart (Is. 30:10): 'Who say to the seers, See not; and to the
prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things: speak to us smooth things; prophesy
deceits.' Jer. 5:30, 31: "A horrible and shocking thing has happened in the land: The
prophets prophesy lies, the priests rule by their own authority, and my people love it
this way. But what will you do in the end?" Jeremiah 5:30-31. False teachers handle
holy things rather with wit and trifling, rather than with fear and reverence. False
teachers are soul-murderers. They are like evil surgeons, that skin over the wound—but
never heal it. Flattery undid Ahab and Herod, Nero and Alexander. False teachers are
hell's greatest enrichers. Not bitter—but flattering words do all the mischief, said
Valerian, the Roman emperor. Such smooth teachers are sweet soul-poisoners. "This is
my warning to my people," says the Lord Almighty. 'Do not listen to these prophets
when they prophesy to you, filling you with futile hopes. They are making up everything
they say. They do not speak for the Lord! They keep saying to these rebels who despise
my word, 'Don't worry! The Lord says you will have peace!' And to those who stubbornly
follow their own evil desires, they say, 'No harm will come your way!'" (Jer. 23:16, 17).
[2.] False teachers are notable in casting dirt, scorn, and reproach upon the
persons, names, and credits of Christ's most faithful ambassadors.
Thus Korah, Dathan, and Abiram charged Moses and Aaron that they took too much
upon them, seeing all the congregation was holy (Num. 16:3). You take too much state,
too much power, too much honor, too much holiness upon you; for what are you more
than others, that you take so much upon you? And so Ahab's false prophets fell foul on
good Micaiah, paying of him with blows for lack of better reasons (1 Kings 22:10-26).
Yes, Paul, that great apostle of the Gentiles, had his ministry undermined and his
reputation blasted by false teachers: 'For his letters,' say they, 'are weighty and
142

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
powerful—but his bodily presence is weak and his speech contemptible' (2 Cor. 10:10).
They rather condemn him than admire him; they look upon him as a dunce rather than
a doctor. And the same hard measure had our Lord Jesus from the scribes and
Pharisees, who labored as for life to build their own credit upon the ruins of his
reputation. And never did the devil drive a more full trade this way than he does in
these days (Matt. 27:63). Oh! the dirt, the filth, the scorn that is thrown upon those of
whom the world is not worthy! I suppose false teachers mind not that saying of
Augustine: 'He who willingly takes from my good name, unwillingly adds to my reward.'
The proverb is, 'A man's eye and his good name can bear no jests.'
[3.] False teachers are venters of the devices and visions of their own heads
and hearts.
Jer. 14:14: "Then the Lord said unto me—These prophets are telling lies in my name. I
did not send them or tell them to speak. I did not give them any messages. They
prophesy of visions and revelations they have never seen or heard. They speak
foolishness made up in their own lying hearts." "This is my warning to my people," says
the Lord Almighty. "Do not listen to these prophets when they prophesy to you, filling
you with futile hopes. They are making up everything they say. They do not speak for
the Lord!" Jeremiah 23:16.
Are there not multitudes in this nation whose visions are but golden delusions, lying
vanities, brain-sick fantasies? These are Satan's great benefactors, and such as divine
justice will hang up in hell as the greatest malefactors, if the physician of souls does not
prevent it.
Matt. 24:4, 5; 11:14; Titus 1:10; Rom. 16:18
[4.] False teachers easily pass over the great and weighty things both of law
and gospel, and stand most upon those things that are of the least importance
and concern to the souls of men.
1 Tim. 1:5-7: 'Now the end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a
good conscience, and of faith sincere; from which some having swerved, have turned
aside unto vain jangling, desiring to be teachers of the law, and understand neither
what they say nor whereof they affirm.' Matt. 23:23: 'Woe unto you, scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites; for you pay tithe of mint, and anise and cummin, and have
omitted the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and faith; these ought you
to have done, and not to leave the other undone.' False teachers are nice in the lesser
things of the law, and as negligent in the greater. 1 Tim. 6:3-5: 'If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud, knowing
nothing—but doting about questions and strife of words, whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of
the truth, supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw yourself.' If such
teachers are not hypocrites in grain, I know nothing (Rom. 2:22). The earth groans to
bear them, and hell is fitted for them (Matt. 24:32).

143

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Luther complained of such in his time as would strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.
This age is full of such teachers, such monsters! The high priest's spirit (Matt. 23:24)
lives and thrives in these days.
[5.] False teachers cover and color their dangerous principles and souldeceptions with very fair speeches and plausible pretenses, with high notions
and golden expressions.
Many in these days are bewitched and deceived by the magnificent words, lofty strains,
and stately terms of deceivers. As strumpets paint their faces, and deck and perfume
their beds, the better to allure and deceive simple souls; so false teachers will put a
great deal of paint and garnish upon their most dangerous principles and blasphemies,
that they may the better deceive and delude poor ignorant souls. They know sugaredpoison goes down sweetly; they wrap up their pernicious, soul-killing pills in gold! (Gal.
6:12; 2 Cor. 11:13-15; Rom. 16:17, 18; Matt. 16:6,11,12; 7:15.)
In the days of Hadrian the emperor, there was one Ben-Cosbi gathered a multitude of
Jews together, and called himself Ben-cocuba, the son of a star, applying that promise
to himself (Num. 24:17)—but he proved Bar-chosaba, the son of a lie. And so will all
false teachers, for all their flourishes prove at the last the sons of lies.
[6.] False teachers strive more to win over men to their opinions, than to
better them in their lives.
Matt. 23:15: 'Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for you compass sea and
land to make one proselyte, and when he is made, you make him twofold more the child
of hell than yourselves!' They busy themselves most about men's heads. Their work is
not to better men's hearts, and mend their lives; and in this they are very much like
their father the devil, who will spare no pains to gain proselytes.
For shame! says Epictetus to his Stoics; either live as Stoics, or leave off the name of
Stoics. The application is easy.
[7.] False teachers make merchandise of their followers.
"But there were also false prophets among the people, just as there will be false
teachers among you. They will secretly introduce destructive heresies, even denying the
sovereign Lord who bought them--bringing swift destruction on themselves. Many will
follow their shameful ways and will bring the way of truth into disrepute. In their greed
these teachers will exploit you with stories they have made up. Their condemnation has
long been hanging over them, and their destruction has not been sleeping." 2 Peter 2:13. They eye your goods more than your good; and mind more the serving of
themselves, than the saving of your souls. So they may have your substance, they care
not though Satan has your souls (Rev. 18:11-13). That they may the better pick your
purse, they will hold forth such principles as are very indulgent to the flesh. False
teachers are the great worshipers of the golden calf. "From the least to the greatest, all
are greedy for gain; prophets and priests alike, all practice deceit." (Jer. 6:13).
Crates threw his money into the sea, resolving to drown it, lest it should drown him. But
false teachers care not who they drown—so they may have their money.
144

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

Now, by these characters you may know them, and so shun them, and deliver your
souls out of their dangerous snares.

145

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices

Thomas Brooks

APPENDIX 3: SIX PROPOSITIONS CONCERNING SATAN AND HIS
DEVICES
And now, to prevent objections, I shall lay down some propositions or conclusions
concerning Satan and his devices, and then give you the reasons of the point, and so
come to make some use and application of the whole to ourselves.
Proposition (1). That though Satan has his devices to draw souls to sin, yet we must
be careful that we do not lay all our temptations upon Satan, that we do not wrong the
devil, and father that upon him that is to be fathered upon our own base hearts.
I think that oftentimes men charge that upon the devil that which is to be charged upon
their own hearts. 'And the Lord said unto the woman, What is this that you have done?
And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat' (Gen. 3:13). Sin and
shifting of sin, came into the world together. This is no small baseness of our hearts,
that they will blame that naughtiness upon Satan. Man has an evil root within him; that
were there no devil to tempt him, nor no wicked men in the world to entice him, yet
that root of bitterness, that cursed sinful nature which is in him, would draw him to sin,
though he knows beforehand that 'the wages of sin is eternal death' (Rom. 6:23). 'For
out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornication, thefts, false
witness, blasphemies' (Matt. 15:19). The whole frame of man is out of frame. The
understanding is dark, the will cross, the memory slippery, the affections crooked, the
conscience corrupted, the tongue poisoned, and the heart wholly evil, only evil, and
continually evil. Should God chain up Satan, and give him no liberty to tempt or entice
people to vanity or folly, yet they could not but sin against him, by reason of that
cursed nature that is in them, that will still be a-provoking them to those sins that will
provoke and stir up the anger of God against them (Jude 15, 16).
Satan has only a persuading sleight, not an enforcing might. He may tempt us—but
without ourselves he cannot conquer us; he may entice us—but without ourselves he
cannot hurt us. Our hearts carry the greatest guilt in every sin. Satan can never undo a
man without himself; but a man may easily undo himself without Satan. Satan can only
present the golden cup—but he has no power to force us to drink the poison that is in
the cup; he can only present to us the glory of the world, he cannot force us to fall
down and worship him, to enjoy the world; he can only spread his snares, he has no
power to force us to walk in the midst of his snares. Therefore do the devil so much
right, as not to excuse yourselves, by your accusing him, and laying the load upon him,
that you should lay upon your own hearts.
We are no sooner born, than buried in a bog of wickedness (Cicero).
The fire is our wood, though it be the devil's flame (Nazianzen).
Proposition (2). That Satan has a great hand and stroke in most sins.
It was Satan who tempted our first parents to rebellion. It was Satan who provoked
David to number the people. It was Satan who put Peter upon rebuking Christ;
therefore says Christ, 'Get behind me, Satan'. It was Satan who put Cain upon
murdering of righteous Abel, therefore it is that he is called 'a murderer from the
146

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
beginning'. It was Satan who put treason into the heart of Judas against Christ, 'And
supper being ended, the devil having put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son,
to betray him'. It was Satan who put Ananias upon lying; Peter said, 'Ananias, why has
Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit?' (Gen. 3:1-5; 1 Chron. 21:1; Matt.
16:22, 23; John 8:44, 13:2; Acts 5:3)
As the hand of Joab was in the tale of the woman of Tekoah, so Satan's hand is usually
in all the sins that men commit. Such is Satan's malice against God, and his envy
against man, that he will have a hand one way or other in all the sins, though he knows
that all the sins he provokes others to shall be charged upon him to his greater woe,
and eternal torment.
Ambrose brings in the devil boasting against Christ and challenging Judas as his own:
'He is not yours, Lord Jesus, he is mine; his thoughts beat for me; he eats with you—
but is fed by me: he takes bread from you—but money from me; he drinks wine with
you, and sells your blood to me.' Such is his malice against Christ, and his wrath and
rage against man, that he will take all advantages to draw men to that which may give
him advantage to triumph over men's souls forever.
Proposition (3). That Satan must have a double permission before he can do anything
against us.
He must have permission from God, and permission from ourselves, before he can do
anything against our happiness. He must have his permission from God, as you may see
in the example of Job (Job 1:11, 12; 2:3-5). Though the devil had malice enough to
destroy him, yet he had not so much as power to touch him, until God gave him
permission.
They could not so much as enter into the swine without permission from Christ (Luke
8:32). Satan would gladly have combated with Peter—but this he could not do without
leave. 'Satan has desired to have you, to winnow you' (Luke 22:31). So Satan could
never have overthrown Ahab and Saul—but by permission from God (1 Kings 22). Ah!
what a cordial, what a comfort should this be to the saints—that their greatest, subtlest,
and most vigilant enemy cannot hurt nor harm them, without permission from him who
is their sweetest Savior, their dearest husband, and their choicest friend.
And as Satan must have permission from God, so he must have permission from us.
When he tempts, we must assent; when he makes offers, we must hearken; when he
commands, we must obey, or else all his labor and temptations will be frustrated, and
the evil that he tempts us to shall be put down only to his account. That is a remarkable
passage in Acts 5:3, 'Why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit?' He does
not expostulate the matter with Satan; he does not say, Satan, 'Why have you filled
Ananias's heart to make him lie to the Holy Spirit?' but he expostulates the case with
Ananias; Peter said, 'Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit?'
Why have you given him an advantage to fill your heart with infidelity, hypocrisy, and
obstinate audacity, to lie to the Holy Spirit? As if he had said, Satan could never have
done this in you, which will now forever undo you, unless you had given him permission.
If, when a temptation comes, a man cries out, and says, "Ah, Lord! here is a temptation
that would force me, that would deflower my soul, and I have no strength to withstand
it! Oh! help! help! for your honor's sake, for your Son's sake, for your promise's sake!"
147

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
it is a sign that Satan has not gained your consent—but committed a rape upon your
souls, which he shall dearly pay for.
Proposition (4). That no weapons but spiritual weapons will be useful and serviceable
to the soul in fighting and combating with the devil.
This the apostle shows: 'Therefore take unto you,' says he, 'the whole armor of God,
that you may be able to stand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand' (Eph.
6:13). So the same apostle tells you, 'That the weapons of your warfare are not
carnal—but mighty through God, to the casting down of strongholds' (2 Cor. 10:4). You
have not to do with a weak—but with a mighty enemy, and therefore you had need to
look to it, that your weapons are mighty—which they cannot be, unless they are
spiritual. Carnal weapons have no power in them towards the making of a conquest
upon Satan. It was not David's sling nor stone that gave him the honor and advantage
of setting his feet upon Goliath—but his faith in the name of the Lord Almighty. 'You
come to me with a sword, with a spear, and with a shield—but I have come to you in
the name of the Lord Almighty, the God of the armies of Israel, whom you have defied'
(1 Sam. 17:45).
He who fights against Satan, in the strength of his own resolutions, constitution or
education, will certainly fly and fall before him. Satan will be too hard for such a soul,
and lead him captive at his pleasure. The only way to stand, conquer, and triumph, is
still to plead, 'It is written,' as Christ did (Matt. 4:10). There is no sword but the twoedged sword of the Spirit, that will be found to be metal of proof when a soul comes to
engage against Satan; therefore, when you are tempted to impurity, plead, 'It is
written, be holy, as I am holy' (1 Peter 1:16); and, 'Let us cleanse ourselves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord' (2 Cor. 7:1).
If he tempts you to distrust God's providence and fatherly care of you, plead, It is
written, 'Those who fear the Lord shall lack no good thing.' (Psalm 34:9).
We read of many that, out of fortitude, could subdue nature—but were at a loss when
they came to deal with a corruption or a temptation. Heraclitus's motto was, 'A Deo
victoria!' It is God that gives victory; and that should be every Christian's motto.
It is written, 'The Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
those who live purely' (Psalm 84:11).
If he tempts you to fear that you shall faint, and fall, and never be able to run to the
end of the race that is set before you, plead, It is written, 'The righteous shall hold on
his way, and he who has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger' (Job. 17:9).
It is written, 'I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them, to do them good—but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not
depart from me' (Jer. 32:40).
It is written, 'Those who wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; they shall mount
up with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not
faint' (Is. 40:31).

148

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
If Satan tempts you to think that because your sun for the present is set in a cloud, that
therefore it will rise no more, and that the face of God will shine upon you no more; that
your best days are now at an end, and that you must spend all your time in sorrow and
sighing; plead, It is written, 'He will turn again, he will have compassion upon us, and
cast all our sins into the depth of the sea' (Micah 7:19).
It is written, 'For a small moment have I forsaken you—but with great mercies will I
gather you. In a little wrath I hid my face from you for a moment—but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on you, says the Lord, your Redeemer' (Is. 54:8, 10).
It is written, 'The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed—but my kindness
shall not depart from you, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, says the
Lord who has mercy on you.'
It is written, 'Can a woman forget her nursing child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? Yes, they may forget, yet will not I forget you.
Behold, I have engraved you upon the palms of my hands, your walls are continually
before me' (Is. 49:15, 16).
If ever you would be too hard for Satan, and after all his assaults, have your bow abide
in strength, then take to yourself the Word of God, which is 'the two-edged sword of the
Spirit, and the shield of faith, whereby you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
the devil' (Eph. 6:17). It is not spitting at Satan's name, nor crossing yourselves, nor
leaning to your own resolutions, that will get you the victory.
Luther reports of Staupitius, a German minister, that he acknowledged himself, that
before he came to understand aright the free and powerful grace of God, he vowed and
resolved a hundred times against some particular sin, and never could get power over
it. At last he saw the reason to be his trusting to his own resolution. Therefore be skillful
in the word of righteousness, and in the actings of faith upon Christ and his victory, and
that crown of glory which is set before you, and Satan will certainly fly from you (James
4:7).
Proposition (5). That we may read much of Satan's nature and disposition by the
diverse names and epithets that are given him in the Scripture.
Sometimes he is called Behemoth, whereby the greatness and brutishness of the devil is
figured (Job 40:15). Those evil spirits are sometimes called accusers, for their
calumnies and slanders; and evil ones, for their malice. Satan is Adversarius, an
adversary, that troubles and molests (1 Pet. 5:8). Abaddon is a destroyer (Rev. 9:11).
They are tempters, for their suggestion; lions, for their devouring; dragons, for their
cruelty; and serpents, for their subtlety. As his names are, so is he; as face answers to
face, so do Satan's names answer to his nature. He has the worst names and the worst
nature of all created creatures.
Proposition (6). That God will shortly tread down Satan under the saints' feet.
Christ, our champion, has already won the field, and will shortly set our feet upon the
necks of our spiritual enemies. Satan is a foiled adversary. Christ has led him captive,
and triumphed over him upon the cross. Christ has already overcome him, and put
149

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
weapons into your hands, that you may overcome him also, and set your feet upon his
neck. Though Satan be a roaring lion, yet Christ, who is the lion of the tribe of Judah,
will make Satan fly and fall before you. Let Satan do his worst, yet you shall have the
honor and the happiness to triumph over him. Cheer up, you precious sons of Zion, for
the certainty and sweetness of victory will abundantly recompense you for all the pains
you have taken in making resistance against Satan's temptations. The broken horns of
Satan shall be trumpets of our triumph and the coronets of our joy.
"The God of peace will soon crush Satan under your feet." Romans 16:20. The Greek
word signifies to break or crash a thing to pieces. Being applied to the feet—it means
that crushing which is by stamping upon a thing.
FIVE REASONS OF THE POINT
Now I shall come to the reasons of the point, and so draw to a close.
Reason (1). That their hearts may be kept in a humble, praying, watching
frame.
Oh! has Satan so many devices to ensnare and undo the souls of men? How should this
awaken dull, drowsy souls, and make them stand upon their watch! A Christian should
be like the seraphim, beset all over with eyes and lights, that he may avoid Satan's
snares, and stand fast in the hour of temptation.
The Lord has in the Scripture discovered the several snares, plots, and devices that the
devil has to undo the souls of men, that so, being forewarned, they may be forearmed;
that they may be always upon their watch-tower, and hold their weapons in their hands,
as the Jews did in Nehemiah's time.
The philosopher had a ball of brass in his hand; if he chanced to sleep it fell into a basin
and awaked him to his studies. You are wise and know how to apply it.
Reason (2). From that malice, envy, and enmity that is in Satan against the
souls of men.
Satan is full of envy and enmity, and that makes him very studious to suit his snares
and plots to the tempers, constitutions, fancies, and callings of men, that so he may
make them as miserable as himself.
Malice cares not what it says or does, just so that it may kill or gall.
The Russians are so malicious, that they have a man hide some of his own goods in the
house of him whom he hates, and then accuse him for the stealing of them. So does
Satan, out of malice to the souls of men, hide his goods, his wares, as I may say, in the
souls of men, and then go and accuse them before the Lord; and a thousand, thousand
other ways Satan's malice, envy, and enmity puts him upon, eternally to undo the
precious souls of men.
An envious heart and plotting head, are inseparable companions.

150

Precious Remedies Against Satan's Devices
Thomas Brooks
Reason (3). The third reason is drawn from that long experience that Satan
has had.
He is a spirit of mighty abilities; and his abilities to lay snares before us are mightily
increased by that long standing of his. He is a spirit of over five thousand years'
standing. He has had time enough to study all those ways and methods which tend
most to ensnare and undo the souls of men. And as he has time enough, so he has
made it his whole study, his only study, his constant study, to find out snares, traps,
and stratagems, to entangle and overthrow the souls of men. When he was but a young
serpent, he did easily deceive and outwit our first parents. But now he is grown into that
'old serpent,' as John speaks (Rev. 12:9). He is as old as the world, and is grown very
cunning by experience.
Reason (4). In judgment to the men of the world, that they may stumble and
fall, and be ensnared forever.
Wicked men who withstand the offers of mercy, and despise the Spirit of grace; who will
not open, though God knocks ever so hard by his Word and rod, by his Spirit and
conscience—are given up by a hand of justice, to be hardened, deceived, and ensnared
by Satan, to their everlasting ruin (1 Kings 22:23). And what can be more just than that
they should be taken and charmed with Satan's wiles, who have frequently refused to
be charmed by the Spirit of grace, though he has charmed ever so wisely, and ever so
sweetly?
Reason (5). That the excellency and power of God's grace may be more
illustrated and manifested, by making his people able to grapple with this
mighty adversary, and that notwithstanding all the plots, devices, and
stratagems of Satan, yet he will make them victorious here, and crown them
with glory hereafter.
The greater and the subtler the enemies of the children of Israel were—the more did
divine power, wisdom, and goodness, sparkle and shine; and that, notwithstanding all
their power, plots, and stratagems, yet to Canaan God would bring them at last. When
Paul had weighed this, he sits down and glories in his infirmities and distresses and
Satan's buffetings—that the power of Christ might rest upon him (2 Cor. 12:7-9).