PURITAN GOLD -- The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment by Jeremiah Burroughs: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 8
How Christ Teaches Contentment

---

The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. By Jeremiah Burroughs.

Chapter 3. How Christ Teaches Contentment.

in himself)-a gracious heart has so much of God within himself, that he
has enough there to make up all his outward wants. In Proverbs 14:14 we
read, 'A good man shall be satisfied from himself', from that which is
within himself-that is the meaning. A gracious man has a bird within his
own bosom which makes him melody enough, though he lacks music.
'The Kingdom of heaven is within you' (Luke 17:21). He has a Kingdom
within him, a Kingdom of God; you see him spoken ill of abroad, but he
has a conscience within him that makes up the want of a name and credit,
that is instead of a thousand witnesses.
13. A GRACIOUS HEART GETS CONTENTMENT FROM THE
COVENANT THAT GOD HAS MADE WITH HIM.
Now this is a way of getting contentment that the men of the world do not
know: they can get contentment, if they have the creature to satisfy them;
but in getting contentment from the Covenant of grace they have little
skill. I should have opened two things here, first, how to get contentment
from the Covenant of grace in general (but I shall speak of that in the next
sermon, and now, only a word on the second). Secondly, how he gets
contentment form the particular branches of the Covenant, that is, from
the particular promises that he has, for supplying every particular want.
There is no condition that a godly man or woman can be in, but there is
some promise or other in the Scripture to help him in that condition. And
that is the way of his contentment, to go to the promises, and get from the
promise, that which may supply. This is but a dry business to a carnal
heart; but it is the most real thing in the world to a gracious heart: when
he finds lack of contentment he repairs to the promise, and the Covenant,
and falls to pleading the promises that God has made. As I should have
shown several promises that God has made, whatever the affliction, I will
only mention one, that is, the saddest affliction of all, in case of the
visitation, and the plague (Psalm 91). Those whose friends cannot come
to them by reason of the plague, and who cannot have other comforts, in
other afflictions might have their friends and other things to comfort
them-but in that they cannot. We read, 'There shall no evil befall thee,
neither shall nay plague come nigh thy dwelling'; then there is a promise
for the pestilence in the 5th and 6th verses, this is a Scripture to those
who are in danger of it. You will say that this is a promise that the plague

shall not come nigh them; but mark that these two are joined: there shall
no evil befall thee, neither shall the plague come nigh thee, the evil of it
shall not come nigh thee.
Objection: You will say, but it does come to many godly men, and how
can they make use of this Scripture? It is rather a Scripture that may
trouble them, because here is a promise that it shall not come nigh them,
and yet it does come nigh them as well as others.
Answer: 1 . The promises of outward deliverance that were made to the
people of God in the time of the law, were to be understood then a great
deal more literally, and fulfilled more literally, than in the times of the
gospel when God makes it up otherwise with as much mercy. Though God
made a Covenant of grace and eternal life in Christ with them, yet I think
there was another covenant too, which God speaks of as a distinct
covenant for outward things, to deal with his people according to their
ways, either in outward prosperity, or in outward afflictions, more so
than now, in a more punctual, set way, than in the times of the gospel.
Therefore when the children of Israel sinned against God, they were sure
to have public judgments come upon them, and if they did well, always
public mercies; the general, constant way of God was to deal with the
people of the Jews according as they did well or ill, with outward
judgments and outward mercies. But it is not so now in the times of the
gospel; we cannot bring such a certain conclusion, that if God did deal so
severely with men by such and such afflictions, he will deal so with them
now, or that they shall have outward prosperity as they had then.
Therefore, that is the first thing, for understanding this and all other texts
of the kind.
2. Perhaps their faith does not attain to this promise; and God often
brings many outward afflictions, because the faith of his people does not
reach the promise, and that not only in the Old Testament, but in the
times of the New Testament. Zacharias' time may be said to be in the time
of the New Testament, when he was struck with dumbness because he did
not believe; and that is given as the cause why he was struck with
dumbness. But you will say now, has faith a warrant to believe
deliverance, that it shall be fully delivered? I dare not say so, but it may
act upon it, to believe that God will make it good in his own way. Perhaps

you have not done as much, and so because of that, this promise is not
fulfilled to you.
3. When God makes such a promise to his people, yet still it must be with
this reservation, that God must have liberty for these three things.
i . That notwithstanding his promise, he will have liberty to make use of
anything for your chastisement.
i i . That he must have liberty, to make use of your wealth, or liberties, or
lives, for the furtherance of his own ends, if it is to be a stumbling block to
wicked and ungodly men. God must have liberty, though he has made a
promise to you he will not release the propriety that he has in your
possessions and lives.
iii. God must have sufficient liberty to make use of what you have, to
show that his ways are unsearchable, and his judgments past finding out.
God reserves these three things in his hand still.
Objection: But you will say, What good then is there in such a promise
that God makes to his people? 1. That you are under the protection of God
more than others. But what comfort is this if it befalls me? Answer: You
have this comfort, that the evil of it shall be taken from you, that if God
will make use of this affliction for other ends, yet he will do it so as to
make it up to you in some other way. Perhaps you have given your
children something, but afterwards if you have a use for that thing, you
will come and say, 'I must have it'. 'Why, father?' the child may say, 'you
gave it to me.' 'But I must have it', says the father, 'and I will make it up to
you in some other way.' The child does not think that the father's love is
ever a whit the less to him. So when there is any such promise as this,
that God by his promise gives you his protection, and yet for all that, such
a thing befalls you, it is only as if the father should say, 'I gave you that
indeed, but let me have it and I will make it up to you in some other way
that shall be as good.' God says, 'Let me have your health and liberty, and
life, and it shall be made up to you in some other way.' 2. Whenever the
plague or pestilence comes to those who are under such a promise, it is
fear some special and notable work, and God requires them to search and
examine in a special manner, to find out his meaning; there is so much to

be learned in the promise that God has made concerning this particular
evil, that the people of God may come to quiet and content their hearts in
this affliction.
I read in this Psalm that God has made a promise to his people, to deliver
them from the plague and pestilence, and yet I find it has come. It may be
that I have not made use of my faith in this promise heretofore; and if
God brings afflictions upon me, yet he will make it up some other way.
God made a promise to deliver me, or at least to deliver me from all the
evil of it; now if this thing does befall me and yet I have a promise of God,
certainly the evil of it is taken away. This promise tells me that if it does
befall me yet it is for some notable end, and because God has a use for my
life, and intends to bring about his glory some way that I do not know of.
And if he will come in a fatherly way of chastisement, yet I will be
satisfied in the thing. So a Christian heart, by reasoning out of the Word,
comes to satisfy his soul in the midst of such a heavy hand of God, and in
such a distressed condition as that. Now carnal hearts do not find that
power in the Word, that healing virtue that is in it, to heal their
distracting cares, and the troubles of their spirits; but when those who are
godly come to hear the Word, they find in it, as it were, a plaster for all
their wounds, and so they come to have ease and contentment in such
conditions as are very grievous and miserable to others. But as for other
particular promises, and more generally for the Covenant of grace, how
and in what a mysterious way the saints work to get contentment and
satisfaction to their souls, we shall refer to these things in the next
chapter.
In the last chapter we spoke of several things in the mystery of
contentment, and at the close we spoke of two more, but we did not have
time to open either of them. I shall now open them a little more fully,
then proceed to some few more.
That is the next thing then: a Christian heart not only has contentment in
God, and certainly he who has God (who himself has all) must have all,
but he is able to make up all his outward wants of creature comforts from
what he finds in himself. That may seem to be more strange. It is true,
perhaps, that even though men do not feel by experience shat it is to
make up all in God, yet we may convince them that if they have him who

has all things then they have all, for there is such a fullness in God, he
being the infinite first being of all things, that may make up all their
wants. But here is another thing, that is beyond that; I say a godly man
can make up whatever he lacks without the creature, he can make it up in
himself. In Proverbs 14:14 we read: 'A good man shall be satisfied from
himself.' Suppose for example, that he lacks outward comforts, good
cheer and feasting, a good conscience in a continual feast; so he can make
up the lack of a feast by the peace that he has in his own conscience. If he
lacks melody in the world, he has a bird within him that sings the most
melodious songs in the world, and the most delightful. And then does he
lack honor? He has his own conscience witnessing for him, that is as a
thousand witnesses. The Scripture says (in Luke 17:21): 'Neither shall
they say, Lo here! or, Lo there! for behold the kingdom of God is within
you.' A Christian, then, whatever he lacks he can make it up, for he has a
kingdom in himself: 'the kingdom of God is within you'.
If a king meets with a great deal of trouble when he is abroad, he contents
himself with this: 'I have a Kingdom of my own.' It is said here, the
Kingdom of God is within a man; now if those of you who are learned
look into the Commentary on this Gospel by a certain scholar, you will
find he has a very strange idea about this text: he confesses that it is
unutterable and so it is, the kingdom of God is within you, but he
understands it that there is such a presence of God and Christ within the
soul of a man, that when the body dies, he says, the soul goes into God
and Christ, who are within him. The soul's going into God and Christ, and
enjoying that communion with God and Christ that is within itself, that is
Heaven to it, he says. He confesses he is not able to express himself, and
others cannot understand fully what he means; but certainly for the
present, before death, there is a Kingdom of God within the soul, such a
manifestation of God in the soul as is enough to content the heart of any
godly man in the world, the Kingdom that he now has within him. He
need not wait till afterwards, till he goes to Heaven; but certainly there is
a Heaven in the soul of a godly man, he has Heaven already. Many times
when you go to comfort your friends in their afflictions, you say, 'Heaven
will pay for all'; indeed, you may assuredly find Heaven pays for all
already. There is a Heaven within the souls of the saints-that is a certain
truth; no soul shall ever come to Heaven, but the soul which has Heaven

come to it first. When you die, you hope you will go to Heaven; but if you
will go to Heaven when you die, Heaven will come to you before you die.
Now this is a great mystery, to have the Kingdom of Heaven in the soul;
no man can know this but that soul which has it. The Heaven which is
within the soul for the present is like the white stone and the new name,
that none but those that have it can understand it. It is a miserable
condition, my brethren, to depend altogether upon creatures for our
contentment. You know that rich men account it a great happiness, if they
do not need to go to buy things by the penny as others do; they have all
things for pleasure or profit on their own ground, and all their
inheritance lies entire together, nobody comes within them, but they have
everything within themselves: there lies their happiness. Whereas other,
poorer people are fain to go from one market to another to provide the
their necessities, great rich men have sheep and beeves, corn and
clothing, and all things else of their own within themselves, and herein
they place their happiness. But this is the happiness of a Christian, that
he has that within himself which may satisfy him more than all these.
There is a place in the first chapter of James that seems to allude to the
condition of men who have all their wealth within themselves: 'But let
patience have her perfect work that ye may be perfect, and entire,
wanting nothing' (James 1:4). The word there used signifies to have the
whole inheritance to ourselves, not a broken inheritance, but that where
all lies within themselves, not like a man who has a piece of his estate
here, and a piece there, but one who has it all lying together. When the
heart is patient under afflictions it finds itself in such an estate as this,
finds its whole inheritance together, and all complete within itself.
Now to show this by further analogies: the one who is filled with good
things is just like many a man who enjoys an abundance of comforts at
home, in his own house. God grants him a pleasant home, a good wife,
and fine walks and gardens, and he has all things at home that he could
desire. Now such a man does not care much for going out. Other men are
fain to go out and see friends, because they have quarrelling and
contending at home. Many poor husbands will give this reason, if their
wives moan, and complain of their faults and shortcomings. They make it
their excuse to go out, because they can never be quiet at home. Now we

account those men most happy who have everything at home. Those who
have confined homes that are unpleasant and evil-smelling delight to go
into the fresh air, but it is not so with many others that have good things
at home. Those who have no good cheer at home are fain to go out to
friends, but those whose tables are well furnished would as soon stay at
home. So a carnal man has little contentment in his own spirit. It is
Augustine who likens a bad conscience to a scolding wife: a man who has
a bad conscience does not care to look into his own soul, but loves to be
out, and to look into other things; he never looks to himself.
As it is with a vessel that is full of liquor, if you strike it, it will make no
great noise, but if it is empty then it makes a great noise; so it is with the
heart, a heart that is full of grace and goodness within will bear a great
many strokes, and never make any noise, but if an empty heart is struck it
will make a noise. When some men and women are complaining so much,
and always whining, it is a sign that there is an emptiness in their hearts.
If their hearts were filled with grace they would not make such a noise. A
man whose bones are filled with marrow, and his veins with good blood
does not complain of the cold as others do. So a gracious heart, having
the Spirit of God within him, and his heart filled with grace has that
within him that makes him find contentment. It was a saying of Seneca:
'Those things that I suffer will be incredibly heavy when I cannot bear
myself.' But if I am no burden to myself, if all is quiet within my own
heart, then I can bear anything. Many men through their wickedness
have burdens outside, but the greatest burden is the wickedness of their
own hearts. They are not burdened with their sins in a godly way, for that
would ease their burden, but they still have their wickedness in its power,
and so they are burdens to themselves. The disorders of men's hearts are
great burdens to them, but many times a godly man has enough within to
content him. Virtue is content with itself, to live well-it is a saying of
Cicero, in one of his Paradoxes-it finds enough within its own sphere for
living happily. But how few are acquainted with this mystery! Many
think, O if I had what another man has, how happily and comfortably
should I live! But if you are a Christian, whatever your condition, you
have enough within yourself. You will say, such and such men who have
all things need not be beholden to anybody.

There are many who labor and take pains when they are young, that they
might not be beholden to others; they love to live of themselves. Now a
Christian may do so, not that he does not live upon God (I do not mean
that), but upon what he has of God within himself: he can live upon that,
although he does not enjoy the comforts that are outside himself. That is
what I mean, and those who are godly and keep close to God in their
communion with him will understand what I mean by saying that a
Christian has the supply of all his wants within himself. Here you may see
that the spirit of a Christian is a precious spirit; a godly spirit is precious,
why? Because it has enough to make him happy within himself.
The next thing that the mystery of contentment consists in is this, That a
gracious heart gets it supply of all things from the Covenant, and so
comes to have contentment, which is a dry thing to a carnal spirit.
There are two things in this: 1 . He gets contentment from the Covenant
in general, that is, from the great covenant that God has made with him
in Christ.
2 . He gets it from the particular promises that God has made with him in
the Covenant.
1. From the Covenant in general. I will give you one Scripture for that,
which is very striking: 'Although my house be not so with God, yet he
hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and
sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it
not to grow' (
2 Samuel 23:5). It is a wonderful statement by David, who did not have
the Covenant of Grace revealed as fully as we have. Mark what he says:
'Although I find not my house so', that is, so comfortable in every way as I
would wish, although it is not so, what has he got to content his spirit? He
says, 'He has made with me an everlasting covenant,' this is what helps in
everything. Some men will say, I am not thus and thus with God, I do not
find that God comes in so fully, or it is not with my house and family as I
hoped it might be, perhaps there is this or that affliction upon my house.
Suppose the plague were to come into your house, and it is not so safe,

and you do not enjoy such outward comfort in your house as you once
did. Can you read this Scripture and say, Although my house is not so
blessed with health as other men's houses are, although my house is not
so, yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant. I am still one in
covenant with God, the Lord has made with me an everlasting covenant.
As for these things in the world, I see they are but momentary, they are
not everlasting. I see a family in which all was well only a week ago, and
now everything is down, the plague has swept away a great many of them,
and the rest are left in sadness and mourning. We see there is no resting
in the things of this world, yet the Lord has made with me an everlasting
covenant ordered in all things. I find disorder in my heart, in my family;
but the everlasting covenant is ordered in all things, yes, and it is sure.
Alas, there is no certainty here in these things. We can be sure of nothing
here, especially in these times; we know that a man can be sure of little
that he has, and who can be sure of his wealth? Perhaps some of you have
here lived well and comfortably before, all was well about you, and you
thought your mountain was strong, but within a day or two you see
everything taken away from you-there is no certainty in the things of this
world; but he says, the Covenant is sure. What I venture at sea is not sure,
but here is an insurance office indeed, a great insurance office for the
saints, at which they are not charged, except in the exercising of grace, for
they may go to this insurance office to insure everything that they
venture, either to have the thing itself, or to be paid for it. In an insurance
office you cannot be sure to have the very goods that you insured, but if
they are lost the insurers pledge themselves to make it good to you. And
this Covenant of grace that God has made with his people is God's
insurance office, and the saints in all their fears may and ought to go to
the Covenant to insure all things, to insure their wealth and insure their
lives. You will say, How are they sure? Their lives and wealth go as well as
other people's do. But God pledges himself to make up all. And mark
what follows, 'This is all my salvation'- Why, David, will you not have
salvation from your enemies and from outward dangers, pestilence and
plague? The frame of his spirit is quieted, as though to say: if that
salvation comes, well and good, I shall praise God for it; but what I have
in the Covenant, that is my salvation, I look upon that as enough. Yes,
and he goes further, 'This is all my salvation and all my desire'-Why,

David, is there not something else that you would like to have besides this
Covenant? No, he says, it is all involved in this. Surely, those men or
women must needs live contented lives who have all their desires? Now,
says the holy man here, this is all my desire, though he make it not to
grow. For all this Covenant, perhaps, you will not prosper in the world as
other men do, true; but I can bear that. Though God does not make my
house to grow, I have all my desires.
Thus you see how a godly heart finds contentment n the Covenant. Many
of you speak of the Covenant of God, and of the Covenant of grace; but
have you found it as effectual as this to your souls, have you sucked this
sweetness from the Covenant, and contentment to your hearts in your sad
conditions. It is a special sign of true grace in any soul, that when any
affliction befalls him, in a kind of natural way he repairs immediately to
the Covenant. Just as a child, as soon as ever it is in danger, need not be
told to go to his father or mother, for nature tells him so; so it is with a
gracious heart: as soon as it is in any trouble or affliction there is a new
nature which carries him to the Covenant immediately, where he finds
ease and rest. If you find that your hearts work in this way, immediately
running to the Covenant, it is an excellent sign of true grace: so much for
the general point.
2. But now for particular promises in the Covenant grace. A gracious
heart looks upon every promise as coming from the root of the great
Covenant, of grace in Christ. Other men look upon some particular
promises, that God will help them in straits, and keep them and the like,
but they do not look at the connection of such particular promises, to the
root, the Covenant of grace. Christians miss a great deal of comfort which
they might have from the particular promises in the gospel, if they would
consider their connection to the root, the great Covenant that God has
made with them in Christ. In the times of the law, they might rest more
upon outward promises than we can in the time of the gospel. I gave you
the reason why we who live in the times of the gospel cannot depend so
much on a literal fulfillment of the outward promises that we find in the
Old Testament, as they could in the time of the law. For there was a
special covenant, that God pleased to call a New Covenant, by way of
distinction from the other covenant, that is made with us in Christ for

eternal life. So even the law, was given to them in a more peculiar way for
an external covenant of outward blessings in the land of Canaan, and so
God dealt with them in a more external covenant than he does now with
his people. Yet godliness has the promise of this life, and that which is to
come. We may make use of the promises for this life, but yet not so much
to rest upon the literal performance of them as they of old might. But God
will make them good in some way or other, in a spiritual way if not in an
outward way. We must lay no more upon outward promises than this,
and therefore if we lay more, we make the promise to bear more than it
will bear.
To give some examples: to believe fully and confidently, that the plague
shall not come nigh a certain house, is, I say, to lay more upon such a
promise than it will bear. If you remember, I opened that promise in
Psalm 91. Now if I had lived in the time of the law, perhaps I might have
been somewhat more confident of the literal performance of the promise,
than I can be now in the time of the gospel. The promise now bears no
more than this, that God has a special protection over his people, and that
he will deliver them from the evil of such an affliction, and if he does
bring such an affliction, it is more than an ordinary providence it is a
special providence that God has in it. I thought I would give you several
promises for the contentment of the heart in the time of affliction: 'When
thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the
rivers, they shall not overflow thee; when thou walkest through the fire
thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee' (Isaiah
43:2).
Certainly, though this promise was made in the time of the law, it will be
made good to all the saints now, one way or other, either literally or in
some other way. For we find clearly that the promise that was made to
Joshua, 'I will not fail thee nor forsake thee' (Joshua 1:5) is applied to
Christians in the time of the Gospel.
So here is the way of faith in bringing contentment by the promises: the
saints of God have an interest in all the promises that ever were made to
our forefathers, from the beginning of the world they are their
inheritance, and go on from one generation to another. By that they come

to have contentment, because they inherit all the promises made in all the
book of God.
Hebrews 13:5 shows this plainly, that it is our inheritance, and we do not
inherit less now than they did in Joshua's time, but we inherit more.
For you will find in that place of Hebrews that more is said than is to
Joshua. To Joshua God says, He will not leave him nor forsake him; but
in this place in Hebrews in the Greek there are five negatives, I will not,
not, not, not, not again. That is the force of it in the Greek. I say, there are
five negatives in that little sentence; as if God should say, I will not leave
you, no I will not, I will not, I will not, with such earnestness five times
together. So that not only have we the same promises that they had, but
we have them more enlarged and more full, though still not so much in
the literal sense, for that, indeed is the least part of the promise. In
Isaiah 54:17 God made a promise: That no weapon formed against his
people should prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against them in
judgment they shall condemn, and mark what follows, 'This is the
heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is of me,
saith the Lord.' This is a good promise for a soldier, though still we ought
not to lay too much upon the literal sense. True, it holds forth thus much,
that God's protection is in special manner over the soldier that are godly.
'And every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt
condemn'-this is against false witness too. Oh you, whose friends never
left you anything! you will say, My friends died and did not leave me a
groat; but I thank God, he has provided for me. Though your father or
mother died and left you no inheritance, you have an inheritance in the
promise, 'This is their heritage.' So that there is no godly man or woman,
but is a great heir.
Therefore when you look into the book of God and find any promise
there, you may make it your own; just as an heir who rides over a lot of
fields and meadows says, This meadow is my inheritance, and this corn
field is my inheritance, and then he sees a fine house, and says, This fine
house is my inheritance. He looks at them with a different eye from a
stranger who rides over those fields. A carnal heart reads the promises,
and reads them merely as stories, not that he has any great interest in

them. But every time a godly man reads the Scriptures (remember this
when you are reading the Scripture) and there meets with a promise, he
ought to lay his hand upon it and say, This is part of my inheritance, it is
mine, and I am to live upon it.
This will make you contented; it is a mysterious way of getting
contentment. And there are several other promises that bring
contentment (Psalm 34:10, 37:6; Isaiah 58:10). So much for the mystery
of contentment by way of the Covenant.
There are two or three things more that show how a godly man has
contentment in a mysterious way different from any carnal heart in the
world, as follows: 14. HE HAS CONTENTMENT BY REALIZING THE
GLORIOUS THINGS OF HEAVEN TO HIM.
He has the kingdom of Heaven as present, and the glory that is to come;
by faith he makes it present. So the martyrs had contentment in their
sufferings, for some of them said, 'Though we have but a hard breakfast,
yet we shall have a good dinner, we shall very soon be in heaven.' 'Do but
shut your eyes', said one, 'and you shall be in heaven at once.' 'We faint
not', says the Apostle (
2 Corinthians 4:16). Why? Because these light afflictions that are but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
They see heaven before them and that contents them. When you sailors
see the haven before you, though you were mightily troubled before you
could see any land, yet when you come near the shore and can see a
certain land-mark, that contents you greatly. A godly man in the midst of
the waves and storms that he meets with can see the glory of heaven
before him and so contents himself. One drop of the sweetness of heaven
is enough to take away all the sourness and bitterness of all the afflictions
in the world. We know that one drop of sourness, or one drop of gall will
make bitter a great deal of honey. Put a spoonful of sugar into a cup of
gall or wormwood, and it will not sweeten it; but if you put a spoonful of
gall into a cup of sugar, it will embitter that. Now it is otherwise in
heaven: one drop of sweetness will sweeten a great deal of sour affliction,
but a great deal of sourness and gall will not embitter a soul who sees the
glory of heaven that is to come. A carnal heart has no contentment but

from what he sees before him in this world, but a godly hearts has
contentment from what he sees laid up for him in the highest heavens.
15. THE LAST THING THAT I WOULD MENTION IS THIS, A
godly man has contentment by opening and letting out his heart to God.
Other men or women are discontented, but how do they help themselves?
By abuse, by bad language. Someone crosses them, and they have no way
to help themselves but by abuse and by bitter words, and so they relieve
themselves in that way when they are angry. But when a godly man is
crossed, how does he relieve himself?-He is aware of his cross as well as
you, but he goes to God in prayer, and there opens his heart to God and
lets out his sorrows and fears, and then can come away with a joyful
countenance. Do you find that you can come away from prayer and not
look sad? It is said of Hannah, that when she had been at prayer her
countenance was no more said (1 Samuel 1:18), she was comforted: this is
the right way to contentment.
Thus we have done with the mystery of contentment. Now if you can but
put these things together that we have spoken of, you may see fully what
an art Christian contentment is.

How Christ Teaches Contentment
Contentment is not such a poor business as many make it. They say, 'You
must be content', and so on. But Paul needed to learn it, and it is a great
art and mystery of godliness to be content in a Christian way, and it will
be seen to be even more of a mystery when we come to show what lessons
a gracious heart learns when it learns to be contented. I have learned to
be contented; what lessons have you learned? Take a scholar who has
great learning and understanding in arts and sciences; how did he begin?
He began, as we say, his ABC, and then afterwards he came to his
Testament, and Bible and accidence,* and so to his grammar, and
afterwards to his other books. [*Accidence = the part of grammar dealing
with inflexions.] So a Christian coming to contentment is as a scholar in
Christ's school, and there are many lessons to teach the soul to bring it to
this learning; every godly man or woman is a scholar. It cannot be said of
any Christian that he is illiterate, but he is literate, a learned man, a
learned woman. Now the lessons that Christ teaches to bring us to
contentment are these: 1. THE LESSON OF SELF-DENIAL.
It is a hard lesson. You know that when a child is first taught, he
complains: This is hard; it is just like that. I remember Bradford the
martyr said, 'Whoever has not learned the lesson of the cross, has not
learned his ABC in Christianity.' This is where Christ begins with his
scholars, and those in the lowest form must begin with this; if you mean
to be Christians at all, you must buckle to this or you can never be
Christian. Just as no-one can be a scholar unless he learns his ABC, so
you must learn the lesson of self-denial or you can never become a
scholar in Christ's school, and be learned in this mystery of contentment.
That is the first lesson that Christ teaches any soul, self-denial, which
brings contentment, which brings down and softens a man's heart. You
know how when you strike something soft it makes no noise, but if you
strike a hard thing it makes a noise; so with the harts of men who are full
of themselves, and hardened with self-love, if they receive a stroke they
make a noise, but a self-denying Christian yields to God's hand, and
makes no noise. When you strike a woolsack it makes no noise because it

yields to the stroke; so a self-denying heart yields to the stroke and
thereby comes to this contentment. now there are several things in this
lesson of self-denial. I will not enter into the doctrine of self-denial, but
only show you how Christ teaches self-denial and how that brings
contentment.
1. Such a person learns to know that he is nothing. He comes to
this, to be able to say, 'Well, I see I am nothing in myself.' That man or
woman who indeed knows that he or she is nothing, and has learned it
thoroughly will be able to bear anything. The way to be able to bear
anything is to know that we are nothing in ourselves. God says to us, 'Wilt
thou set thine eyes upon that which is not' (
Proverbs 23:5) speaking of riches. Why, blessed God, do not you do so?
you have set your heart upon us and yet we are nothing. God would not
have set our hearts upon riches, because they are nothing, and yet God is
pleased to set his heart upon us, and we are nothing: that is God's grace,
free grace, and therefore it does not much matter what I suffer, for I am
as nothing.
2. I deserve nothing. I am nothing, and I deserve nothing. Suppose I lack
this and that thing which others have? I am sure that I deserve nothing
except it be Hell. You will answer any of your servants, who is not
content: I wonder what you think you deserve? or your children: do you
deserve it that you are so eager to have it? You would stop their mouths
thus, and so we may easily stop our own mouths: we deserve nothing and
therefore why should we be impatient if we do not get what we desire. If
we had deserved anything we might be troubled, as in the case of a man
who has deserved well of the state or of his friends, yet does not receive a
suitable reward, it troubles him greatly, whereas if he is conscious that he
has deserved nothing, he is content with a rebuff.
3. I can do nothing. Christ says, 'Without me you can do nothing' (John
15:5). Why should I make much of it, to be troubled and discontented if I
have not got this and that, when the truth is that I can do nothing? If you
were to come to one who is angry because he has not got such food as he
desires, and is discontented with it, you would answer him, 'I marvel
what you do or what use you are!' Should one who will sit still and be of

no use, yet for all that have all the supply that he could possible desire?
Do but consider of what use you are in the world, and if you consider
what little need God has of you, and what little use you are, you will not
be much discontented. if you have learned this lesson of self-denial,
though God cuts you short of certain comforts, yet you will say, 'Since I
do but little, why should I have much': this thought will bring down a
man's spirit as much as anything.
4. I am so vile that I cannot of myself receive any good. I am not only an
empty vessel, but a corrupt and unclean vessel: that would spoil anything
that comes into it. So are all our hearts: every one of them is not only
empty of good but is like a musty bottle that spoils even good liquor that
is poured into it.
5. If God cleanses us in some measure, and puts into us some good liquor,
some grace of his Spirit, yet we can make use of nothing when we have it,
if God but withdraws himself. If God leaves us one moment after he has
bestowed upon us the greatest gifts, and whatever abilities we can desire,
if God should say, 'I will give you them, now go and trade', we cannot
progress one foot further if God leaves us. Does God give us gifts and
abilities? Then let us fear and tremble lest God should leave us to
ourselves, for then how foully should we abuse those gifts and abilities.
You think other men and women have memory and gifts and abilities and
you would fain have them-but suppose God should give you these, and
then leave you, you would utterly spoil them.
6. We are worse than nothing. By sin we become a great deal worse than
nothing. Sin makes us more vile than nothing, and contrary to all good. It
is a great deal worse to have a contrariety to all that is good, than merely
to have an emptiness of all that is good. We are not empty pitchers in
respect of good, but we are like pitchers filled with poison, and is it much
for such as we are to be cut short of outward comforts? 7. If we perish we
will be no loss. If God should annihilate me, what loss would it be to
anyone? God can raise up someone else in my place to serve him in a
different way.
Now put just these seven things together and then Christ has taught you
self-denial. I may call these the several words in our lesson of self-denial.

Christ teaches the soul this, so that, as in the presence of God on a real
sight of itself, it can say: 'Lord, I am nothing, Lord, I deserve nothing,
Lord, I can do nothing, I can receive nothing, and can make use of
nothing, I am worse than nothing, and if I come to nothing and perish I
will be no loss at all and therefore is it such a great thing for me to be cut
short here?' A man who is little in his own eyes will account every
affliction as little, and every mercy as great. Consider Saul: There was a
time, the Scripture says, when he was little in his own eyes, and then his
afflictions were but little to him: when some would not have had him to
be King but spoke contemptuously of him, he held his peace; but when
Saul began to be big in his own eyes, then the affliction began to be great
to him.
There was never any man or woman so contented as a self-denying man
or woman. No-one ever denied himself as much as Jesus Christ did: he
gave his cheeks to the smiters, he opened not his mouth, he was as a lamb
when he was led to the slaughter, he made no noise in the street. He
denied himself above all, and was willing to empty himself, and so he was
the most contented that ever any was in the world; and the nearer we
come to learning to deny ourselves as Christ did, the more contented
shall we be, and by knowing much of our own vileness we shall learn to
justify God.
Whatever the Lord shall lay upon us, yet he is righteous for he has to deal
with a most wretched creature. A discontented heart is troubled because
he has no more comfort, but a self-denying man rather wonders that he
has as much as he has. Oh, says the one, I have but a little; Aye, says the
man who has learned this lesson of self-denial, but I rather wonder that
God bestows upon me the liberty of breathing in the air, knowing how
vile I am, and knowing how much sin the Lord sees in me. And that is the
way of contentment, by learning self-denial.
8. But there is a further thing in self-denial which brings contentment.
Thereby the soul comes to rejoice and take satisfaction in all God's ways;
I beseech you to notice this. If a man is selfish and self-love prevails in his
heart, he will be glad of those things that suit with his own ends, but a
godly man who has denied himself will suit with and be glad of all things

that shall suit with God's ends. A gracious heart says, God's ends are my
ends and I have denied my own ends; so he comes to find contentment in
all God's ends and ways, and his comforts are multiplied, whereas the
comforts of other men are single. It is very rare that God's way shall suit
with a man's particular end, but always God's ways suit with his own
ends. if you will only have contentment when God's ways suit with your
own ends, you can have it only now and then, but a self-denying man
denies his own ends, and only looks at the ends of God and therein he is
contented. When a man is selfish he cannot but have a great deal of
trouble and vexation, for if I regard myself, my ends are so narrow that a
hundred things will come and jostle me, and I cannot have room in those
narrows ends of my own. You know in the City what a great deal of stir
there is in narrow streets: since Thames street is so narrow they jostle
and wrangle and fight one with another because the place is so narrow,
but in the broad streets they can go quietly. Similarly men who are selfish
meet and so jostle with one another, one man is for self in one thing, and
another man is for self in another thing, and so they make a great deal of
stir. But those whose hearts are enlarged and make public things their
ends, and can deny themselves, have room to walk and never jostle with
one another as others do. The lesson of self-denial is the first lesson that
Jesus Christ teaches men who are seeking contentment.
2. THE VANITY OF THE CREATURE.
That is the second lesson in Christ's school, which he teaches those whom
he would make scholars in this art: the vanity of the creature, that
whatever there is in the creature has an emptiness in it. 'Vanity of
vanities, all is vanity,' is the lesson that the wise man learned: the
creature in itself can do us neither good nor hurt; it is all but as wind.
There is nothing in the creature that is suitable for a gracious heart to
feed upon for its good and happiness. My brethren, the reason why you
have not got contentment in the things of the world is not because you
have not got enough of them-that is not the reason-but the reason is,
because they are not things proportionable to that immortal soul of yours
that is capable of God himself. Many men think that when they are
troubled and have not got contentment it is because they have but a little
in the world, and that if they had more then they should be content. That

is just as if a man were hungry, and to satisfy his craving stomach he
should gape and hold open his mouth to take in the wind, and then
should think that the reason why he is not satisfied is because he has not
got enough of the wind; no, the reason is because the thing is not suitable
to a craving stomach. Yet there is really the same madness in the world:
the wind which a man takes in by gaping will as soon satisfy a craving
stomach ready to starve, as all the comforts in the world can satisfy a soul
who knows what true happiness means. You would be happy, and you
seek after such and such comforts in the creature.
Well, have you got them? do you find your hearts satisfied as having the
happiness that is suitable to you? No, no, it is not here, but you think it is
because you lack such and such things. O poor deluded man! it is not
because you have not got enough of it, but because it is not the thing that
is proportionable to the immortal soul that God has given you. Why do
you lay out money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that
which satisfieth not? (Isaiah 55:2). You are mad people, you seek to
satisfy your stomach with that which is not bread, you follow the win; you
will never have contentment. All creatures in the world say contentment
is not in us, riches say, contentment is not in me, pleasure says,
contentment is not in me; if you look for contentment in the creature you
will fail. No, contentment is higher. When you come into the school of
Christ, Christ teaches you that there is a vanity in all things in the world,
and the soul which, by coming into the school of Christ, by understanding
the glorious mysteries of the Gospel, comes to see the vanity of all things
in the world, is the soul that comes to true contentment. I could give you
an abundance of proverbs from Heathens which show the vanity of all
things in the world, and they did not learn the vanity of the creature in
the right school. But when a soul comes into the School of Jesus Christ,
and there comes to see vanity in all things in the world, then such a soul
comes to have contentment. If you seek contentment elsewhere, like the
unclean spirit you seek for rest but find none.
3. A THIRD LESSON WHICH CHRIST TEACHES A CHRISTIAN
WHEN HE COMES INTO HIS SCHOOL IS THIS: He teaches him
to understand what is the one thing that is necessary, which he never
understood before. You know what he said to Martha: 'O Martha thou

cumberest thyself about many things, but there is one thing necessary.'
Before, the soul sought after this and that, but now it says, I see that it is
not necessary for me to be rich, but it is necessary for me to make my
peace with God; it s not necessary that I should live a pleasurable life in
this world, but it is absolutely necessary that I should have pardon of my
sin; it is not necessary that I should have honor and preferment, but it is
necessary that I should have God as my portion, and have my part in
Jesus Christ, it is necessary that my soul should be saved in the day of
Jesus Christ. The other things are pretty fine indeed, and I should be glad
if God would give me them, a fine house, and income, and clothes, and
advancement for my wife and children: these are comfortable things, but
they are not the necessary things; I may have these and yet perish for
ever, but the other is absolutely necessary. No matter how poor I am, I
may have what is absolutely necessary: thus Christ instructs the soul.
Many of you have had some thoughts about this, that it is indeed
necessary for you to provide for your souls, but when you come to Christ's
school, Christ causes the fear of eternity to fall upon you, and causes such
a real sight of the great things of eternity, and the absolute necessity of
those things, that it possesses your heart with fear and takes you off from
all other things in the world.
It is said of Pompey, that when he was carrying corn to Rome at a time of
dearth, he was in a great deal of danger from storms at sea, but he said,
'We must go on, it is necessary that Rome should be relieved, but it is not
necessary that we should live.' So, certainly, when the soul is once taken
up with the things that are of absolute necessity, it will not be much
troubled about other things. What are the things that disquiet us here but
some by-matters in this world? And it is because our hearts are not taken
up with the one absolutely necessary thing. Who are the men who are
most discontented, but idle persons, persons who have nothing to occupy
their minds? Every little thing disquiets and discontents them; but in the
case of a man who has business of great weight and consequence, if all
things go well with his great business which is in his head, he is not aware
of meaner things in the family. On the other hand a man who lies at home
and has nothing to do finds fault with everything. So it is with the heart:
when the heart of a man has nothing to do, but to be busy about creaturecomforts, every little thing troubles him; but when the heart is taken up

with the weighty things of eternity, with the great things of eternal life,
the things of here below that disquieted it before are things now of no
consequence to him in comparison with the other-how things fall out
here is not much regarded by him, if the one thing that is necessary is
provided for.
4. THE SOUL COMES TO UNDERSTAND IN WHAT RELATION
IT STANDS TO THE WORLD.
By that I mean as follows, God comes to instruct the soul effectually
through Christ by his Spirit, on what terms it lives here in the world, in
what relation it stands. While I live in the world my condition is to be but
a pilgrim, a stranger, a traveler, and a soldier. Now rightly to understand
this, not only being taught it by rote, so that I can speak the words over,
but when my soul is possessed with the consideration of this truth, that
God has set me in this world, not as in my home but as a mere stranger
and a pilgrim who is travelling to another home, and that I am here a
soldier in my warfare, I say, a right understanding of this is a mighty help
to contentment in whatever befalls one.
For instance, when a man is at home, if things are not according to his
desire he will find fault and is not content; but if a man travels, perhaps
he does not meet with conveniences as he desires-the servants in the
house are not at his beck or are not as diligent as his own servants were,
and his diet is not as at home, and his bed not as at home-yet this thought
may moderate his spirit: I am a traveler and I must not be finding fault, I
am in another man's house, and it would be bad manners to find fault in
someone else's house, even though things are not as much to my liking as
at home.
If a man meets with bad weather, he must be content; it is travellers' fare,
we say. Both fair weather and foul are the common travellers' fare and we
must be content with it. Of course, if a man were at home and the rain
poured into his house, he would regard it as an intolerable hardship; but
when he is travelling, he is not so troubled about rain and storms. When
you are at sea, though you have not as many things as you have at home,
you are not troubled at it; you are contented. Why? Because you are at
sea.

You are not troubled when storms arise, and though many things are
otherwise than you would have them at home you are still quieted with
the fact that you are at sea. When sailors are at sea they do not care what
clothes they have, though they are pitched and tarred, and but a clout
about their necks, and any old clothes. They think of when they come
home: then they shall have their fine silk stockings and suits, and laced
bands, and such things, and shall be very fine. So they are contented
while away, with the thought that it shall be different when they come
home, and though they have nothing but salt meat, and a little hard fare,
yet when they come to their houses then they shall have anything.
Thus it should be with us in this world, for the truth is, we are all in this
world but as seafaring men, tossed up and down on the waves of the sea
of this world, and our haven is Heaven; here we are travelling, and our
home is a distant home in another world. Indeed some men have better
comforts than others in travelling, and it is truly a great mercy of God to
us in England that we can travel with such delight and comfort, much
more so than they can in other countries, and through God's mercy we
have as great comforts in our travelling to Heaven in England as in any
place under Heaven. Though we meet with travellers' fare sometimes, yet
it should not be grievous to us. The Scripture tells us plainly that we must
behave ourselves here as pilgrims and strangers: 'Dearly beloved, I
beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which
war against the soul' (1 Peter 2:11).
Consider what your condition is, you are pilgrims and strangers; so do
not think to satisfy yourselves here. When a man comes into an inn and
sees there a fair cupboard of plate, he is not troubled that it is not his
own.- Why? Because he is going away. So let us not be troubled when we
see that other men have great wealth, but we have not.-Why? We are
going away to another country; you are, as it were, only lodging here, for
a night. If you were to live a hundred years, in comparison to eternity it is
not as much as a night, it is as though you were travelling, and had come
to an inn. And what madness is it for a man to be discontented because
he has not got what he sees there, seeing he may be going away again
within less than a quarter of an hour? You find the same in David: this
was the argument that took David's heart away from the things of this

world, and set him on other things: 'I am a stranger in the earth, hide not
thy commandments from me' (Psalm 119:19). I am a stranger in the
earth-what then?-then, Lord, let me have the knowledge of your
commandments and it is sufficient. As for the things of the earth I do not
set store by them, whether I have much or little, but hide not thy
commandments from me, Lord, let me know the rule that I should guide
my life by.
Then again, we are not only travelers but soldiers: this is the condition in
which we are here in this world, and therefore we ought to behave
ourselves accordingly. The Apostle makes use of this argument in writing
to Timothy: 'Thou therefore endure hardness as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ' (2 Timothy 2:3).
The very thought of the condition of a soldier is enough to still his
disquiet of heart. When he is away, he does not enjoy such comforts in his
quarters as he has in his own home: perhaps a man who had his bed and
curtains drawn about him, and all comforts in his chamber, has now
sometimes to lie on straw and he thinks to himself, I am a soldier and it is
suitable to my condition. He must have his bed warmed at home, but he
must lie out in the fields when he is a soldier, and the very thought of the
condition in which he stands, calms him in all things. Yes, and he goes
rejoicing, to think that this is only suitable to the condition in which God
has put him. So it should be with us in respect of this world. What an
unseemly thing it would be to see a soldier go whining up and down with
his finger in his eye, complaining, that he does not have hot meat every
meal, and his bed warmed as he did at home! Now Christians know that
they are in their warfare, they are here in this world fighting and
combating with the enemies of their souls and their eternal welfare, and
they must be willing to endure hardness here. A right understanding of
this fact that God has put them into such a condition is what will make
them content, especially when they consider that they are certain of the
victory and that ere long they shall triumph with Jesus Christ; then all
their sorrows shall be done away, and their tears wiped from their eyes. A
soldier is content to endure hardness though he does not know that he
shall have the victory, but a Christian knows himself to be a soldier, and
knows that he shall conquer and triumph with Jesus Christ to all eternity.