PURITAN GOLD -- The Mystery of Providence by John Flavel: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 13
Our Employment

---

The Mystery of Providence. By John Flavel.

Chapter 4. Our Employment.

Chapter 4: Our Employment

Another excellent performance of Providence, respecting the good of
both your bodies and souls, concerns that employment and calling it
has ordered for you in this world. It has not only an eye upon your
well-being in the world to come, but upon your well-being in this
world also, and that very much depends upon the station and
vocation to which it calls you.
Now the Providence of God with respect to our civil callings may be
displayed very takingly in the following particulars.
In directing you to a calling in your youth, and not permitting you
to live an idle, useless and sinful life, as many do who are but
burdens to the earth, the wens of the body politic, serving only to
disfigure and drain it, to eat what others earn. Sin brought in sweat
(Gen. 3. 19), but now, not to sweat increases sin. He that lives idly
cannot live honestly, as is plainly enough intimated (1 Thess. 4. 11,
12). But when God puts men into a lawful calling, in which the labour
of their hands or heads is sufficient for them, it is a very valuable
mercy; for in so doing they ‘eat their own bread’ (2 Thess. 3. 12).
Many a sad temptation is happily prevented, and they are ordinarily
furnished by it for works of mercy to others, and surely ‘it is more
blessed to give than to receive.’
In ordering you to such callings and employments in the world as
are not only lawful in themselves but most suitable to you. There are
many persons employed in sinful trades and arts, merely to furnish
other men’s lusts. They do not only sin in their employments, but
their very employments are sinful. They trade for hell, and are
factors for the devil. Demetrius and the craftsmen at Ephesus got
their estates by making shrines for Diana (Acts 19. 24, 25), i.e., little
cases or boxes with folding leaves, within which the image of that
idol sat enshrined. These were carried about by the people in

procession in honour of their idol. And at this day, how many wicked
arts and employments are there invented, and multitudes of persons
maintained by them, merely to gratify the pride and wantonness of a
debauched age!
Now to have an honest and lawful employment, in which you do not
dishonour God in benefiting yourselves, is no small mercy. But if it is
not only lawful in itself, but suited to your genius and strength, there
is a double mercy in it. Some poor creatures are engaged in callings
that eat up their time and strength, and make their lives very
uncomfortable to them. They have not only consuming and wasting
employments in the world, but such as allow them little or no time
for their general calling, and yet all this does but keep them and
theirs alive. Therefore, if God has fitted you with an honest
employment in which you have less toil than others, and more time
for heavenly exercises, ascribe this benefit to the special care of
Providence for you.
In settling you in such an employment and calling in the world, as
possibly neither yourselves nor parents could ever expect you
should attain to. There are among us such persons as, on this
account, are signally obliged to divine Providence. God has put them
into such a way as neither they nor their parents ever planned. For
look how the needle in the compass turns now this way, then that
way, and never ceases moving till it settles to the north point; just so
it is in our settlement in the world. A child is now designed for this,
then for that, but at last settles in that way of employment to which
Providence designed him. How strangely are things wheeled about
by Providence! Now what we or our parents, but what God designed
shall take place. Amos was very meanly employed at first, but God
designed him for a more honourable and comfortable calling (Amos
7. 14, 15). David followed the ewes, and probably never raised his

thoughts to higher things in the days of his youth; but God made him
the royal shepherd of a better flock (Ps. 78. 70, 71). Peter and Andrew
were employed as fishermen, but Christ calls them from that to a
higher calling, to be ‘fishers of men’ (Matt. 4. 18, 19). Pareus, when
he was fourteen years old, was by the instigation of his stepmother
placed with an apothecary; but Providence so wrought that he was
taken off from that and fitted for the ministry, in which he became a
fruitful and eminent instrument to the Church. James Andreas was,
by reason of his father’s inability to keep him at school, designed for
a carpenter, but was afterwards, by the persuasion of friends and
assistance of the church-flock, sent to Stuttgart, and thence to the
University, and so attained to a very eminent station of service to the
Church. A master builder, Oecolampadius, was by his father
designed for a merchant; but his mother, by urgent entreaties,
prevailed to keep him at school, and this man was a blessed
instrument in the reformation of religion. I might easily cite
multitudes of such instances, but a taste may suffice.
In securing your estates from ruin. ‘Hast thou not made an hedge
about him, and all that he hath?’ (Job 1. 10). This is the enclosure of
Providence, which secures to us what by its favour we acquire in the
way of honest industry.
In making your calling sufficient for you. It was the prayer of Moses
for the tribe of Judah: ‘Let his hands be sufficient for him’ (Deut. 33.
7), and it is no small mercy if yours be so to you. Some there are that
have work, but not strength to go through with it; others have
strength, but no employment for it. Some have hands, and work for
them; but it is not sufficient for them and theirs. If God bless your
labours, so as to give you and yours necessary supports and comfort
in the world by it, it is a choice providence, and with all thankfulness
to be acknowledged.

If any that fear God shall complain that, although they have a calling,
yet it is a hard and laborious one, which takes up too much of their
time which they would gladly employ in other and better work, I
answer that it is likely that the wisdom of Providence foresaw this to
be the most suitable and proper employment for you; and if you had
more ease and rest, you might have more temptations than now you
have. The strength and time which is now taken up in your daily
labours, in which you serve God, might otherwise have been spent
upon such lusts in which you might have served the devil.
Moreoever, hereby it may be your health is the better preserved, and
natural refreshments made the sweeter to you. ‘The sleep of a
labouring man is sweet, whether he eat little or much: but the
abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep’ (Eccl. 5. 12).
And as to the service of God, if your hearts are spiritual, you may
enjoy much communion with God in your very employments, and
you have some intervals and respites for that purpose. Have you not
more spare hours than you employ to that end?
‘But all my labours will scarcely suffice to procure me and mine the
necessaries of life. I am kept short and low to what others are, and
this is a sad affliction.’
Though the wisdom of Providence has ordered you a lower and
poorer condition than others, yet consider how many there are that
are lower than you in the world. You have but little of the world, yet
others have less. Read the description of those persons (Job 30. 4,
etc.). If God has given you but a small portion of the world, yet if you
are godly He has promised never to forsake you (Heb. 13. 5).
Providence has ordered that condition for you which is really best for
your eternal good. If you had more of the world than you have, your
heads and hearts might not be able to manage it to your advantage. A

small boat must have but a narrow sail. You have not lacked hitherto
the necessities of life, and are commanded ‘having food and raiment
(though none of the finest) to be therewith content.’ ‘A little that a
righteous man hath is better than the riches of many wicked’ (Ps. 37.
16): better in the acquisition, sweeter in the fruition, and more
comfortable in the account.
Well then, if Providence has so disposed of you all, that you can eat
your own bread, and so advantageously directed some of you to
employments that afford, not only necessities for yourselves and
families, but a surplus of works of mercy to others, and all this
brought about for you in a way you did not plan; let God be owned
and honoured in this providence. Will you not henceforth call Him:
‘My Father, the guide of my youth’ (Jer. 3. 4)? Surely it was the Lord
that guided you to settle as you did in those days of your youth; you
reap at this day, and may to your last day, the fruits of those early
providences in your youth.
Now see that you walk answerably to the obligations of Providence in
this particular; and see to it in the fear of God that you do not abuse
any of those things to His dishonour which He has wrought for your
comfort. To prevent this, I will here drop a few needful cautions, and
conclude this particular point.
Do not be slothful and idle in your vocations. It is said that Augustus
built an Apragapolis, a city void of business; but I am sure God never
erected any city, town or family to that end. The command to Adam
(Gen. 3. 19) no doubt reaches all his posterity, and Gospelcommands bind it upon Christians (Rom. 12. 11; 1 Thess. 4. 11). If
you are negligent, you cannot be innocent.
And yet do not be so intent upon your particular callings as to make
them interfere with your general calling. Beware you do not lose your

God in the crowd and hurry of earthly business. Mind that solemn
warning: ‘But they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition’ (1 Tim. 6. 9). The inhabitants of Oenoe, a
dry island near Athens, bestowed much labour to draw in a river to
water it and make it fruitful. But when the sluices were opened, the
waters flowed so abundantly that it overflowed the island and
drowned the inhabitants. The application is obvious. It was an
excellent saying of Seneca: ‘I do not give, but lend myself to
business.’
Remember always the success of your callings and earthly
employments is by divine blessing, not human diligence alone. ‘But
thou shalt remember the Lord thy God; for it is he that giveth thee
power to get wealth’ (Deut. 8. 18). The devil himself was so far
orthodox as to acknowledge it: ‘Hast not thou made an hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on every side?
Thou hast blessed the work of his hands’ (Job 1. 10). Recommend
therefore your affairs to God in prayer. ‘Delight thyself also in the
Lord; and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy
way unto the Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass’
(Ps. 37. 4, 5). And do not meddle with that which you cannot
recommend to God in prayer for a blessing.
Be well satisfied in that station and employment in which Providence
has placed you, and do not so much as wish yourself in another. ‘Let
every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called’ (1 Cor. 7.
20). Providence is wiser than you, and you may be confident it has
suited all things better to your eternal good than you could do had
you been left to your own option.