PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 14
The Holy Spirit's Work in Mortification


Chapter 3

THE HOLY SPIRIT ’S
WORK IN MORTIFICATION
1. The Second Principle for Mortification:
The Spirit Is the Effective Cause
The next principle for mortification relates to the great sovereign cause of mortification,
which, in the words laid for the foundation of this discourse, is said to be the Holy Spirit, as
was proved earlier.
Principle II: Only the Holy Spirit is sufficient for mortification of sin. All ways and means
without Him are as nothing. He is the great effective cause of it. He works in us as He
pleases.

a. Other remedies useless
In vain do men seek other remedies; they shall not be healed by them. The other ways prescribed for sin to be mortified are known.
1). Roman Catholicism. The greatest part of popish religion,25 of that which looks most
like religion in their profession, consists in mistaken ways and means of mortification. This is
the pretense of their rough garments, by which they deceive. Their vows, orders, fastings, and
penances are all built on this ground: they are all for the mortifying of sin. Their preachings,
sermons, and books of devotion all look this way. Hence, those who interpret the locusts that
came out of the bottomless pit (Rev 9:3) to be the friars of the Romish church—who are said
to torment men so that they will “seek death, and shall not find it” (9:6)—think that they did it
by their stinging sermons in which they convinced them of sin. In reality, however, not being
able to discover the true remedy for the healing and mortifying of sin, they kept them in such
perpetual anguish and terror, and such trouble in their consciences, that they desired to die!
This, I say, is the substance and glory of their religion. But such glory is their shame (Phi
3:19), what with their laboring to bring mortification to dead creatures, ignorant of the nature
and end of the work; what with the poison they mixed with it in their persuasion of its merit;
yea, even supererogation 26 (as they style their unnecessary merit with a proud, barbarous title)! But of them and their mortification more afterward in chapter seven.
25
26

Popish religion – Roman Catholicism.
supererogation – in Roman Catholic theology, the performance of good works beyond what God commands or requires, which are held to constitute a store of merit that the Church may dispense to others to
make up for their deficiencies.

3. The Holy Spirit’s Work in Mortification

15

2). Professing Protestants. It is known that the ways and means to be used for the mortification of sin invented by Roman Catholics are still insisted on and prescribed for the same end
by some who should have more light and knowledge of the gospel. Such directions to this
purpose have of late been given by some, and are greedily grabbed at by others professing
themselves Protestants, who might have become popish devotionists three or four hundred
years ago. Such outside endeavors, such bodily exercises, such self-performances, such merely
legal duties without the least mention of Christ or His Spirit, are covered over with swelling
words of vanity for the only means and helps for the mortification of sin. Such reveal a deeprooted unacquaintedness with the power of God and mystery of the gospel. This consideration
was one motive to the publishing of this plain discourse.

b. Reasons they are useless
Now, some reasons among others why the papists 27 and these others can never truly mortify
any one sin with all their endeavors are as follows.
1). Because many of the ways and means they use and insist upon for this end were never
appointed by God for that purpose. Now, there is nothing in religion that has any effectiveness
for achieving an objective, unless God has appointed it for that purpose. Such as these are
their rough garments, their vows, penances, disciplines, their course of monastical life, and
the like. Concerning these God will say, “Who hath required this at your hand?” (Isa 1:12),
and, “In vain they do worship me, teaching for doctrines the traditions of men” (Mat 15:9). Of
the same nature are various self-vexations insisted on by others.
2). Because the things that are appointed of God as means 28 are not used by them in
their due place and order, such as praying, fasting, watching, meditation, and the like. These
have their use in the business in hand if they are all looked upon as streams, 29 but they look on
them as the fountain. 30 These things effect and accomplish the end as means only, subordinate
to the Spirit and faith; but they look on them to do it by virtue of the work itself. If they fast so
much, pray so much, and keep their hours and times, the work is done! As the apostle says of
some in another case, they are “ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth” (2Ti 3:7); so they are always mortifying but never come to any sound mortification. In a
word, they have various means to mortify the natural man, as to the natural life we lead here;
but none to mortify [the root] lust or corruption.
This is the general mistake of men ignorant of the gospel about this thing, and it lies at the
bottom of very much of that superstition and will-worship that has been brought into the
world. What horrible self-macerations 31 were practiced by some of the ancient authors of monastical devotion! What violence did they offer to nature! What extremity of sufferings did they
put themselves upon! Search their ways and principles to the bottom, and you will find that it
27

papists – those loyal to the Pope; Roman Catholics.
means of grace – God’s ways of bestowing His blessings of grace upon His people through Christ and the
Holy Spirit, i.e., the preaching of the Word, baptism, the Lord’s Supper, prayer, etc.
29
streams – Protestants and some Baptists view the Word, ordinances, etc., as means of grace by which the
Holy Spirit, the fountain of grace, blesses God’s people.
30
fountain – Roman Catholicism views the “sacraments” as the primary sources of saving grace to God’s people, often without faith on the part of the recipient.
31
self-macerations – acts of wasting away of the body through fasting or other self-imposed physical sufferings.
28

16

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

had no other root but this mistake: namely, that seeking a severe mortification, they attempted to mortify the natural man instead of the corrupt old man, the physical body we live in instead of the “body of death.”
3). Neither will the natural popery that is in others do it. Men are grieved by the guilt of a
sin that has prevailed over them; they instantly promise to themselves and God that they will
so sin no more. They watch over themselves and pray for a season, until this heat waxes cold
and the sense of sin is worn off—and so mortification goes also, and sin returns to its former
domination. Duties are excellent food for an unhealthy soul, but they are no physic32 for a sick
soul. He that turns his meat into his medicine must expect no great operation. Spiritually sick
men cannot sweat out their distemper with working. But this is the way of men who deceive
their own souls, as we shall see afterward.
That none of these ways are sufficient is evident from the nature of the work itself that is to
be done. It is a work that requires so many concurrent actings in it as no self-endeavor can
accomplish. It is of that kind that an almighty energy is necessary for its accomplishment, as
shall be made clear later.

2. Mortification: The Work of the Spirit
The mortification of sin is, then, the work of the Spirit. For,
a. He is promised of God to be given unto us to do this work. The taking away of the
stony heart—the stubborn, proud, rebellious, unbelieving heart—is in general the work of
mortification that we are addressing. Now, this is still promised to be done by the Spirit: God
puts His Spirit in us and takes “the stony heart out of [our] flesh” (Eze 11:19; 36:26). By the
Spirit of God is this work wrought when all means fail (Isa 57:17-18).
b. We have all our mortification from the gift of Christ, and all the gifts of Christ are
communicated to us and given us by the Spirit of Christ: “Without me ye can do nothing”
(Joh 15:5). All communications of supplies and relief—in the beginnings, increasings, actings
of any grace whatever from Him—are by the Spirit, by Whom He alone works in and upon believers. From Him we have our mortification: He is exalted and made “a Prince and a Saviour,
to give repentance to [us]” (Act 5:31); and our mortification is no small portion of our repentance. How does He do it? Having “received…the promise of the Holy Ghost,” He sends Him
abroad for that end (Act 2:33). You know the many promises He made of sending the Spirit to
do the works that He purposed to accomplish in us (Joh 14:16, etc.).

3. How the Spirit Mortifies Sin
The resolution of one or two questions will now lead me nearer to what I principally intend.

a. The Spirit mortifies
The first is: How does the Spirit mortify sin? I answer: in general, in three ways.
1). By causing our hearts to abound in grace and the fruits that are contrary to the flesh,
and the fruits thereof and principles of them. So the apostle puts the fruits of the flesh in opposition to the fruits of the Spirit: “The works of the flesh,” says he, “are [so and so]” (Gal 5:1932

physic – medicine.

3. The Holy Spirit’s Work in Mortification

17

21); “but,” he says, “the fruit of the Spirit” are quite contrary, quite of another sort (5:22-23).
Yes, but what if these are in us and abound, may not the other abound also? No, he says, “They
that are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts” (v. 24). But how? Why,
“we live in the Spirit [and] also walk in the Spirit” (v. 25)—that is, through the abounding of
these graces of the Spirit in us, and walking according to them. For, says the apostle, “These
are contrary the one to the other” (v. 17), so that they cannot both be in the same subject in
any intense or high degree.
This “renewing [of us] by the Holy Ghost,” as it is called (Ti 3:5), is one great way of mortification. He causes us to grow, thrive, flourish, and abound in those graces that are contrary,
opposite, and destructive to all the fruits of the flesh, and to the quiet or thriving of indwelling
sin itself.
2). By a real physical effectiveness on the root and habit of sin, for the weakening, destroying, and taking it away. Hence He is called a “spirit of judgment and…burning” (Isa 4:4),
really consuming and destroying our lusts. He takes away the stony heart by an almighty effectiveness; for as He begins this kind of work so He carries it on in its progressive degrees. He is
the fire that burns up the very root of lust.
3). He brings the cross of Christ into the heart of a sinner by faith, and gives us communion with Christ in His death, and fellowship in His sufferings. About the manner of this
we will write more later.

b. Our part in mortifying
Secondly, if this be the work of the Spirit alone, how is it that we are exhorted to it? Seeing
the Spirit of God only can do it, let the work be left wholly to Him.
1). The Spirit’s work. The work of the Spirit in mortification is no different from all graces
and good works that are in us, which are His. He “worketh in you both to will and to do of his
[own] good pleasure” (Phi 2:13). He works “all our works in us” (Isa 26:12): “the work of faith
with power” (2Th 1:11; Col 2:12); He causes us to pray, and is a Spirit of supplication (Eph
6:18; Rom 8:26; Zec 12:10). And yet we are exhorted, and are to be exhorted, to all these.
2). Our obedience. He does not so work our mortification in us as not to keep it still an act
of our obedience. The Holy Ghost works in us and upon us as we are fit to be worked in and
on; that is, so as to preserve our own liberty and free obedience. He works upon our understandings, wills, consciences, and affections agreeably to their own natures. He works in us
and with us, not against us or without us; so that His assistance is an encouragement as to the
enabling of the work, and no occasion to neglect the work itself.
Indeed, I might here bewail the endless, foolish labor of poor souls who—being convinced
of sin, and not able to stand against the power of their convictions—set themselves to keep
down sin by innumerable perplexing ways and duties; but all in vain, being strangers to the
Spirit of God. They combat without victory, have war without peace, and are in slavery all their
days. They spend their strength for that which is not bread, and their labour for that which
profiteth not (Isa 55:2).
This is the saddest warfare in which any poor creature can be engaged. A soul under the
power of conviction from the Law is pressed to fight against sin, but has no strength for the
combat. They cannot but fight, but they can never conquer. They are like men thrust on the
sword of enemies to be slain on purpose. The Law drives them on, and sin beats them back.

18

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

Sometimes they think, indeed, that they have foiled sin, when they have only raised a dust that
they see it not; that is, they disturb their natural affections of fear, sorrow, and anguish, which
makes them believe that sin is conquered, when it is not touched. By the time they have
cooled off they must begin the battle again; and the lust that they thought to be slain appears
to have had no wound.
And if the case be so sad with them who do labor and strive and yet enter not into the kingdom, what is their condition who despise all this: who are perpetually under the power and
dominion of sin, and love to have it so; who are troubled at nothing, but that they cannot
make sufficient “provision for the flesh, to fulfil the lusts thereof” (Rom 13:14)!
