PURITAN GOLD -- Mortification of Sin by John Owen: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 14
The Means of Mortification: Faith


Chapter 7

RULES FOR MORTIFICATION
A. Faith
Beginning in Chapter 5, we have been dealing with the practical aspects of mortification.
What must a man do to mortify his indwelling sin? To answer, we are considering three headings:
I. Show what it is to mortify any sin, and that both negatively (ch. 5) and positively (ch. 6),
that we be not mistaken in the foundation.
II. Give general directions for such things as without which it will be utterly impossible for
anyone to get any sin truly and spiritually mortified.
III. Draw out particular actions whereby this is to be done. 55
The second head (II.) comes now under consideration: the ways and means whereby a soul
may proceed to the mortification of any particular lust and sin, which Satan takes advantage of
to disquiet and weaken him.
Now, there are some general considerations to be premised concerning some principles and
foundations of this work, without which no man in the world can attain thereunto, even if he
is very much raised by convictions and resolved for the mortification of any sin. The general
rules and principles without which no sin will be ever mortified are as follows:

1. Believe
a. Belief required for mortification
1). The first rule
A. Unless a man be a believer, one that is truly engrafted into Christ, he can never mortify any one sin.
I do not say, unless he knows himself to be so, but unless indeed he is so. Mortification is
the work of believers: “If ye through the Spirit do mortify,” etc. (Rom 8:13)—you believers, to
whom there is no condemnation (8:1). They alone are exhorted to it: “Mortify therefore your
members which are upon the earth” (Col 3:5). Who should mortify? You who are “risen with
Christ” (3:1), whose “life is hid with Christ in God” (3:3), who shall “appear with him in glory”
(3:4). An unregenerate man may do something like it, but he can never perform the work itself
so as it may be acceptable with God. You know what a picture of it is drawn in some of the phi55

These opening comments have been adapted from chapter five by the editors to assist the reader.

32

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

losophers: Seneca, Tully, Epictetus. 56 What affectionate discourses they have about contempt
of the world and self, about regulating and conquering all exorbitant affections and passions!
The lives of most of them showed that their teachings differed as much from true mortification as the sun painted on a sign-post from the sun in the heavens: they had neither light nor
heat. 57 Their own Lucian 58 sufficiently manifests what they all were. There is no death of sin
without the death of Christ.
You know what attempts there are made after mortification by the papists in their vows,
penances, and satisfactions. I dare say of them (I mean as many of them as act upon the principles of their church, as they call it) what Paul says of Israel in point of righteousness. They
have followed after mortification, but they have “not attained to” it (Rom 9:31). Wherefore?
“Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law” (9:32). The same is
the state and condition of all among ourselves who, in obedience to their convictions and
awakened consciences, attempt to forsake sin. They follow after it, but they do not attain it.
2). The Spirit required
It is true: it is, it will be, required of every person who hears the Law or gospel preached,
that he mortify sin. It is his duty, but it is not his immediate 59 duty; it is his duty to do it, but
to do it in God’s way. If you require your servant to pay so much money for you in such a
place, but first to go and collect it in another, it is his duty to pay the money appointed, and
you will blame him if he does not do it. Yet it was not his immediate duty: he was first to collect it according to your direction. So it is in this case: sin is to be mortified, but something is
to be done in the first place to enable us thereunto.
I have proved that it is the Spirit alone that can mortify sin; He is promised to do it, and all
other means without Him are empty and vain. How shall he mortify sin, then, who has not the
Spirit? A man may easier see without eyes and speak without a tongue than truly mortify one
sin without the Spirit. Now, how is the Spirit attained? He is the Spirit of Christ; and as the
apostle says, “If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his” (Rom 8:9). Therefore,
if we are Christ’s and have an interest in Him, 60 then we have the Spirit, and by this alone have
power for mortification. The apostle discusses this in depth: “So then they that are in the flesh
cannot please God” (Rom 8:8). This is the inference and conclusion he makes of his foregoing
discourse about our natural state and condition, and the enmity we have unto God and His
Law therein. If we are in the flesh, if we have not the Spirit, we cannot do anything that should
please God.
But what is our deliverance from this condition? “But ye are not in the flesh, but in the
Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you” (8:9)—that is, you believers, who have the
56

Seneca (Lucius Annaeus) (c. 4 BC - AD 65) – Roman philosopher, statesman, and orator; Rome’s leading
intellectual of his day.
Tully (Marcus Tullius) (also Cicero) (106 - 43 BC) – Roman writer, statesman, philosopher, orator.
Epictetus (c. AD 55 - 135) – Greek-speaking Stoic philosopher.
57
neither light nor heat – neither truth or power for holy living.
58
Lucian of Samosata (c. AD 125 - c. 180) – rhetorician and satirist who wrote in the Greek language. He is
noted for his witty and scoffing nature. His notable works include Dialogues of the Gods, Dialogues of the
Dead, and many works of fiction.
59
immediate – first.
60
interest in Him – union with Christ.

7. Rules for Mortification: Faith

33

Spirit of Christ, you “are not in the flesh.” There is no way of deliverance from the state and
condition of being in the flesh but by the Spirit of Christ. And what if this Spirit of Christ be in
you? Why, then, you are mortified: “The body is dead because of sin,” or unto sin (v. 10). Mortification is carried on; the new man is quickened to righteousness. This the apostle proves
from the union we have with Christ by the Spirit, which will produce suitable operations in us
to what it wrought in Him (v. 11). All attempts, then, for mortification of any lust without an
interest in Christ are vain.
3). Human efforts fail
Many men that are vexed with and for sin—by the arrows of Christ for conviction, by the
preaching of the Word, or by some affliction having been made sharp in their hearts—do vigorously set themselves against this or that particular lust, wherewith their consciences have
been most disquieted or perplexed. But, poor creatures! They labor in the fire, and their work
is consumed. When the Spirit of Christ comes to this work, He will be “like a refiner’s fire, and
like fullers’ soap,” and He will purge men “as gold and silver” (Mal 3:2-3)—that is, take away
their dross and tin, their filth and blood (Isa 4:4). But men must be gold and silver at their
core, or else refining will do them no good.
The prophet gives us the sad result of wicked men’s utmost attempts for mortification, by
whatever means God affords them: “The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire;
the founder melteth in vain…Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them” (Jer 6:29-30). And what is the reason hereof? They were “brass and iron” when
they were put into the furnace (v. 28). Men may refine brass and iron a very long time before
they will be good silver!
I say then, mortification is not the present business of unregenerate men. God calls them
not to it as yet. Conversion is their work, the conversion of the whole soul—not the mortification of this or that particular lust. You would laugh at a man that you should see setting up a
great structure and never take any care for a foundation—especially if you should see him so
foolish as to continue in the same course after having a thousand experiences of what he built
at one time falling down at another. So it is with convinced persons: though they plainly see
that what ground they get against sin one day they lose in another, yet they will go on in the
same road still without inquiring where the destructive flaw lies in their progress.
4). The Scriptures
When the Jews, upon the conviction of their sin, were cut to the heart and cried out, “What
shall we do?” (Act 2:37), what does Peter direct them to do? Does he bid them go and mortify
their pride, wrath, malice, cruelty, and the like? No, he knew that was not their present work,
but he calls them to conversion and faith in Christ in general (v. 38). Let the soul be first
thoroughly converted, and then, looking “on him whom they pierced” (Joh 19:37), humiliation and mortification will ensue. Thus, when John came to preach repentance and conversion, he said, “Now also the axe is laid to the root of the trees” (Mat 3:10). The Pharisees had
been laying heavy burdens, imposing tedious duties and rigid means of mortification, in fastings, washings, and the like, all in vain. John says in effect, “The doctrine of conversion is for
you; the axe in my hand is laid to the root.”
And our Savior tells us what is to be done in this case, saying, “Do men gather grapes from
thorns?” (Mat 7:16). But suppose a thorn bush be well pruned and cut, and be well taken care

34

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

of? Yes, but he will never bear figs; “neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit” (vv. 1718). It cannot be but every tree will bring forth fruit according to its own kind. What is then to
be done? He tells us, “Make the tree good, and his fruit [will be] good” (Mat 12:33). The root
must be dealt with, the nature of the tree changed, or no good fruit will be brought forth.
This is what I aim at: unless a man be regenerate, unless he be a believer, all attempts that
he can make for mortification are to no purpose, be they ever so deceptively attractive and
promising. All the means he can use are pointless, even if he should follow them with ever so
much diligence, earnestness, watchfulness, and intention of mind and spirit. In vain shall he
use many remedies; he shall not be healed.

b. Evils upon unbelievers who attempt mortification
Yea, there are various hopeless evils attending an endeavor to perform this duty in convinced persons who are not believers.
1). Distracted from seeking Christ
When an unbeliever focuses on mortifying sin, his mind and soul are taken up about that
which is not the man’s proper business, and so he is diverted from that which is. God lays hold
by His Word and judgments on some sin in him, galls his conscience, disquiets his heart, deprives him of his rest. Now other diversions will not serve his turn; he must apply himself to
the work before him. The business in hand is to awake the whole man unto a consideration of
the state and condition he is in, that he might be brought home to God. But instead he sets
himself to mortify the sin that troubles him—which is a clear result of self-love, to be freed
from his trouble—and not at all to the work he is called to, and so is diverted from it. Thus
God tells us of the tribe of Ephraim, that He “spread [His] net upon them,” and brought “them
down as the fowls of the heaven” and “chastised them” (Hos 7:12)—that is, caught them, entangled them, convinced them that they could not escape. Then God tells us, “They return, but
not to the most High” (v. 16)—that is, they set themselves to a relinquishment of sin, but not
by universal conversion as God called for it. Thus the most promising efforts men can fix upon
for coming to God divert them from coming to Him.
This is one of the most common deceits whereby men ruin their own souls. I wish that
61
some whose trade it is to daub with untempered mortar in the things of God did not teach
this deceit and cause the people to err by their ignorance (Eze 13:10-14). What do men do,
what often are they directed unto, when their consciences are vexed by sin and disquieted by
the Lord Who has laid hold upon them? Is not a practical relinquishment of the sin that they
are perplexed with—in some fruits of it—and making head against it the sum of what they apply themselves to? And is not the gospel end of their convictions lost thereby? Here men abide
and perish.
2). False confidence
This duty is a thing good in itself (in its proper place), a duty evidencing sincerity, bringing
home peace to the conscience. Therefore, a man finding himself really engaged in it—his
mind and heart set against this or that sin, with purpose and resolution to have no more to do

61

daub with untempered mortar – apply plaster of improperly mixed clay that will not hold up to weather;
here refers to irresponsibly encouraging people to attempt mortification before saving faith.

7. Rules for Mortification: Faith

35

with it—is ready to conclude that his state and condition is good, and so to delude his own
soul.
a). False quieting of the conscience. However, when his conscience has been made sick
with sin and he could find no rest, when he should go to the great Physician of souls and get
healing in His blood, the man by this engagement against sin pacifies and quiets his conscience and sits down without going to Christ at all. Ah, how many poor souls are thus deluded to eternity! “When Ephraim saw his sickness…[he] sent to king Jareb” (Hos 5:13), which
kept him off from God. The whole bundle of the popish religion is made up of designs and contrivances to pacify the conscience without Christ—all described by the apostle in Romans
10:3.
b). Self-righteous satisfaction. By attempting mortification, men satisfy themselves that
their state and condition is good, seeing they do that which is a work good in itself and they do
not do it to be seen. They know they would have the work done in sincerity, and so are hardened in a kind of self-righteousness.
c). Giving up. When a man has thus for a season been deluded and has deceived his own
soul, and finds in a long course of life that indeed his sin is not mortified—or if he has
changed one sin, he has gotten another—he begins at length to think that all contending is in
vain. He thinks he will never be able to prevail, but is only making a dam against water that
increases on him. Hereupon he gives over as one despairing of any success and yields up him62
self to the power of sin and that habit of formality that he has fallen into.
This is the usual result with persons attempting the mortification of sin without first obtaining an interest in Christ. It deludes them, hardens them, and destroys them. And therefore
we see that there are not usually more vile and desperate sinners in the world than such as,
having by conviction been put on this course, have found it fruitless and deserted it without a
discovery of Christ. And this is the substance of the religion and godliness of the choicest formalists in the world, and of all those who in the Roman “synagogue” are drawn to mortifica63
tion, as they drive Indians to baptism or cattle to water.
I say, then, that mortification is the work of believers, and believers only. To kill sin is the
work of living men; where men are dead (as all unbelievers, the best of them, are dead), sin is
alive, and will live.

2. Work of Faith
It is the peculiar work of faith. Now, if there be a work to be done that will be effected by only one instrument, it is the greatest madness for any who do not have that instrument to attempt the doing of it. It is faith that purifies the heart (Act 15:9); or, as Peter speaks, “ye have
purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit” (1Pe 1:22). And without it, it will
not be done.

62

formality – outward efforts without a heart for God. See Formality and Useless Kinds of Religion by J. C. Ryle
(1816-1900); both available from CHAPEL LIBRARY.
63
Indians to baptism – Roman Catholic missionary efforts in India in which they baptized natives to “make”
them Christians; RC theology teaches that people are born again when sprinkled with water by a priest; no
faith is necessary in that act.

36

MORTIFICATION OF SIN

I suppose what has been spoken is sufficient to make good my first general rule: Be sure to
get an interest in Christ. If you intend to mortify any sin without it, it will never be done.

3. Objection: What Shall the Unregenerate Do?
You will say, “What then would you have unregenerate men do who are convinced of the
evil of sin? Shall they cease striving against sin, live dissolutely, 64 give their lusts their swing,
and be as bad as the worst of men? This would be a way to set the whole world into confusion,
to bring all things into darkness, to set open the flood-gates of lust, and lay the reins upon the
necks of men to rush into all sin with delight and greediness, like the horse into the battle.”
Answer 1. God forbid (Rom 6:1-2)! It is to be looked on as a great result of the wisdom,
goodness, and love of God, that by many ways and means He is pleased to restrain the sons of
men from running forth into the range of excess and riot which the depravity of their nature
would carry them into with violence. By whatever way this is done, it is a result of the care,
kindness, and goodness of God, without which the whole earth would be a hell of sin and confusion.
Answer 2. There is a peculiar convincing power in the Word, which God is oftentimes
pleased to put forth, to the wounding, amazing, and in some sort the humbling of sinners,
though they are never converted. And the Word is to be preached though it has this end, yet
not with this end in view. Let, then, the Word be preached and the sins of men will be rebuked,
lust will be restrained, and some oppositions will be made against sin, though that be not the
effect aimed at.
Answer 3. Though this be the work of the Word and Spirit, and it be good in itself, yet it is
not profitable nor availing as to its main end in them in whom it is wrought. They are still in
the gall of bitterness and under the power of darkness.
Answer 4. Let men know it is their duty, but in its proper place. I take not men from mortification, but put them upon conversion. He is not his enemy who shall call a man from mending a hole in the wall of his house to quench a fire that is consuming the whole building. Poor
soul, it is not your sore finger but your consuming fever, to which you are to apply yourself!
You set yourself against a particular sin and do not consider that you are nothing but sin.

4. To Preachers
Let me add this to them who are preachers of the Word or intend that employment through
the good hand of God. It is their duty to plead with men about their sins, to lay load on particular sins, but always remember that it be done with that which is the proper end of law and
gospel: that is, that they make use of the sin they speak against to discover the state and condition of the sinner. Otherwise, perhaps they may work men to formality and hypocrisy, but little of the true end of preaching the gospel will be brought about. It will not profit to beat a
man off from his drunkenness into a sober formality. A skillful master of the assemblies lays
his axe at the root and drives still at the heart (Ecc 12:11).
To attack particular sins of ignorant, unregenerate persons, such as the land is full of, is a
good work. However, though it may be done with great effectiveness, vigor, and success, if this
64

dissolutely – without moral restraint.

7. Rules for Mortification: Faith

37

be the only result of preaching (that is, that they are set upon the most diligent endeavors to
mortify the sins preached against), all that is accomplished is but like the beating of an enemy
in an open field, and driving him into an impregnable castle, not to be prevailed against. Do
you ever gain the advantage [in reproving] a sinner on the account of any one sin whatever?
Do you have anything to take hold of him by? Apply it to his state and condition, drive it up to
the head, and there deal with him. To break men off of particular sins, and not to break their
hearts, is to deprive ourselves of advantages in dealing with them.
And herein is the Roman mortification grievously sinful. They drive all sorts of persons to
mortifying without the least consideration whether the persons have a principle for it or not.
Yea, they are so far from calling on men to believe, so that they may be able to mortify their
lusts, that they call men to mortification instead of believing. The truth is: they neither know
what it is to believe nor what mortification itself intends. Faith with them is but a general assent to the doctrine taught in their church; and mortification with them is a man’s commitment by a vow to some certain course of life wherein he denies himself something of the use of
the things of this world, not without a considerable compensation. Such men know neither
the Scriptures nor the power of God. Their boasting of their mortification is but their glorying
in their shame.
Some casuists 65 among ourselves overlook the necessity of regeneration and confidently
give this for a direction to all sorts of persons that complain of any sin or lust: that they should
vow against it at least for a season, a month or so. These seem to have barely any light in the
mystery of the gospel, much like that of Nicodemus when he first came to Christ (Joh 3). They
bid men vow to abstain from their sin for a season. This commonly makes their lust more impetuous. Perhaps with great perplexity they keep their word—and perhaps not, which increases their guilt and torment. Is their sin at all mortified hereby? Do they find a conquest over it?
Is their condition changed, though they attain a relinquishment of it? Are they not still in the
gall of bitterness? Is not this to put men to make brick, if not without straw, yet, which is
worse, without strength (Exo 5:7)?
What promise has any unregenerate man to encourage him in this work? What assistance
for the performance of it? Can sin be killed without an interest in the death of Christ, or mortified without the Spirit? If such directions should prevail to change men’s lives, as seldom
they do, yet they never reach to the change of their hearts or conditions. They may make men
self-righteous or hypocrites, but not Christians.
It often grieves me to see poor souls who have a zeal for God and a desire of eternal welfare,
kept by such directors and directions under a hard, burdensome, outside worship and service
of God all their days, with many specious 66 endeavors for mortification, in an utter ignorance
of the righteousness of Christ and unacquaintedness with His Spirit. Persons and things of
this kind I know too many. If ever God shine into their hearts to give them the knowledge of
His glory in the face of His Son Jesus Christ, they will see the folly of their present way (2Co
4:6).

65
66

casuists – theologians and others who study and resolve cases of conscience regarding duty and conduct.
specious – deceptively promising.
