PURITAN GOLD -- The Pilgrim's Progress by John Bunyan: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 14
Christian's Burden and the City of Destruction

---

{1} When at the first I took my pen in hand
  Thus for to write, I did not understand
  That I at all should make a little book
  In such a mode; nay, I had undertook
  To make another; which, when almost done,
  Before I was aware, I this begun.

  And thus it was: I, writing of the way
  And race of saints, in this our gospel day,
  Fell suddenly into an allegory
  About their journey, and the way to glory,
  In more than twenty things which I set down.
  This done, I twenty more had in my crown;
  And they again began to multiply,
  Like sparks that from the coals of fire do fly.

  Nay, then, thought I, if that you breed so fast,
  I'll put you by yourselves, lest you at last
  Should prove ad infinitum, and eat out
  The book that I already am about.

  Well, so I did; but yet I did not think
  To shew to all the world my pen and ink
  In such a mode; I only thought to make
  I knew not what; nor did I undertake
  Thereby to please my neighbour: no, not I;
  I did it my own self to gratify.

{2} Neither did I but vacant seasons spend
  In this my scribble; nor did I intend
  But to divert myself in doing this
  From worser thoughts which make me do amiss.

  Thus, I set pen to paper with delight,
  And quickly had my thoughts in black and white.
  For, having now my method by the end,
  Still as I pulled, it came; and so I penned
  It down: until it came at last to be,
  For length and breadth, the bigness which you see.

  Well, when I had thus put mine ends together,
  I shewed them others, that I might see whether
  They would condemn them, or them justify:
  And some said, Let them live; some, Let them die;
  Some said, JOHN, print it; others said, Not so;
  Some said, It might do good; others said, No.

  Now was I in a strait, and did not see
  Which was the best thing to be done by me:
  At last I thought, Since you are thus divided,
  I print it will, and so the case decided.

{3} For, thought I, some, I see, would have it done,
  Though others in that channel do not run:
  To prove, then, who advised for the best,
  Thus I thought fit to put it to the test.

  I further thought, if now I did deny
  Those that would have it, thus to gratify.
  I did not know but hinder them I might
  Of that which would to them be great delight.

  For those which were not for its coming forth,
  I said to them, Offend you I am loth,
  Yet, since your brethren pleased with it be,
  Forbear to judge till you do further see.

  If that thou wilt not read, let it alone;
  Some love the meat, some love to pick the bone.
  Yea, that I might them better palliate,
  I did too with them thus expostulate:--

{4} May I not write in such a style as this?
  In such a method, too, and yet not miss
  My end--thy good? Why may it not be done?
  Dark clouds bring waters, when the bright bring none.
  Yea, dark or bright, if they their silver drops
  Cause to descend, the earth, by yielding crops,
  Gives praise to both, and carpeth not at either,
  But treasures up the fruit they yield together;
  Yea, so commixes both, that in her fruit
  None can distinguish this from that: they suit
  Her well when hungry; but, if she be full,
  She spews out both, and makes their blessings null.

  You see the ways the fisherman doth take
  To catch the fish; what engines doth he make?
  Behold how he engageth all his wits;
  Also his snares, lines, angles, hooks, and nets;
  Yet fish there be, that neither hook, nor line,
  Nor snare, nor net, nor engine can make thine:
  They must be groped for, and be tickled too,
  Or they will not be catch'd, whate'er you do.

  How does the fowler seek to catch his game
  By divers means! all which one cannot name:
  His guns, his nets, his lime-twigs, light, and bell:
  He creeps, he goes, he stands; yea, who can tell
  Of all his postures? Yet there's none of these
  Will make him master of what fowls he please.
  Yea, he must pipe and whistle to catch this,
  Yet, if he does so, that bird he will miss.

  If that a pearl may in a toad's head dwell,
  And may be found too in an oyster-shell;
  If things that promise nothing do contain
  What better is than gold; who will disdain,
  That have an inkling of it, there to look,
  That they may find it? Now, my little book,
  (Though void of all these paintings that may make
  It with this or the other man to take)
  Is not without those things that do excel
  What do in brave but empty notions dwell.

{5} 'Well, yet I am not fully satisfied,
  That this your book will stand, when soundly tried.'
  Why, what's the matter? 'It is dark.' What though?
  'But it is feigned.' What of that? I trow?
  Some men, by feigned words, as dark as mine,
  Make truth to spangle and its rays to shine.

  'But they want solidness.' Speak, man, thy mind.
  'They drown the weak; metaphors make us blind.'

  Solidity, indeed, becomes the pen
  Of him that writeth things divine to men;
  But must I needs want solidness, because
  By metaphors I speak? Were not God's laws,
  His gospel laws, in olden times held forth
  By types, shadows, and metaphors? Yet loth
  Will any sober man be to find fault
  With them, lest he be found for to assault
  The highest wisdom. No, he rather stoops,
  And seeks to find out what by pins and loops,
  By calves and sheep, by heifers and by rams,
  By birds and herbs, and by the blood of lambs,
  God speaketh to him; and happy is he
  That finds the light and grace that in them be.

{6} Be not too forward, therefore, to conclude
  That I want solidness--that I am rude;
  All things solid in show not solid be;
  All things in parables despise not we;
  Lest things most hurtful lightly we receive,
  And things that good are, of our souls bereave.

  My dark and cloudy words, they do but hold
  The truth, as cabinets enclose the gold.

  The prophets used much by metaphors
  To set forth truth; yea, who so considers Christ,
  his apostles too, shall plainly see,
  That truths to this day in such mantles be.

  Am I afraid to say, that holy writ,
  Which for its style and phrase puts down all wit,
  Is everywhere so full of all these things--
  Dark figures, allegories? Yet there springs
  From that same book that lustre, and those rays
  Of light, that turn our darkest nights to days.

{7} Come, let my carper to his life now look,
  And find there darker lines than in my book
  He findeth any; yea, and let him know,
  That in his best things there are worse lines too.

  May we but stand before impartial men,
  To his poor one I dare adventure ten,
  That they will take my meaning in these lines
  Far better than his lies in silver shrines.
  Come, truth, although in swaddling clouts, I find,
  Informs the judgement, rectifies the mind;
  Pleases the understanding, makes the will
  Submit; the memory too it doth fill
  With what doth our imaginations please;
  Likewise it tends our troubles to appease.

  Sound words, I know, Timothy is to use,
  And old wives' fables he is to refuse;
  But yet grave Paul him nowhere did forbid
  The use of parables; in which lay hid
  That gold, those pearls, and precious stones that were
  Worth digging for, and that with greatest care.

  Let me add one word more. O man of God,
  Art thou offended? Dost thou wish I had
  Put forth my matter in another dress?
  Or, that I had in things been more express?
  Three things let me propound; then I submit
  To those that are my betters, as is fit.

{8} 1. I find not that I am denied the use
  Of this my method, so I no abuse
  Put on the words, things, readers; or be rude
  In handling figure or similitude,
  In application; but, all that I may,
  Seek the advance of truth this or that way
  Denied, did I say? Nay, I have leave
  (Example too, and that from them that have
  God better pleased, by their words or ways,
  Than any man that breatheth now-a-days)
  Thus to express my mind, thus to declare
  Things unto thee that excellentest are.

  2. I find that men (as high as trees) will write
  Dialogue-wise; yet no man doth them slight
  For writing so: indeed, if they abuse
  Truth, cursed be they, and the craft they use
  To that intent; but yet let truth be free
  To make her sallies upon thee and me,
  Which way it pleases God; for who knows how,
  Better than he that taught us first to plough,
  To guide our mind and pens for his design?
  And he makes base things usher in divine.

  3. I find that holy writ in many places
  Hath semblance with this method, where the cases
  Do call for one thing, to set forth another;
  Use it I may, then, and yet nothing smother
  Truth's golden beams: nay, by this method may
  Make it cast forth its rays as light as day.
  And now before I do put up my pen,
  I'll shew the profit of my book, and then
  Commit both thee and it unto that Hand
  That pulls the strong down, and makes weak ones stand.

  This book it chalketh out before thine eyes
  The man that seeks the everlasting prize;
  It shews you whence he comes, whither he goes;
  What he leaves undone, also what he does;
  It also shows you how he runs and runs,
  Till he unto the gate of glory comes.

{9} It shows, too, who set out for life amain,
  As if the lasting crown they would obtain;
  Here also you may see the reason why
  They lose their labour, and like fools do die.

  This book will make a traveller of thee,
  If by its counsel thou wilt ruled be;
  It will direct thee to the Holy Land,
  If thou wilt its directions understand:
  Yea, it will make the slothful active be;
  The blind also delightful things to see.

  Art thou for something rare and profitable?
  Wouldest thou see a truth within a fable?
  Art thou forgetful? Wouldest thou remember
  From New-Year's day to the last of December?
  Then read my fancies; they will stick like burs,
  And may be, to the helpless, comforters.

  This book is writ in such a dialect
  As may the minds of listless men affect:
  It seems a novelty, and yet contains
  Nothing but sound and honest gospel strains.
  Wouldst thou divert thyself from melancholy?
  Wouldst thou be pleasant, yet be far from folly?
  Wouldst thou read riddles, and their explanation?
  Or else be drowned in thy contemplation?
  Dost thou love picking meat? Or wouldst thou see
  A man in the clouds, and hear him speak to thee?
  Wouldst thou be in a dream, and yet not sleep?
  Or wouldst thou in a moment laugh and weep?
  Wouldest thou lose thyself and catch no harm,
  And find thyself again without a charm?
  Wouldst read thyself, and read thou knowest not what,
  And yet know whether thou art blest or not,

  By reading the same lines? Oh, then come hither,
  And lay my book, thy head, and heart together.


JOHN BUNYAN.



THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS

In the Similitude of a Dream


{10} As I walked through the wilderness of this world, I lighted
on a certain place where was a Den, and I laid me down in that
place to sleep: and, as I slept, I dreamed a dream. I dreamed,
and behold, I saw a man clothed with rags, standing in a certain
place, with his face from his own house, a book in his hand, and
a great burden upon his back. [Isa. 64:6; Luke 14:33; Ps. 38:4;
Hab. 2:2; Acts 16:30,31] I looked, and saw him open the book,
and read therein; and, as he read, he wept, and trembled; and, not
being able longer to contain, he brake out with a lamentable cry,
saying, "What shall I do?" [Acts 2:37]

{11} In this plight, therefore, he went home and refrained himself
as long as he could, that his wife and children should not perceive
his distress; but he could not be silent long, because that his
trouble increased. Wherefore at length he brake his mind to his
wife and children; and thus he began to talk to them: O my dear
wife, said he, and you the children of my bowels, I, your dear
friend, am in myself undone by reason of a burden that lieth hard
upon me; moreover, I am for certain informed that this our city
will be burned with fire from heaven; in which fearful overthrow,
both myself, with thee my wife, and you my sweet babes, shall
miserably come to ruin, except (the which yet I see not) some way
of escape can be found, whereby we may be delivered. At this his
relations were sore amazed; not for that they believed that what
he had said to them was true, but because they thought that some
frenzy distemper had got into his head; therefore, it drawing
towards night, and they hoping that sleep might settle his brains,
with all haste they got him to bed. But the night was as troublesome
to him as the day; wherefore, instead of sleeping, he spent it in
sighs and tears. So, when the morning was come, they would know
how he did. He told them, Worse and worse: he also set to talking
to them again; but they began to be hardened. They also thought
to drive away his distemper by harsh and surly carriages to
him; sometimes they would deride, sometimes they would chide, and
sometimes they would quite neglect him. Wherefore he began to
retire himself to his chamber, to pray for and pity them, and also
to condole his own misery; he would also walk solitarily in the
fields, sometimes reading, and sometimes praying: and thus for
some days he spent his time.

{12} Now, I saw, upon a time, when he was walking in the fields,
that he was, as he was wont, reading in his book, and greatly
distressed in his mind; and, as he read, he burst out, as he had
done before, crying, "What shall I do to be saved?"

{13} I saw also that he looked this way and that way, as if he
would run; yet he stood still, because, as I perceived, he could
not tell which way to go. I looked then, and saw a man named
Evangelist coming to him and asked, Wherefore dost thou cry? [Job
33:23]

{14} He answered, Sir, I perceive by the book in my hand, that
I am condemned to die, and after that to come to judgement [Heb.
9:27]; and I find that I am not willing to do the first [Job 16:21],
nor able to do the second. [Ezek. 22:14]

CHRISTIAN no sooner leaves the World but meets EVANGELIST, who
lovingly him greets With tidings of another: and doth show Him
how to mount to that from this below.

{15} Then said Evangelist, Why not willing to die, since this life
is attended with so many evils? The man answered, Because I fear
that this burden is upon my back will sink me lower than the grave,
and I shall fall into Tophet. [Isa. 30:33] And, Sir, if I be not
fit to go to prison, I am not fit, I am sure, to go to judgement,
and from thence to execution; and the thoughts of these things make
me cry.

{16} Then said Evangelist, If this be thy condition, why standest
thou still? He answered, Because I know not whither to go. Then
he gave him a parchment roll, and there was written within, Flee
from the wrath to come. [Matt. 3.7]

{17} The man therefore read it, and looking upon Evangelist
very carefully, said, Whither must I fly? Then said Evangelist,
pointing with his finger over a very wide field, Do you see yonder
wicket-gate? [Matt. 7:13,14] The man said, No. Then said the other,
Do you see yonder shining light? [Ps. 119:105; 2 Pet. 1:19] He
said, I think I do. Then said Evangelist, Keep that light in your
eye, and go up directly thereto: so shalt thou see the gate; at
which, when thou knockest, it shall be told thee what thou shalt
do.

{18} So I saw in my dream that the man began to run.

Now, he had not run far from his own door, but his wife and children,
perceiving it, began to cry after him to return; but the man put
his fingers in his ears, and ran on, crying, Life! life! eternal
life! [Luke 14:26] So he looked not behind him, but fled towards
the middle of the plain. [Gen. 19:17]

{19} The neighbours also came out to see him run [Jer. 20:10];
and, as he ran, some mocked, others threatened, and some cried
after him to return; and, among those that did so, there were two
that resolved to fetch him back by force. The name of the one was
Obstinate and the name of the other Pliable. Now, by this time,
the man was got a good distance from them; but, however, they were
resolved to pursue him, which they did, and in a little time they
overtook him. Then said the man, Neighbours, wherefore are ye come?
They said, To persuade you to go back with us. But he said, That
can by no means be; you dwell, said he, in the City of Destruction,
the place also where I was born: I see it to be so; and, dying
there, sooner or later, you will sink lower than the grave, into
a place that burns with fire and brimstone: be content, good
neighbours, and go along with me.

{20} OBST. What! said Obstinate, and leave our friends and our
comforts behind us?

CHR. Yes, said Christian, for that was his name, because that ALL
which you shall forsake is not worthy to be compared with a little
of that which I am seeking to enjoy [2 Cor. 4:18]; and, if you
will go along with me, and hold it, you shall fare as I myself;
for there, where I go, is enough and to spare. [Luke 15:17] Come
away, and prove my words.

{21} OBST. What are the things you seek, since you leave all the
world to find them?

CHR. I seek an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth
not away [1 Pet. 1:4], and it is laid up in heaven, and safe there
[Heb. 11:16], to be bestowed, at the time appointed, on them that
diligently seek it. Read it so, if you will, in my book.

OBST. Tush! said Obstinate, away with your book; will you go back
with us or no?

CHR. No, not I, said the other, because I have laid my hand to the
plough. [Luke 9:62]

{22} OBST. Come, then, neighbour Pliable, let us turn again,
and go home without him; there is a company of these crazy-headed
coxcombs, that, when they take a fancy by the end, are wiser in
their own eyes than seven men that can render a reason. [Prov.
26:16]

PLI. Then said Pliable, Don't revile; if what the good Christian
says is true, the things he looks after are better than ours: my
heart inclines to go with my neighbour.

OBST. What! more fools still! Be ruled by me, and go back; who
knows whither such a brain-sick fellow will lead you? Go back, go
back, and be wise.

{23} CHR. Nay, but do thou come with thy neighbour, Pliable; there
are such things to be had which I spoke of, and many more glorious
besides. If you believe not me, read here in this book; and for
the truth of what is expressed therein, behold, all is confirmed
by the blood of Him that made it. [Heb. 9:17-22; 13:20]

PLI. Well, neighbour Obstinate, said Pliable, I begin to come to a
point; I intend to go along with this good man, and to cast in my
lot with him: but, my good companion, do you know the way to this
desired place?

{24} CHR. I am directed by a man, whose name is Evangelist, to
speed me to a little gate that is before us, where we shall receive
instructions about the way.

PLI. Come, then, good neighbour, let us be going. Then they went
both together.

OBST. And I will go back to my place, said Obstinate; I will be no
companion of such misled, fantastical fellows.

{25} Now, I saw in my dream, that when Obstinate was gone back,
Christian and Pliable went talking over the plain; and thus they
began their discourse.

{26} CHR. Come, neighbour Pliable, how do you do? I am glad you
are persuaded to go along with me. Had even Obstinate himself
but felt what I have felt of the powers and terrors of what is yet
unseen, he would not thus lightly have given us the back.

PLI. Come, neighbour Christian, since there are none but us two
here, tell me now further what the things are, and how to be enjoyed,
whither we are going.