PURITAN GOLD -- The Bruised Reed by Richard Sibbes: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 14
Christ's Wise Government

---

The Bruised Reed. By Richard Sibbes.

Chapter 12. Christ's Wise Government.

12. Christ's Wise Government
The second conclusion from the final part of the text is that Christ's
government in his church and in his children is a wise and well ordered
government because it is called judgment, and judgment is the life and
soul of wisdom. Of this conclusion there are two branches: first, that the
spiritual government of Christ in us is joined with judgment and wisdom,
and secondly, wherever true spiritual wisdom and judgment are, there
likewise the Spirit of Christ has brought in his gracious government.
JUDGMENT AND WISDOM
As to the first, a well guided life by the rules of Christ stands with the
strongest and highest reason of all; and therefore holy men are called
`wisdom's children' (Luke 7:35), and are able to justify, both by reason
and experience, all the ways of wisdom. Opposite courses are folly and
madness. Hereupon Paul says that `he that is spiritual judgeth all things'
(1 Cor. 2:15) that appertain to him, and is judged of none that are of an
inferior rank, because they lack spiritual light and sight to judge. Yet this
sort of men will judge and `speak evil of the things that they understand

not' (2 Pet. 2:12); they step from ignorance to prejudice and rash censure,
without taking right judgment in their way, and therefore their judgment
comes to nothing. But the judgment of a spiritual man, so far as he is
spiritual, shall stand, because it is agreeable to the nature of things. As
things are in themselves, so they are in his judgment. As God is in himself
infinite in goodness and majesty, so he is to him. He ascribes to God in
his heart his divinity and all his excellencies. As Christ is in himself the
only Mediator, and all in all in the church (Col. 3:11), so he is to him, by
making Christ so in his heart. As all things are dung in comparison with
Christ (Phil. 3:8), so they are to Paul, a sanctified man. As the very worst
thing in religion, `the reproach of Christ', is better than `the pleasures of
sin for a season' (Heb. 11:25 26), so it is to Moses, a man of a right
esteem. As one day in the courts of God is better than a thousand
elsewhere (Psa. 84:10), so it is to David, a man of a reformed judgment.
There is a conformity of a good man's judgment to things as they are in
themselves, and according to the difference or agreement put by God in
things, so does his judgment differ or agree.
Truth is truth, and error, error, and that which is unlawful is unlawful,
whether men think so or not. God has put an eternal difference between
light and darkness, good and ill, which no creature's conceit can alter;
and therefore no man's judgment is the measure of things further than it
agrees to truth stamped upon things themselves by God. For this reason,
because a wise man's judgment agrees to the truth of things, a wise man
may in some sense be said to be the measure of things, and the judgment
of one holy wise man to be preferred before a thousand others. Such men
usually are immovable as the sun in its course, because they think, and
speak and live by rule. A Joshua and his house will serve God (josh.
24:15), whatsoever others do, and will run a course contrary to the world,
because their judgments lead them a contrary way. Hence it is that Satan
has a spite at the eye of the soul, the judgment, to put it out by ignorance
and false reason, for he cannot rule in any until either he has taken away
or perverted judgment. He is a prince of darkness, and rules in darkness
of the understanding. Therefore he must first be cast out of the
understanding by the prevailing of truth and planting of it in the soul.
Those, therefore, that are enemies of knowledge help Satan and
antichrist, whose kingdom, like Satan's, is a kingdom of darkness, to erect

their throne. Hence it is promised by Christ, that the Holy Ghost shall
convince the world of righteousness or judgment (John 16:8); that is, that
he is resolved to set up a throne of government, because the great lord of
misrule, Satan, `the prince of this world', is judged by the gospel, and the
Spirit accompanying it. His impostures are discovered, his enterprises
laid open. Therefore when the gospel was spread the oracles ceased,
Satan fell from heaven like lightning (Luke 10:18). Men were translated
out of his kingdom into Christ's. Where prevailing is by lies, discovery is
victory: `they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest
unto all men' (2 Tim. 3:9). So that manifestation of error gives a stop to it,
for none will willingly be deceived. Let truth have full scope without
check or restraint, and let Satan and his instruments do their worst, they
shall not prevail, as Jerome says of the Pelagians in his time: `The
discovery of your opinions is the vanquishing of them, your blasphemies
appear at the first blush."
THE NEED FOR HEAVENLY LIGHT
Hence we learn the necessity that the understanding should be grounded
in knowledge which is above nature
1 Jerome (c.347 419) in his Epistle to Ctesiphon.
for a well ordered Christian life. There must be light to discover an end
beyond nature, because of which we are Christians, and a rule suitable to
direct to that end, which is the will of God in Christ, discovering his good
pleasure toward us, and our duty towards him. And in virtue of this
discovery we do all that we do which may in any way further what we
reckon to be true. The eye must first be single, and then the whole body
and frame of our conduct will be light (Matt. 6:22); otherwise both we
and our course of life are nothing but darkness. The whole conduct of a
Christian is nothing else but knowledge reduced to will, affection and
practice. If the digestion of food in the stomach is not good, the working
of the liver cannot be good; so if there is error in the judgment it mars the
whole of practice, as an error in the foundation does a building. God will
have no blind sacrifices, no unreasonable services (Isa. 1:13), but will
have us to love him with all our mind (Rom. 12:2), that is, with our
understanding part, as well as with all our hearts (Luke 10:27), that is, the

feeling part of the soul.
This ordering of Christ's government by judgment is agreeable to the
soul, and God delights to preserve the manner of working peculiar to
man, that is, to do what he does out of judgment. As grace supposes
nature, as founded upon it, so the frame of grace preserves the frame of
nature in man. And, therefore Christ brings about all that is good in the
soul through judgment, and that so sweetly that many, by a dangerous
error, think that that good which is in them and issues from them is from
themselves, and not from the powerful work of grace. So it is in evil,
where the devil so subtly leads us according to the stream of our own
nature that men think that Satan had no hand in their sin; but here a
mistake is with little peril, because we are evil of ourselves, and the devil
only promotes ill he finds in us. But there are no seeds of supernatural
goodness at all in us. God finds nothing in us but enmity, only he has
engraved in our nature an inclination in general to that which we judge to
be good. Now when he clearly reveals what is good in particular, we are
attracted to it; and when he shows us convincingly what is evil we abhor
it as freely as we embraced it before.
From this we may know whether we work as we should do or not. That is,
when we do what we do out of inward principles, when we do not choose
what is good only because we were so brought up, or because such and
such whom we respect do so, or because we will maintain a side, so
making religion a faction; but out of judgment, when what we do that is
good we first judge in ourselves so to be; and what we abstain from that is
ill we first judge to be ill from an inward judgment. A sound Christian, as
he enjoys the better part, so has he first made choice of it with Mary
(Luke 10:42). He establishes every purpose by counsel (Prov. 20:18).
God, indeed, uses carnal men to very good service, but without a
thorough altering and conviction of their judgment. He works by them,
but not in them. Therefore they do neither approve the good they do nor
hate the evil they abstain from.
WHERE CHRIST'S GOVERNMENT IS SET UP
The second branch of this conclusion is that, wherever true wisdom and
judgment are, there Christ has set up his government, because where

wisdom is it directs us, not only to understand, but to order our ways
aright. Where Christ as a prophet teaches by his Spirit, he likewise as a
king subdues the heart by his Spirit to obedience to what is taught. This is
that teaching which is promised of God, when not only the brain but the
heart itself is taught; when men do not only know what they should do
but are taught the very doing of it. They are not only taught that they
should love, fear and obey, but they are taught love itself, and fear and
obedience themselves. Christ sets up his throne in the very heart and
alters its direction, so making his subjects good, together with teaching
them to be good. Other princes can make good laws, but they cannot
write them in their people's hearts (Jer. 31:33). This is Christ's
prerogative: he infuses into his subjects his own Spirit. Upon him there
does not only rest the spirit of wisdom and understanding, but likewise
the spirit of the fear of the Lord (Isa. 11:2). The knowledge which we have
of him from himself is a transforming knowledge (2 Cor. 3:18). The same
Spirit who enlightens the mind inspires gracious inclinations into the will
and affections and infuses strength into the whole man. As a gracious
man judges as he should, so he inclines to and does as he judges. His life
is a commentary on his inward man. There is a sweet harmony among
God's truth, his judgment, and his whole conversation.
HOW CHRIST GOVERNS US
The heart of a Christian is like Jerusalem when it was at its best, a city
compact within itself (Psa. 122:3), where are set up the thrones of
judgment (Psa. 122:5). Judgment should have a throne in the heart of
every Christian. Not that judgment alone will work a change. There must
be grace to alter the bent and sway of the will before it will yield to be
wrought upon by the understanding. But God has so joined these
together that whenever he savingly shines on the understanding he gives
a soft and pliable heart. For without a work upon the heart by the Spirit of
God it will follow its own inclination to that which it loves, whatever the
judgment shall say to the contrary. There is no natural proportion
between an unsanctified heart and a sanctified judgment. For the
unaltered heart will not give leave to the judgment coldly and soberly to
conclude what is best, as a sick man, whilst his feverish illness corrupts
his taste, is rather desirous to please that than to hearken to what the

physician may say. Judgment has no power over itself where the will is
unsubdued, for the will and affections bribe it to give sentence for them,
when any profit or pleasure shall come in competition with that which the
judgment only shall in general think to be good. And therefore it is, for
the most part, in the power of the heart what the understanding shall
judge and determine in particular things. Where grace has subdued the
heart, unruly passions do not cast such a mist before the understanding
that it does not see in particular cases what is best. Base considerations,
springing from self love, do not alter the case and bias the judgment into
a contrary way; but that which is good in itself shall be good to us,
although it crosses our particular worldly interests.
THE EFFECTS OF THIS IN PRACTICE
The right understanding of this has an influence on practice, which has
drawn me to a more full explanation. This will teach us the right method
of godliness: to begin with judgment, and then to beg of God, together
with illumination, holy inclinations of our will and affections, that so a
perfect government may be set up in our hearts, and that our knowledge
may be `in all judgment' (Phil. 1:9), that is, with experience and feeling.
When the judgment of Christ is set up in our judgments, and thence, by
the Spirit of Christ, brought into our hearts, then it is in its proper place
and throne. Until then, truth does us no good, but helps to condemn us.
The life of a Christian is a regular life, and he that walks by the rule (Gal.
6:16) of the new creature, peace shall be upon him. He that despises
God's way and loves to live at large, seeking all liberty to the flesh, shall
die (Prov. 19:16). And it is made good by Paul, `If ye live after the flesh,
ye shall die' (Rom. 8:13).
We learn likewise that men of an ill governed life have no true judgment.
No wicked man can be a wise man. Without Christ's Spirit the soul is in
confusion, without beauty and form, as all things were in the chaos before
the creation. The whole soul is out of joint till it be set right again by him
whose office is to `restore all things'. The baser part of the soul, which
should be subject, rules all and subdues what little truth is in the
understanding, holding it captive to base affections. And Satan by
corruption gets all the holds of the soul, till Christ, stronger than he,
comes and drives him out, taking possession of all the powers and parts

of soul and body to be weapons of righteousness, to serve him. Then it
becomes true, `New lords, new laws'. Christ as a new conqueror changes
the fundamental laws of old Adam and establishes a government of his
own.

13 . Grace Shall Reign
The third conclusion from the final part of the text is that Christ's
government will be victorious. Let us see the reasons for this.
WHY CHRIST'S KINGDOM MUST PREVAIL
1. Christ has conquered all in his own person first, and he is `over all, God
blessed for ever' (Rom. 9:5), and therefore over sin, death, hell, Satan and
the world. And, as he has overcome them in himself, so he overcomes
them in our hearts and consciences. We commonly say that conscience
makes a man kingly or contemptible, because it is planted in us to judge
for God, either with us or against us. Now if natural conscience be so
forcible, what will it be when, besides its own light, it has the light of
divine truth put into it? It will undoubtedly prevail, either to make us
hold up our heads with boldness or abase us beneath ourselves. If it
subjects itself, by grace, to Christ's truth, then it boldly faces death, hell,
judgment and all spiritual enemies, because then Christ sets up his
kingdom in the conscience and makes it a kind of paradise.
The sharpest conflict which the soul has is between the conscience and
God's justice. Now if the conscience, sprinkled with the blood of Christ,
has prevailed over assaults fetched from the justice of God, now satisfied
by Christ, it will prevail over all other opposition whatsoever.
2. We are to encounter accursed and damned enemies; therefore, if they
begin to fall before the Spirit in us, they shall fall. If they rise up again, it
is to have the greater fall.
3. The Spirit of truth, to whose tuition Christ has committed his church,
and the truth of the Spirit, which is the scepter of Christ, abide forever;

therefore the soul begotten by the immortal seed of the Spirit (1 Pet.
1:23), and this truth, must not only live for ever, but also prevail over all
that oppose it, for both the Word and the Spirit are mighty in operation
(Heb. 4:12). And, if the wicked spirit is never idle in those whom God has
delivered up to him, we cannot think that the Holy Spirit will be idle in
those whose leading and government is committed to him. No, as he
dwells in them, so he will drive out all that rise up against him, until he is
all in all.
What is spiritual is eternal. Truth is a beam of Christ's Spirit, both in
itself and as it is engrafted into the soul. Therefore it, and the grace
wrought by it, though little, will prevail. A little thing in the hand of a
giant will do great things. A little faith strengthened by Christ will work
wonders.
4. `Unto everyone that hath shall be given' (Matt. 25:29). The victory
over corruption or temptation is a pledge of final victory. As Joshua said
when he set his foot upon the five kings whom he conquered, `Thus shall
the LORD do to all your enemies' (josh. 10:25). Heaven is ours already,
only we strive till we have full possession.
5. Christ as king brings in a commanding light into the soul and bows the
neck, and softens the iron sinew of the inner man; and where he begins to
rule, he rules for ever, `of his kingdom there shall be no end' (Luke 1:33).
6. The purpose of Christ's coming was to destroy the works of the devil,
both for us and in us; and the purpose of the resurrection was, as well as
sealing to us the assurance of his victory, so also (1) to quicken our souls
from death in sin; (2) to free our souls from such snares and sorrows of
spiritual death as accompany the guilt of sin; (3) to raise them up more
comfortable, as the sun breaks forth more gloriously out of a thick cloud;
(4) to raise us out of particular slips and failings stronger; (5) to raise us
out of all troublesome and dark conditions of this life; and (6) at length to
raise our bodies out of the dust. For the same power that the Spirit
showed in raising Christ, our Head, from the sorrows of death and the
lowest degree of his abasement, that power, obtained by the death of
Christ from God, now appeased by that sacrifice, the Spirit will show in
the church, which is his body, and in every particular member thereof.

And this power is conveyed by faith, by which, after union with Christ in
his estates both of humiliation and of exaltation, we see ourselves, not
only dead with Christ, but risen and sitting together with him in heavenly
places (Eph. 2:6). Now we, apprehending ourselves to be dead and risen,
and therefore victorious over all our enemies in our Head, and
apprehending that his scope in all this is to conform us to himself, we are
by this faith changed into his likeness (2 Cor. 3:18), and so become
conquerors over all our spiritual enemies, as he is, by that power which
we derive from him who is the storehouse of all spiritual strength for all
his people. Christ at length will fulfill his purpose in us, and faith rests
assured of it, and this assurance is very operative, stirring us up to join
with Christ in his purposes.
And so, as to the church in general, by Christ it will have its victory.
Christ is that little `stone cut out without hands' which broke in pieces
the goodly image (Dan. 2:34), that is, all opposite government, until it
became `a great mountain, and filled the whole earth' (Dan. 2:35). So
that the stone that was cut out of the mountain becomes a mountain itself
at length. Who art thou, then, O mountain, that think to stand up against
this mountain? All shall lie flat and level before it. He will bring down all
mountainous, high, exalted thoughts, and lay the pride of all flesh low.
When chaff strives against the wind, or stubble against the fire, when the
heel kicks against the pricks, when the potsherd strives with the potter,
when man strives against God, it is easy to know on which side the victory
will be. The winds may toss the ship wherein Christ is, but not overturn it.
The waves may dash against the rock, but they only break themselves
against it.
WHY THE ENEMY SEEMS VICTORIOUS
Objection: If this is so, why is it thus with the church of God, and with
many a gracious Christian? The victory seems to be with the enemy.
To understand this, we should remember, firstly, that God's children
usually, in their troubles, overcome by suffering. Here lambs overcome
lions, and doves eagles, by suffering, that herein they may be conformable
to Christ, who conquered most when he suffered most. Together with
Christ's kingdom of patience there was a kingdom of power.

Secondly, this victory is by degrees, and therefore they are too hasty
spirited that would conquer as soon as they strike the first stroke, and be
at the end of their race at the first setting forth. The Israelites were sure of
their victory in their journey to Canaan, yet they must fight it out. God
would not have us quickly forget what cruel enemies Christ has overcome
for us. `Slay them not, lest my people forget,' says the Psalmist (Psa.
59:11), so that, by the experience of that annoyance we have by them, we
might be kept in fear to come under their power.
Thirdly, God often works by contraries: when he means to give victory, he
will allow us to be foiled at first; when he means to comfort, he will terrify
first; when he means to justify, he will condemn us first; when he means
to make us glorious, he will abase us first. A Christian conquers, even
when he' is conquered. When he is conquered by some sins, he gets
victory over others more dangerous, such as spiritual pride and security.
Fourthly, Christ's work, both in the church and in the hearts of
Christians, often goes backward so that it may go forward better. As seed
rots in the ground in the winter time, but after comes up better, and the
harder the winter the more flourishing the spring, so we learn to stand by
falls, and get strength by weakness discovered virtutis custos infirmitas
(weakness is the keeper of virtue). We take deeper root by shaking. And,
as torches flame brighter by moving, thus it pleases Christ, out of his
freedom, in this manner to maintain his government in us. Let us herein
labour to exercise our faith, so that it may answer Christ's way of dealing
with us. When we are foiled, let us believe we shall overcome; when we
have fallen, let us believe we shall rise again. Jacob, after he received a
blow which made him lame, yet would not give over wrestling (Gen.
32:25) till he had obtained the blessing. So let us never give up, but, in
our thoughts, knit the beginning, progress and end together, and then we
shall see ourselves in heaven out of the reach of all enemies. Let us assure
ourselves that God's grace, even in this imperfect state, is stronger than
man's free will in the state of original perfection. It is founded now in
Christ, who, as he is the author, so will he be the finisher, of our faith
(Heb. 12:2). We are under a more gracious covenant.
What some say of rooted faith, fides radicata, that it continues, while
weak faith may come to nothing, seems to be contradicted by this

Scripture; for, as the strongest faith may be shaken, so the weakest, where
truth is, is so far rooted that it will prevail. Weakness with watchfulness
will stand, when strength with too much confidence fails. Weakness, with
acknowledgement of it, is the fittest seat and subject for God to perfect
his strength in; for consciousness of our infirmities drives us out of
ourselves to him in whom our strength lies.
From this it follows that weakness may be consistent with the assurance
of salvation. The disciples, notwithstanding all their weaknesses, are
bidden to rejoice that their names are written in heaven (Luke 10:20).
Failings, with conflict, in sanctification should not weaken the peace of
our justification and assurance of salvation. It matters not so much what
ill is in us, as what good; not what corruptions, but how we regard them;
not what our particular failings are so much as what the thread and tenor
of our lives are, for Christ's dislike of that which is amiss in us turns not
to the hatred of our persons but to the victorious subduing of all our
infirmities.
Some have, after conflict, wondered at the goodness of God that so little
and such trembling faith should have upheld them in so great combats,
when Satan had almost caught them. And, indeed, it is to be wondered at,
how much a little grace will prevail with God for acceptance, and over our
enemies for victory, if the heart is upright. Such is the goodness of our
sweet Saviour that he delights still to show his strength in our weakness.
CONSOLATION FOR WEAK CHRISTIANS
The first use of this is for the great consolation of poor and weak
Christians. Let them know that a spark from heaven, though kindled
under greenwood that sobs and smokes, yet it will consume all at last.
Love once kindled is strong as death. Many waters cannot quench it, and
therefore it is called a vehement flame, or flame of God (Song of Sol. 8:6),
kindled in the heart by the Holy Ghost. That little that is in us is fed with
an everlasting spring. As the fire that came down from heaven in Elijah's
time (1 Kings 18:38) licked up all the water, to show that it came from
God, so will this fire consume all our corruption. No affliction without or
corruption within shall quench it. In the morning, we often see clouds
gather about the sun, as if they would hide it, but the sun overcomes them

little by little, till it comes to its full strength. At first, fears and doubts
hinder the breaking out of this fire, until at length it gets above them all,
and Christ prevails. And then he upholds his own graces in us. Grace
conquers us first, and we, by it, conquer all else; whether corruptions
within us, or temptations from outside us.
The church of Christ, begotten by the Word of truth, has the doctrine of
the apostles for her crown, and tramples the moon, that is, the world and
all worldly things, `under her feet' (Rev. 12:1). Every one that is `born of
God overcometh the world' (1 John 5:4). Faith, whereby especially Christ
rules, sets the soul so high that it looks down on all other things as far
below, as having represented to it, by the Spirit of Christ, riches, honor,
beauty and pleasures of a higher nature.
EVIDENCES OF CHRIST'S RULE IN US
Now, that we may not come short of the comfort intended, there are two
things especially to be taken notice of by us: firstly, whether there is such
a judgment or government set up in us to which this promise of victory is
made, and secondly, how we are to conduct ourselves so that the
judgment of Christ in us may indeed be victorious.
The evidences whereby we may come to know that Christ's judgment in
us is such as will be victorious, are:
1. Being able from experience to justify all Christ's ways, let flesh and
blood say what they can to the contrary, and willingly subscribing to that
course which God has taken in Christ to bring us to heaven, still
approving a further measure of grace than we have attained to, and
projecting and planning for it. No other men can justify their courses,
when their conscience is awakened.
2. Having reasons of religion the strongest reasons with us, prevailing
more than reasons fetched from worldly policy.
3. Being so true to our ends and steadfast to our rule that no hopes or
fears can sway us another way, but still we are enquiring what agrees with

or differs from our rule.
4. Being able to `do nothing against the truth, but for the truth' (2 Cor.
13:8), the truth being dearer to us than our lives. Truth does not have this
sovereignty in the heart of any carnal man.
5. If we had liberty to choose under whose government we would live, out
of a delight in the inner man to Christ's government, making choice of
him only to rule us before any other. This argues that we are like minded
to Christ, a free and a willing people, and not compelled to Christ's
service otherwise than by the sweet constraint of love. When we are so far
satisfied with the government of Christ's Spirit that we are willing to
resign up ourselves to him in all things, then his kingdom is come to us,
and our wills are brought to his will. It is the bent of our wills that makes
us good or ill.
6. Having a well ordered, uniform life, not consisting of fits and starts,
shows a well ordered heart; as in a clock, when the hammer strikes well,
and the hand of the dial points well, it is a sign that the wheels are rightly
set.
7. When Christ's will comes into competition with any earthly loss or
gain, yet then, in that particular case, having the heart willing to stoop to
Christ is a true sign; for the truest trial of the power of grace is in
particular cases which touch us most closely, for there our corruption
makes the greatest head. When Christ came nearest to home with the
young man in the gospel, he lost a disciple of him (Matt. 19. 22).
8. Being able to practice duties pleasing to Christ, though contrary to
flesh and the course of the world, and being able to overcome ourselves in
that evil to which our nature is prone and stands so much inclined, and
which agrees to the ruling passion of the times, which others lie
enthralled under, such as desire of revenge, hatred of enemies, private
ends, etc., this shows that grace in us is above nature, heaven above earth,
and will have the victory.
To make this clearer, and help us in our trial, we must know that there
are three degrees of victory: first, when we resist though we are foiled;

second, when grace gets the better, though with conflict; and third, when
all corruption is perfectly subdued. When we have strength only to resist,
we may know Christ's government in us will be victorious, because what
is said of the devil is true of all our spiritual enemies, `Resist the devil,
and he will flee from you' (James 4:7); because `Greater is he that is in
you', who takes the part of his own grace, `than he that is in the world' (1
John 4:4). And if we may hope for victory from bare resistance, what may
we not hope for when the Spirit has gained the upper hand?