PURITAN GOLD -- The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment by Jeremiah Burroughs: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 8
The Evils of a Murmuring Spirit

---

The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment. By Jeremiah Burroughs.

Chapter 5. The Evils of a Murmuring Spirit.

It is what is said to be the glory of Christ, (for it is thought by interpreters
to be meant of Christ) in Micah 5:5: 'And this man shall be the peace
when the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in
our palaces.' This man shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come
into our land-for one to be in peace when there are no enemies is no great
thing, but the text says, when the Assyrian shall come into our land, then
this man shall be the peace. That is, when all shall be in a hubbub and
uproar, yet then this man shall be peace. That is the trial of grace, when
you find Jesus Christ to be peace in your hearts when the Assyrian shall
come into the land. You may think you find peace in Christ when you
have no outward troubles, but is Christ your peace when the Assyrian
comes into the land, when the enemy comes? Suppose you should hear
the enemy come marching to the city and they had taken the works, and
were plundering, what would be your peace? Jesus Christ would be peace
to the soul when the enemy comes into the city, and into your houses. If
any of you have been where the enemy has come, what has been the peace
of your souls? What is said of Christ may be applied to this grace of
contentment: when the Assyrian, the plunderers, the enemies, when any
affliction, trouble, distress befalls such a heart, then this grace of
contentment bring peace to the soul; it brings peace to the soul at the
time when the Assyrian comes into the land. The grace of contentment is
an excellent grace: there is much beauty, much strength in it, there is a
great deal of worth in this grace, and therefore be in love with it.
3. BY CONTENTMENT THE SOUL IS FITTED TO RECEIVE
MERCY, AND TO DO SERVICE.
I will put these two together: contentment makes the soul fit to receive
mercy, and to do service. No man or woman in the world is as fit to
receive the grace of God, and to do the work of God, as those who have
contented spirits.
Those who are contented are fitted to receive mercy from the Lord. If you
want a vessel to take in any liquor, you must hold it still for if the vessel
stirs and shakes up and down, you cannot pour in anything, but you will
say, 'Hold still', that you may pour it in and not lose any. So if we would
be vessels to receive God's mercy, and would have the Lord pour his
mercy into us, we must have quiet, still hearts. We must not have hearts

hurrying up and down in trouble, discontent and vexing, but still and
quiet hearts, if we receive mercy from the Lord. If a child throws and
kicks up and down for a thing, you do not give it him when he cries so,
but first you will have the child quiet. Even though, perhaps, you intend
him to have what he cries for, you will not give it him till he is quiet, and
comes, and stands still before you, and is contented without it, and then
you will give it him. And truly so does the Lord deal with us, for our
dealings with him are just as your froward children's are with you. As
soon as you want a thing from God, if you cannot have it you are
disquieted at once and all in an uproar, as it were, in your spirits. God
intends mercy to you, but he says, 'You shall not have it yet, I will see you
quiet first, and then in the quietness of your hearts come to me, and see
what I will do with you.' I appeal to you who are in any way acquainted
with the ways of God, have you not found this to be the way of God
towards you/ When you were troubled for want, perhaps, of some
spiritual comfort and your hearts were vexed at it, you got nothing from
God all that while; but if you have got your heart into a quiet frame, and
can say, 'Well, it is right that the Lord should do with his poor creatures
what he will, I am under his feet, and am resolved to do what I can to
honor him, and whatever he does with me, I will seek him as long as I
live, I will be content with what God gives, and whether he gives or not I
will be content.' 'Are you in this frame?' says God, 'now you shall have
comfort, now I will give you the mercy.' A prisoner must not think he will
get rid of his chains by pulling and tearing; he may gall his flesh and rend
it to the very bone, but certainly he will not be unfettered sooner. If he
wants his fetters taken off he must quietly give up himself to some man to
take them off. If a beggar knocks once or twice at the door and you do not
come, and thereupon he is vexed and troubled and thinks it much that
you let him stand a little while without anything, you think that this
beggar is not fit to receive an alms. But if you hear two or three beggars at
your door, and out of your window you hear them say, 'Let us be content
to stay, perhaps they are busy, it is right that we should stay, it is well if
we get anything in the end, we deserve nothing at all, and therefore we
may well wait a while', you would then quickly send them an alms. So
God deals with the heart: when it is in a disquiet mood then God does not
give; but when the heart lies down quietly under God's hand, then is it in
a fit frame to receive mercy. 'Your strength shall be to sit still,' says God,

'you shall not be delivered from Babylon but by your sitting still.'
4. AS CONTENTMENT MAKES FIT TO RECEIVE MERCY, SO
FIT TO DO SERVICE.
O the quiet fruits of righteousness, the peaceable fruits of righteousness!
They indeed prosper and multiply most when they come to be peaceable
fruits of righteousness. As the philosophers say of everything that moves,
nothing moves but upon something that is immovable. A thing which
moves upon the earth, could not move if the earth were not still.
Objection. The ships move upon the sea, and that is not still.
Answer. But the seas move upon that which is still and immovable.
Nothing moves but it has something immovable that upholds it. The
wheels in a coach move up and down, but the axle-tree does not move up
and down; so it is with the heart of a man. As they say of the Heaven that
it moves up and down upon a pole that is immovable, so it is in the heart
of a man: if he will move to do service to God, he must have a steady heart
within him. That must help him to move in the service of God, for those
who have unsteady, disturbed spirits which have no steadfastness at all in
them are not fit to do service for God, but such as have steadfastness in
their spirits are men and women fit to do any service. That is the reason
why, when the Lord has any great work for one of his servants to do,
usually he first quiets their spirits, he brings their spirits into a quiet,
sweet frame, to be contented with anything, and then he sets them about
employment.
5. CONTENTMENT DELIVERS US FROM AN ABUNDANCE OF
TEMPTATIONS.
Oh, the temptations that men of discontented spirits are subject to! The
Devil loves to fish in troubled waters. That is our proverb about men and
women, their disposition is to fish in troubled waters, they say it is good
fishing in troubled waters. This is the maxim of the Devil, he loves to fish
in troubled waters; where he sees the spirits of men and women troubled
and vexed, there the Devil comes. He says, 'There is good fishing for me',

when he sees men and women go up and down discontented, and he can
get them alone, then he comes with his temptations: 'Will you suffer such
a thing?' he says, 'take this shift, this indirect way, do you not see how
poor you are, others are well off, you do not know what to do for the
winter, to provide fuel and get bread for you and your children', and so he
tempts them to unlawful courses. This is the special disorder that the
Devil fastens upon, when he gets men and women to give their souls to
him: it is from discontent, that is the ground of all who have been
witches, and so have given up themselves to the Devil: the rise of it has
been their discontent.
Therefore it is noticeable that those upon whom the Devil works, to make
them witches, are usually old and melancholy people, and women
especially, and those of the poorer sort who are discontented at home.
Their neighbors trouble them and vex them, and their spirits are weak
and they cannot bear it, so upon that the Devil fastens his temptations
and draws them to anything. If they are poor, then he promises them
money; if they have revengeful spirits, then he tells them that he will
revenge them upon such and such persons: now this quiets and contents
them. Oh! there is occasion of temptation for the Devil when he meets
with a discontented spirit! Luther said of God, 'God does not dwell in
Babylon, but in Salem.' Babylon signifies confusion, and Salem signifies
peace; now God does not dwell in spirits that are in a confusion, but he
dwells in peaceable and quiet spirits. Oh, if you would free yourselves
from temptations, labor for contentment. It is the peace of God that
guards the heart from temptation. I remember reading of one Marius
Curio who had bribes sent to him, to tempt him to be unfaithful to his
country. When he was sitting at home at dinner with a dish of turnips,
and they came and promised him rewards: said he, 'That man who can be
contented with this fare that I have will not be tempted with your
rewards. I thank God I am content with this far, and as for rewards let
them be offered to those that cannot be content to dine with a dish of
turnips.' So the truth is, as we see clearly, that the reason why many
betray their trust, as in the service of Parliament and the Kingdom, is
because they cannot be contented to be in a low condition. If a man is
contented to be in a low condition, and to go meanly clothed if God sees
fit, such a one is shot-free, you mighty say, from thousands of

temptations of the Devil, that prevail against others to the damning of
their souls.
Oh, in such times as these, when men are in danger of the loss of their
wealth, I say men who have not got this grace are in a most lamentable
condition, they are in more danger for their souls than they are for their
outward possessions. You think it is a sad thing to be in danger of your
outward possessions that you may lose everything in a night; but if you
have not this contented spirit within you, you are in more danger of the
temptations of the Devil, to be plundered in that way of any good, and to
be led into sin. Oh, when men think thus, that they must live as finely as
they were wont to do, they make themselves a prey to the Devil, but for
such as can say, 'let God do with me what he pleases, I am content to
submit to his hand in it', the Devil will scarcely meddle with such men.
There was a notable saying of a philosopher who lived on mean fare: as
he was eating herbs and roots, someone said to him, 'If you would but
please Dionysius, you need not eat herbs and roots'; but he answered him
thus, 'If you would but be content with such mean fare, you need not
flatter Dionysius.' Temptations will no more prevail over a contented
man, than a dart that is thrown against a brazen wall.
6. THE SIXTH EXCELLENCE IS THE ABUNDANT COMFORTS
IN A MAN'S LIFE THAT CONTENTMENT WILL BRING.
Contentment will make a man's life exceedingly sweet and comfortable,
nothing more so than the grace of contentment. I will show how it brings
comfort in many ways.
1. What a man has he has in a kind of independent way, not depending
upon any creature for his comfort.
2. If God raises the position of a contented man who is low, he has the
love of God in it. It is abundantly more sweet then than if he had it and
his heart was not contented; for God may grant a discontented man his
desire, but he cannot say that it is from love. If a man has quieted his
spirit first, and then God grants him his desire, he may have more
comfort in it, and more assurance that he has the love of God in it.

3. This contentment is a comfort to a man's spirit in this, that it keeps in
his comforts, and keeps out whatever may damp his comforts, or put out
the light of them. I may compare this grace of contentment to a sailor's
lantern: when a sailor is at sea, no matter how much provision he has in
his ship, yet if he is thousands of leagues from land, or in a route where
he will not meet with a ship for three or four months, he will be in a sad
state if he has no lantern on his ship, nor anything by which to keep a
candle alight in a storm. He would give a great deal to have a lantern, or
something that might serve instead of one. When a storm comes in the
night, and he can have no light above board, but it is puffed out at once,
his state is very sad. So, many men have the light of comfort when there is
no storm, but let any affliction come, any storm upon them, and their
light is puffed out at once, and what can they do now? When the heart is
furnished with this grace of contentment, this grace is, as it were, the
lantern, and it keeps comfort in the spirit of a man, light in the midst of a
storm and tempest. When you have a lantern in the midst of a storm you
can carry light everywhere up and down the ship, to the top of the mast if
you wish, and yet keep it alight; so when the comfort of a Christian is
enlivened with the grace of contentment, it may be kept alight whatever
storms or tempests come, still he can keep light in his soul. Oh this helps
your comforts very much.
7. CONTENTMENT DRAWS COMFORT FROM THOSE THINGS
WE DO NOT REALLY POSSESS.
Perhaps many who have not got outward things have more comfort than
those who do possess them. A man who distils herbs, though he has not
got the herbs themselves, yet having the water that is distilled out of
them, he may enjoy the benefit of the herbs. So though a man has not got
real possession of such outward wealth, such an outward comfort, yet, by
the grace of contentment he may get it to himself. By the art of navigation
we can bring in the riches of the East and West Indies to ourselves; so by
the art of contentment we may bring in the comfort of any condition to
ourselves, that is, we may have that comfort by contentment, that we
should have if we had the thing itself.
You will find a noteworthy story in Plutarch to illustrate this: In the life of
Pyrrhus, one Sineus came to him, and would fain have had him desist

from the wars, and not war with the Romans. He said to him, 'May it
please your Majesty, it is reported that the Romans are very good men of
war, and if it please the gods that we overcome them, what benefit shall
we have of that victory?' Pyrrhus answered him, 'We shall then
straightway conquer all the rest of Italy with ease.' 'Indeed that is likely
which your Grace speaks,' said Sineus, 'but when we have won Italy, will
our wars end then?' 'If the gods were pleased', said Pyrrhus, 'that the
victory were achieved, the way would then be made open for us to attain
great conquests, for who would not afterwards go into Africa, and so to
Carthage?' 'But', said Sineus, 'when we have everything in our hands what
shall we do in the end?' Then Pyrrhus laughing, told him again, 'We will
then be quiet, and take our ease, and have feasts every day, and be as
merry with one another as we possibly can.' Said Sineus, 'What prevents
us now from being as quiet, and merry together, since we enjoy that
immediately without further travel and trouble which we would seek for
abroad, with such shedding of blood, and manifest danger? can you not
sit down and be merry now?' So a man may think, if I had such a thing,
then I would have another, and if I had that, then I should have more;
and what if you had got all you desire? Then you would be content-why?
You may be content now without them.
Certainly our contentment does not consist in getting the thing we desire,
but in God's fashioning our spirits to our conditions. Some men have not
got a foot of ground of their own, yet they live better than other men who
are heirs to a great deal of land. I have known it in the country
sometimes, that a man lives upon his own land, and yet lives very poorly;
but you find another man who rents his land, and yet by his good
husbandry, and by his care, lives better than he who has his own land. So
a many by this art of contentment may live better without an estate than
another man can live off an estate. Oh, it adds exceedingly to the comfort
of a Christian.
That I may show it further I would add, there is more comfort even in the
grace of contentment than there is in any possessions whatsoever; a man
has more comfort in being content without a thing, than he can have in
the thing that he in a discontented way desires. You think, if I had such a
thing, then I should be content. I say, there is more good in contentment,

than there is in the thing that you would fain have to cure your
discontent, and that I shall show in several particulars: 1. I would fain
have such a thing, and then I could be content; but if I had it, then it
would be but the creature that helped my contentment, whereas now it is
the grace of God in my soul that makes me content, and surely it is better
to be content with the grace of God in my soul, than with enjoying an
outward comfort? 2. If I had such a thing, granted my position might be
better, but my soul would not be better; but by contentment my soul is
better. That would not be bettered by wealth, or lands, or friends; but
contentment makes myself better, and therefore contentment is a better
portion than the thing that I would fain have as my portion.
3. If I become content by having my desire satisfied, that is only self-love,
but when I am contented with the hand of God, and am willing to be at
his disposal, that comes form my love to God. In having my desire
satisfied, I am contented through self-love, but through the grace of
contentment I come to be contented out of love to God, and is it not
better to be contented out of love to God, tan from a principle of selflove? 4. If I am contented because I have what I desire, perhaps I am
contented in that one thing, but that one thing does not furnish me with
contentment in another thing; perhaps I may grow more dainty and nice
and froward in other things. If you give children what they want in some
things, they grow so much the more coy and dainty and discontented if
they cannot have other things that they want. But if I have once overcome
my heart, and am contented through the grace of God in my heart, then
this makes me content not only in one particular but in general, whatever
befalls me. I am discontented, and would fain have a certain thing, and
afterwards I have it: now does this prepare me to be contented in other
things? No, but when I have got this grace of contentment, I am prepared
to be contented in all conditions. Thus you see that contentment brings
comfort to a man's life, fills it full of comfort in this world; the truth is, it
is even a Heaven on earth.
What is Heaven, but the rest and quiet of a man's spirit; that is the special
thing that makes the life of Heaven, there is rest and joy, and satisfaction
in God. So it is in a contented spirit: there is rest and joy and satisfaction
in God. In Heaven there is singing praises to God; a contented heart is

always praising and blessing God. You have Heaven while you are on
earth when you have a contented spirit; yea, in some regards it is better
than Heaven.
How is that, you will say? There is a kind of honor that God has in it, and
an excellence that he does not have in Heaven, and it is this: In Heaven
there is no overcoming of temptations. They are not put to any trials by
afflictions. In Heaven they have exercise of grace, but they have nothing
but encouragement to it, and indeed the grace of those who are there is
perfect, and in that they excel us. But there is nothing to cross their grace,
they have no trials at all to tempt them to do contrary; whereas for a man
or woman to be in the midst of afflictions, temptations and troubles, and
yet to have grace exercised, and to be satisfied in God and Christ and in
the Word and promises in the midst of all they suffer: this may seem to be
an honor that God receives from us, that he does not have from the angels
and saints in Heaven. Is it so much for one who is in Heaven, who has
nothing but good from God, has nothing to try him, no temptations; is it
so much for such a one to be praising and blessing God, as for the poor
soul who is in the midst of trials and temptations and afflictions and
troubles? For this soul to go on praying, and blessing, and serving God, I
say, is an excellence that you do not find in Heaven, and God will not
have this kind of glory from you in Heaven. Therefore be contented, and
prize this contentment, and be willing to live in this world as long as God
shall please. Do not think, Oh, that I were delivered from all these
afflictions and troubles here in this world! If you were, then you would
have more ease yourself, but this is a way of honoring God, and
manifesting the excellence of grace here, when you are in this conflict of
temptation, which God shall not have from you in Heaven.
So be satisfied and quiet, be contented with your contentment. I lack
certain things that others have, but blessed be God, I have a contented
heart which others have not. Then, I say, be content with your
contentment, for it is a rich portion that the Lord has granted you. If the
Lord should give you thousands in this world, it would not be such a rich
portion as this, that he has given you a contented spirit. Oh, go away and
praise the name of God, and say, 'Why, Lord, it is true that I would be
glad if I had these and these comforts which others have, but you have cut

me short. Though I lack these, yet you have given me what is as good and
better, you have given me a quiet, contented heart, to be willing to be at
your disposal.'
8. CONTENTMENT IS A GREAT BLESSING OF GOD UPON THE
SOUL.
There is God's blessing upon those who are content, upon them, and their
possessions, and upon all that they have. We read in Deuteronomy of the
blessing of Judah, the principal tribe: 'And he said, hear, Lord, the voice
of Judah, and bring him unto his people, let his hands be sufficient for
him, and be thou an help to him from his enemies.' Let his hands be
sufficient for him, that is, bring a sufficiency of all good to him that he
may have of his own: that is the blessing of Judah. So when God gives you
a sufficiency of your own, as every contented man has, that is the blessing
of God upon you, the blessing of the principal tribe, of Judah, is upon
you. It is the Lord who gives us all things to enjoy; we may have the thing
and yet not enjoy it unless God comes in with his blessing. Now whatever
you have, you enjoy it; many men have possessions and do not enjoy
them. It is the blessing of God which gives us all things to enjoy, and it is
God who through his blessing has fashioned your heart and made it
suitable to your circumstances.
9. THOSE WHO ARE CONTENT MAY EXPECT REWARD FROM
GOD That God will give them the good of all the things which they are
contented to be without. This brings an abundance of good to a contented
spirit. There is such and such a mercy which you think would be very
pleasant to you if you had it; but can you bring your heart to submit to
God in it? Then you shall have the blessing of the mercy one way or
another; if you do not have the thing itself, you shall have it made up one
way or another; you will have a bill of exchange to receive something in
lieu of it. There is no comfort that any soul is content to be without, but
the Lord will give either the comfort or something instead of it. You shall
have a reward to your soul for whatever good thing you are content to be
without. You know what the Scripture says of active obedience: the Lord
accepts of his servants their will for the deed. Though we do not do a good
thing, yet if our hearts are upright, to will to do it, we shall have the
blessing, though we do not do the thing. You who complain of weakness,

you cannot do as others do, you cannot do as much service as others do-if
your hearts are upright with God, and would fain do the same service that
you see others do, and would account it a great blessing of God, the
greatest blessing in the world if you were able to do as others do-now you
may comfort yourselves with this, that dealing with God in the Covenant
of grace, you shall have from God the reward of all you would do. As a
wicked man shall have the punishment for all the sin he would commit,
so you shall have the reward for all the good you would do. Now may not
we draw an argument from active obedience to passive: there is as good
reason why you should expect that God will reward you for all that you
are willing to suffer, as well as for all that you are willing to do. If you are
willing to be without such a comfort and mercy when God sees fit, you
shall be no loser; certainly God will reward you either with the comfort or
with what shall be as good to you as the comfort. Therefore consider,
How many things have I that others lack? and can I bring my heart into a
quiet, contented frame to lack what others have? I have the blessing of all
that they have, and I shall either possess such things as others have, or
else God will make it up one way or another, either here or hereafter in
eternity to me. Oh what riches are here! With contentment you have all
kinds of riches.
10. LASTLY, BY CONTENTMENT THE SOUL COMES TO AN
EXCELLENCE NEAR TO GOD HIMSELF, YEA, THE NEAREST
POSSIBLE.
For this word, this is translated 'content', signifies a self-sufficiency, as I
told you in opening the words. A contented man is a self-sufficient man,
and what is the great glory of God, but to be happy and self-sufficient in
himself? Indeed, he is said to be all-sufficient, but that is only a further
addition of the word 'all', rather than of any matter, for to be sufficient is
all-sufficient. Now this is the glory of God, to be sufficient, to have
sufficiency in himself. El-shaddai means to be God having sufficiency in
himself. And you come near to this. As you partake of the Divine nature
by grace in general, so you do it in a more peculiar manner by this grace
of Christian contentment, for what is the excellence and glory of God but
this? Suppose there were no creatures in the world, and that all the
creatures in the world were annihilated: God would remain the same

blessed God that he is now, he would not be in a worse condition if all
creatures were gone; neither would a contented heart, if God should take
away all creatures from him. A contented heart has enough in the lack of
all creatures, and would not be more miserable than he is now. Suppose
that God should keep you here, and all the creatures that are in the world
were taken away, yet you still, having God to be your portion, would be as
happy as you are now.
Therefore contentment has a great deal of excellence in it.

The Evils of a Murmuring Spirit
Thus we have showed in many respects the excellence of this grace of
contentment, laboring to present the beauty of it before your souls, that
you may be in love with it. Now, my brethren, what remains but the
practice of this? For this art of contentment is not a speculative thing,
only for contemplation, but it is an art of divinity, and therefore practical.
You are now to labor to work upon your hearts, that this grace may be in
you, that you may honor God and honor your profession with this grace
of contentment, for there are none who more honor God, and honor their
profession than those who have this grace of contentment.
Now that we may come to grips with the practice, it is necessary that we
should be humbled in our hearts because of our lack of contentment in
the past. For there is no way to set about any duty that you should
perform, you might labor to perform it, but first you must be humbled for
the lack of it. Therefore I shall endeavor to get your hearts to be humbled
for lack of this grace. 'Oh, had I had this grace of contentment, what a
happy life I might have lived! What abundance of honor I might have
brought to the name of God! How might I have honored my profession!
What a great deal of comfort I might have enjoyed! But the Lord knows it
has been far otherwise. Oh, how far I have been from this grace of
contentment which has been expounded to me! I have had a murmuring,
a vexing, and a fretting heart within me. Every little cross has put me out
of temper and out of frame. Oh, the boisterousness of my spirit! What evil

God sees in the vexing and fretting of my heart, and murmuring and
repining of my spirit!' Oh that God would make you see it! Now to the end
that you might be humbled for lack of it, I shall endeavor in these
headlings to speak of it: First I shall set before you The evil of a
murmuring spirit. There is more evil in it than you are aware of.
In the second place, I will show you some aggravations of this evil. It is
altogether evil, but more so in some cases than others.
Thirdly, I shall labor to take away the excuses that any murmuring,
discontented heart has for his disorder.
There are these three things in this use of humbling of the soul for the
want of this grace of contentment.
For the present, the first: The great evil that is in a murmuring,
discontented heart.
1. THIS MURMURING AND DISCONTENTEDNESS OF YOURS
REVEALS MUCH CORRUPTION IN THE SOUL.
As contentment argues much grace, and strong grace, and beautiful
grace, so murmuring argues much corruption, and strong corruption, and
very vile corruptions in your heart. If a man's body is of such a temper
that every scratch of a pin makes his flesh to rankle and be a sore, you will
surely say, this man's body is very corrupt, his blood and his flesh is
corrupt, that every scratch of a pin shall make it rankle. So it is in your
spirit, if every little trouble and affliction makes you discontented, and
makes you murmur, and even causes your spirit within you to rankle. Or
like a wound in a man's body, the evil of the wound is not so much in the
largeness of it, and the abundance of blood that comes out of it, but in the
inflammation that there is in it, or in a fretting and corrupting humor
that is in the wound.
When an unskilled man comes and sees a large wound in the flesh, he
looks upon it as a dangerous wound, and when he sees a great deal of
blood gush out, he thinks, these are the evils of it; but when a surgeon
comes and sees a great gash, he says: 'This will be healed within a few

days, but there is a smaller wound and an inflammation or a septic sore
in it, and this will cost time', he says, 'to cure.' So he does not lay balsam
and healing salves upon it, but his great is to get out the septic
inflammation, and the thing that must heal this wound is some potion to
purge. But the patient says, 'What good will this do to my wound? You
give me something to drink, and my wound is in my arm, or in my leg.
What good will this do that I am putting in my stomach?' Yes, it purges
out the infection, and takes away the inflammation, and till that is taken
away the salves can do no good.
So it is, just for all the world, in the souls of men: it may be that there is
some affliction upon them, which I compare to the wound; now they
think that the greatness of the affliction is what makes their condition
most miserable. Oh now, there is a fretting humor, an inflammation in
the heart, a murmuring spirit that is within you, and that is the misery of
your condition, and it must be purged out of you before you can be
healed. Let God do with you what he will, till he purges out that fretting
humor your wound will not be healed. A murmuring heart is a very sinful
heart; so when you are troubled for this affliction you had need to turn
your thoughts rather to be troubled for the murmuring of your heart, for
that is the greatest trouble. There is an affliction upon you and that is
grievous, but there is a murmuring heart within and that is more
grievous. Oh, that we could but convince men and women that
murmuring spirit is a greater evil than any affliction, whatever the
affliction! We shall show more fully afterward that a murmuring spirit is
the evil of the evil, and the misery of the misery.
2. THE EVIL OF MURMURING IS SUCH THAT WHEN GOD
WOULD SPEAK OF WICKED MEN AND DESCRIBE THEM, and
show the brand of a wicked and ungodly man or woman, he instances this
sin in a more special manner. I might name many Scriptures, but that
Scripture in Jude is a most remarkable one. In the 14th verse onwards, it
is said, 'That the Lord comes with ten thousands of his saints, to execute
judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and all of
their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.'
Mark here in this 15th verse mention is made four times of ungodly ones:

all that are ungodly among them, all their ungodly deeds which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners
have spoken against him. This is in general, but now he comes in
particular to show who these are: 'These are', he says, 'murmurers',-that
is the very first. Would you know who are ungodly men, whom God when
he comes with ten thousands of angels shall come to punish for all their
ungodly deeds that they do, and those that speak ungodly things against
him? These ungodly ones are murmurers; murmurers in Scripture are
put in the forefront of all. You had need to look to your spirits; you may
see that this murmuring, which is the vice contrary to this contentment,
is not as small a matter as you think. You think you are not as ungodly as
others, because you do not swear and drink as others do, but you may be
ungodly in murmuring. It is true there is no sin but some seeds and
remainders of it are in those who are godly; but when men are under the
power of this sin of murmuring, it convicts them as ungodly, as well as if
they were under the power of drunkenness, or whoredom, or any other
sin. God will look upon you as ungodly for this sin as well as for any sin
whatever. This one Scripture should make the heart shake at the thought
of the sin of murmuring.
3. AS WELL AS BEING MADE A BRAND OF UNGODLY MEN,
YOU WILL FIND IN SCRIPTURE THAT GOD ACCOUNTS IT
REBELLION.
It is contrary to the worship that is in contentedness. That is worshipping
God, crouching to God and falling down before him, even as a dog would
crouch when you hold a stick over him; but a murmuring heart is a
rebellious heart, as you will find, if you compare two Scripture together:
they are both in the book of Numbers. 'But on the morrow', says
Numbers 16:41, 'all the congregation of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of the
Lord.' They all murmured; now compare this with chapter 17 and
verse 10: 'And the Lord said unto Moses, Bring Aaron's rod again before
the testimony, to be kept for a token against the rebels.' In the 16th
chapter they murmured against Moses and Aaron, and in the 17th chapter
we read, Bring the rod of Aaron again, before the testimony, for a token

against the rebels. So you see that to be a murmurer, and to be a rebel, in
Scripture phrase is all one; it is rebellion against God. Just as it is the
beginning of rebellion and sedition in a kingdom, when the people are
discontented. When discontent comes, it grows to murmuring, and you
can go into no house almost, but there is murmuring when men are
discontented, so that within a little while it breaks forth into sedition or
rebellion. Murmuring is but as the smoke of the fire: there is first a smoke
and smouldering before the flame breaks forth; and so before open
rebellion in a kingdom there is first a smoke of murmuring, and then it
breaks forth into open rebellion. But because it has the seeds of rebellion,
it is accounted before the Lord to be rebellion. Will you be a rebel against
God? When you feel your heart discontented and murmuring against the
dispensation of God towards you, you should check it thus: Oh, you
wretched heart! What, will you be a rebel against God? Will you rise in
rebellion against the infinite God? Yet you have done so. Charge your
heart with this sin of rebellion.
You who are guilty of this sin of murmuring, you are this day charged by
the Lord, as being guilty of rebellion against him, and God expects that
when you go home, you should humble your souls before him for this sin,
that you should charge your souls for being guilty of rebellion against
God.
Many of you may say, I never thought that I was a rebel against God
before, I thought that I had many infirmities, but now I see the Scripture
speaks of sin in a different way than men do, the Scripture makes men,
though only murmurers, to be rebels against God. Oh, this rebellious
heart that I have against the Lord, which has manifested itself in this way
of murmuring against the Lord! That is a third point in the evil of
discontent.
4. IT IS A WICKEDNESS WHICH IS GREATLY CONTRARY TO
GRACE, AND ESPECIALLY CONTRARY TO THE WORK OF
GOD, IN BRINGING THE SOUL HOME TO HIMSELF.
I know no disorder more opposite and contrary to the work of God in the
conversion of a sinner, than this is.

Question. What is the work of God when he brings a sinner home to
himself? Answer. 1. The usual way is for God to make the soul to see, and
be sensible of the dreadful evil that is in sin, and the great breach that sin
has made between God and it, for, certainly, Jesus Christ can never be
known in his beauty and excellence till the soul knows that. I do not say
what secret work of the Holy Ghost there may be in the soul, but before
the soul can actually apply Jesus Christ to itself, it is impossible but that
it must come to know the evil of sin, and the excellence of Jesus Christ. A
seed of faith may be put into the soul, but the soul must first know Christ,
and know sin, and be made sensible of it. Now how contrary is this sin of
murmuring to any such work of God! Has God made me see the dreadful
evil of sin, and made my soul sensible of the evil of sin as the greatest
burden? How can I be then so much troubled for every little affliction?
Certainly, if I saw what the evil of sin was, that sight would swallow up all
other evils, and if I were burdened with the evil of sin, it would swallow
up all other burdens. What! am I now murmuring against God's hand?
says such a soul, whereas a while ago the Lord made me see myself to be a
damned wretch, and apprehend it as a wonder that I was not in Hell?
2. Yea, it is strongly contrary to the sight of the infinite excellence and
glory of Jesus Christ, and of the things of the Gospel. What! am I the soul
to whom the Lord has revealed the infinite excellence of Jesus Christ, and
yet shall I think such a little affliction to be so grievous to me, when I
have had the sight of such glory in Christ as is worth more than ten
thousand worlds? A true convert will say: 'Oh, the Lord at such a time
gave me a sight of Christ that I would not be without for ten thousand,
thousand worlds.' But has God given you that, and will you be
discontented for a trifle in comparison to that?
3. A third work when God brings the soul home to himself is by taking the
heart off from the creature, disengaging the heart from all creaturecomforts: that is the third work ordinarily that the soul may perceive of
itself. It is true, God's work may be altogether in the seeds in him, but in
the various actings of the soul, in turning to God, it may perceive these
things in it. The disengagement of the heart from the creature is the
calling of the soul from the world-'whom the Lord hath called he hath
justified'-what is the calling of the soul but this? The soul which before

was seeking for contentment in the world, and cleaving to the creature, is
now called out in the world by the Lord, who says: 'Oh Soul, your
happiness is not here, your rest is not here, your happiness is elsewhere,
and your heart must be loosened from all the things that are here below
in the world.' This is the work of God in the soul, to disengage the heart
from the creature, and how contrary is a murmuring heart to such a
thing! Something which is glued to another cannot be taken off, but you
must tear it; so it is a sign your heart is glued to the world, that when God
would take you off, your heart tears. If God, by an affliction, should come
to take anything in the world from you, and you can part from it with
ease, without tearing, it is a sign then that your heart is not glued to the
world.
4. A fourth work of God in converting a sinner is this, the casting of the
soul upon Jesus Christ for all its good. I see Jesus Christian the Gospel as
the Fountain of all good, and God out of free grace tendering him to me
for life and for salvation, and now my souls casts itself, rolls itself upon
the infinite grace of God in Christ for all good. now have you done so?
Has God converted you, and drawn you to his Son to cast your soul upon
him for all your good, and yet you are discontented for the want of some
little matter in a creature comfort? Are you he who has cast your soul
upon Jesus Christ for all good? As he says in another case, 'Is this thy
faith?' 5. The soul is subdued to God. And then it comes to receive Jesus
Christ as a King, to rule, to order, and dispose of him how he pleases, and
so the heart is subdued unto God. Now how opposite is a murmuring,
discontented heart to a heart subdued to Jesus Christ as King, and
receiving him as a Lord to rule and dispose of him as he pleases! 6. There
is in the work of your turning to God the giving up of yourself to God in
an everlasting covenant. As you take Christ, the head of the Covenant, to
be yours, so you give up yourself to Christ. In the work of conversion
there is the resignation of the soul wholly to God in an everlasting
covenant to be his. Have you ever surrendered up yourself to God in an
everlasting covenant? Then, certainly, this fretting, murmuring heart of
ours is strongly opposite to it, certainly you forget this covenant of yours,
and the resignation of yourself up to God. It would be of marvellous help
to you to humble your souls when you are in a murmuring condition.

If you could but obtain so much liberty of your own spirits as to look back
to see what the work of God was in converting you, there is nothing would
prevail more than to think of that. I am now in a murmuring,
discontented way, but how did I feel my soul working when God turned
my soul to himself! Oh, how opposite is this to that work, and how
unbecoming! Oh, what shame and confusion would come upon the spirits
of men and women, if they could but compare the work of corruption in
their murmuring and discontent with the work of God that was upon
their souls in conversion! Now we should labor to keep the work of God
upon our souls which was present at our conversion; for conversion must
not be only at one instant at first. Men are deceived in this, if they think
their conversion is finished merely at first; you must be in a way of
conversion to God all the days of your life, and therefore Christ said to his
disciples, 'Except ye be converted and become as little children?' Ye be
converted. Why? Were they not converted before? Yes, they were
converted, but they were still to continue the work of conversion all the
days of their lives. What work of God there is at the first conversion is to
abide afterwards. There must always abide some sight and sense of sin; it
may be not in the way which you had, which was rather a preparation
than anything else, but the sight and sense of sin is to continue still, that
is, you are still to be sensible of the burden of sin as it is against the
holiness, and goodness, and mercy of God to you. And the sight of the
excellence of Jesus Christ is to continue, and your calling away from the
creature, and your casting of your soul upon Christ, and your receiving
Christ as King-still receive him day by day-and the subduing of your
heart, and the surrendering of yourself up to God in a way of covenant.
Now if this were but daily continued, there would be no space nor time
for murmuring to work upon your heart: that is the fourth point.
5. MURMURING AND
BELOW A CHRISTIAN.

DISCONTENT

IS

EXCEEDINGLY

Oh, it is too mean and base a disorder for a Christian to give place to it.
Now it is below a Christian in many respects.
1. Below the relation of a Christian. How below the relation of a
Christian? The relation in which you stand. Below what relation? you will

say.
i . The relation in which you stand to God. Do you not call God your
father? and do you not stand in relation to him as a child? What! do you
murmur? In
2 Samuel 13:4 there is a speech of Jonadab to Amnon: 'Why art thou,
being the king's son, lean from day to day? wilt thou not tell me?'; and so
he told him, but that was for a wicked cause. He perceived that his spirit
was troubled, for otherwise he was of a fat and plump temper of body, but
because of trouble of spirit he even pined away. Why? What is the
matter? You stand in this relation to the King and yet let anything trouble
your heart-that is his meaning; is there anything that should disquiet
your heart when you stand in such a relation to the King, as the King's
son? So I may say to a Christian: Are you the King's son, the son, the
daughter, of the King of Heaven, and yet so disquieted and troubled, and
vexed at every little thing that happens? As if a King's son were to cry out
that he is undone for losing a toy; what an unworthy thing would this be!
So do you: you cry out as if you were undone and yet are a King's son, you
who stand in such relation to God, as to a father, you dishonor your
father in this; as if either he had not wisdom, or power, or mercy enough
to provide for you.
i i . The relation in which you stand to Jesus Christ. You are the spouse of
Christ. What! One married to Jesus Christ and yet troubled and
discontented? Have you not enough in him? Does not Christ say to his
spouse, as Elkanah said to Hannah: 'Am not I better to thee than ten
sons?' (1 Samuel 1:8). So does not Christ your husband say to you, 'Am
not I better to you than thousands of riches and comforts, such comforts
as you murmur for want of?' Has not God given you his Son and will he
not with him give you all things? Has the love of God to you been such as
to give you his Son in marriage? Why are you discontented and
murmuring? Consider your relation to Jesus Christ, as a spouse and
married to him: his person is yours, and so all the riches of Jesus Christ
are yours, as the riches of a husband are his wife's.
Though some husbands are so vile that their wives may be forced to sue
for maintenance, certainly Jesus Christ will never deny maintenance to

his spouse, it is a dishonor for a husband to have the wife to whining up
and down. What! you are matched with Christ and are his spouse, and
will you murmur now, and be discontented in your spirit? You will
observe that with those who are newly married, when there is discontent
between the wife and the husband, their friends will shake their heads
say, 'They are not meeting with what they expected; you see ever since
they were married together how the man looks, and the woman looks,
they are not so cheery as they used to be. Surely it is likely to prove an ill
match.' But it is not so here, it shall not be so between you and Christ. Oh,
Jesus Christ does not love to see his spouse with a scowling countenance;
no man loves to see discontent in the face of his wife, and surely Christ
does not love to see discontent in the face of his spouse.
iii. You stand in relation to Christ, not only as a spouse, but as a member.
You are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and to have a member of
Jesus Christ in a condition of discontent exceedingly unworthy.
iv. He is your elder brother likewise, and so you are a co-heir with him.
v . The relation in which you stand to the Spirit of God. You are the
temple of the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost is your Comforter. It is he who
is appointed to convey all comforts from the Father and the Son, to the
souls of his people. And are you the temple of the Holy Ghost, and does
he dwell in you, and yet for all that you murmur for every little thing? vi.
The relation in which you stand to the angels. You are made one body
with them, for so Christ has joined principalities and powers with his
Church: they are ministering spirits for the good of his people, to supply
what they need, and you and they are joined together, and Christ is the
head of you and angels.
vii. The relation in which you stand to the saints. You are of the same
body with them, they and you make up but one mystical body with Jesus
Christ, and if they are happy you must needs be happy.
Oh, how beneath a Christian is a murmuring spirit, especially when he
considers the relations in which he stands! 2. A Christian should
consider, That murmuring and discontentedness is below the high dignity
which God has put upon him. Do but consider the high dignity which God

has put upon you: the meanest Christian in the world is a lord of heaven
and earth. he has made us kings unto himself, kings to God, not kings to
men to rule over them; and yet I say, every Christian is lord of heaven and
earth, yea of life and death. That is, as Christ is Lord of all, so he has
made those who are his members lords of all. 'All are yours', says the
Apostle, 'even life and death, every thing is yours.' It is a very strange
expression, that death should be theirs, death is yours, that is, you are, as
it were, lords over it, you have what shall make death your servant, your
slave, even death itself, your greatest enemy is turned to be your slave.
Faith makes a Christian as lord over all, lifted up in excellence above all
creatures that ever God made, except the angels, and in some respect
above them.
I say the poorest Christian who lives is raised to a position above all
creatures in the world except angels, and above them in many respects
too- and yet discontented! That you who were as a firebrand of hell, and
might have been scorching and yelling and roaring there to all eternity,
yet that God should raise you to have a higher excellence in you than
there is in all the works of creation that ever he made except angels, and
other Christians, who are in your position! Indeed, you are nearer the
Divine nature than the angels, because your nature is joined in a
hypostatical union to the Divine nature, and in that respect your nature is
more honored than the nature of the angels. And the death of Christ is
yours. He died for you and not for the angels, and therefore you are likely
to be raised above the angels in many respects. You who are in such a
position as this, you who are set apart to the end that God might manifest
to all eternity what the infinite power of a Deity is able to raise a creature
to-for that is the position of a saint, a believer: his position is that he is set
apart to the end that God might manifest to all eternity what his infinite
power is able to do to make a creature happy.
Are you in such a position? Oh, how low and beneath this position is a
murmuring and discontented heart for want of some outward comforts
here in this world! How unseemly it is that you should be a slave to every
cross, that every affliction shall be able to say to your soul, 'Bow down to
us'! We accounted it a great slavery, when men said to our souls, 'Bow
down', as the cruel prelates were wont to do, in imposing things upon

men's consciences: in effect they said, 'Let your consciences, your souls,
bow down to us, that we may tread upon them'. That is the greatest
slavery in the world, that one man should say to another, 'Let your
consciences, your souls, bow down, that we may tread upon them'; but
will you allow every affliction to say, 'Bow down that we may tread upon
you'? Truly it is so, when your heart is overcome with murmuring and
discontent; know that those afflictions which have caused your to
murmur have said to you, 'Bow down that we may tread upon you.' Nay,
not afflictions, but the very Devil prevails against you in this. Oh! how
this is beneath the happy position to which God has raised a Christian!
What! will the son of a King let every base fellow come and bid him bow
down, that he may tread upon his neck? That is what you do in every
affliction: the affliction, the cross and trouble that befalls you, says, 'Bow
down that we may come and tread upon you.' 3. Murmuring is below the
spirit of a Christian. The spirit of every Christian should be like the spirit
of his Father: every father loves to see his spirit in his child, loves to see
his image, not the image of his body only, to say, here is a child for all the
world like his father, but he has the spirit of his father too. A father who is
a man of spirit loves to see his spirit in his child, rather than the features
of his body. Oh, the Lord who is our Father loves to see his Spirit in us.
Great men love to see great spirits in their children, and the great God
loves to see a great spirit in his children. We are one spirit with God and
with Christ, and one spirit with the Holy Ghost; therefore, we should have
a spirit that might manifest the glory of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
in our spirits: that is the spirit of a Christian.
The spirit of a Christian should be a lion-like spirit; as Jesus Christ is the
Lion of the tribe of Judah (so he is called) so we should manifest
something of the lion-like spirit of Jesus Christ. He manifested his lionlike spirit in passing through all afflictions and troubles whatsoever
without any murmuring against God. When he came to drink that bitter
cup, and even the dregs of it, he prayed indeed to God that if it were
possible it might pass from him, but immediately: 'Not my will, but thy
will be done.' As soon as ever he mentioned the passing of the cup from
him, though it was the most dreadful cup that ever was drunk since the
world began, yet at the mentioning of it: 'Not my will, but thy will be
done.' Here Christ showed a lion-like spirit in going through all kinds of

afflictions whatsoever, without any murmuring against God in them. Now
a murmuring spirit is a base, dejected spirit, cross and contrary to the
spirit of a Christian, and it is very base.
I remember that the Heathens accounted it very base. Plutarch reports of
a certain people, who used to manifest their disdain to men who were
overmuch dejected by any affliction, and condemned them to this
punishment: to wear women's clothes all their days, or for a certain space
of time at least, they should go in women's clothes I token of shame and
disgrace to them because they had such effeminate spirits. They thought
it against a manly spirit, and therefore, seeing they did un-man
themselves, they should go as women. Now, shall they account it an
unmanly spirit, to be overmuch dejected in afflictions? and shall not a
Christian account it an unchristianlike spirit to be overmuch dejected by
any affliction whatsoever? I remember someone else compares
murmuring spirits to children, when they are weaning: what a great deal
of stir you have with your children when you wean then! how perverse
and vexing they are! So, when God would wean you from some outward
comforts in this world, oh, how fretting and discontented you are!
Children will not sleep themselves nor let their mothers sleep when they
are weaning; and so, when God would wean us from the world, and we
fret, vex, and murmur, this is a childish spirit.
4. It is below the profession of a Christian. The profession of a Christianwhat is that? A Christian's profession is to be dead to the world and to be
alive to God, that is his profession, to have his life hid with Christ in God,
to satisfy himself in God. What! is this your profession? And yet if you
have not everything you want, you murmur and are discontented. In that
you even deny your profession.
5. It is below that special grace of faith. Faith is what overcomes the
world; it makes all the promises of God ours. Now when you look upon
you the profession of religion did God ever promise you that you would
live at ease, and quiet, and have no trouble? I remember Augustine has a
similar expression: 'What! is this your faith? Did I ever promise you (he
says) that you should flourish in the world? Are you a Christian to that
end? And is this your faith? I never made any such promise to you when
you took upon you to be a Christian.' Oh, it is very contrary to your