PURITAN GOLD -- A Body of Divinity by Thomas Watson: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 13
Of The Creation — Concerning Sin


OF THE CREATION
QUEST. VII. WHAT are the decrees of God?
Ans. The decrees of God are his eternal purpose, according to the
counsel of his will, whereby, for his own glory, he hath fore-ordained
whatsoever shall come to pass.
I should now come to speak concerning the decrees of God, but I
have already spoken something to this under the attribute of God's
immutability. God is unchangeable in his essence, and he is
unchangeable in his decrees; his counsel shall stand; he hath decreed
the issue of all things, and carries them on to their period by his
providence; and therefore I shall proceed to the execution of his
decrees.
QUEST. VIII. The next question is, What is the work of creation?

ANS. It is God's making all things of nothing, by the word of his
power, &c.—Gen. 1:1., "In the beginning God created the heaven and
the earth."
The creation is glorious to behold,—it is a pleasant and fruitful study.
Some think that Isaac, when he went abroad into the fields to
meditate, it was in the book of the creatures. The creation is the
heathen man's Bible,—the plowman's primer,—the traveller's
perspective glass, through which he receives the species and
representation of those infinite excellencies which are in God. The
creation is a large volume in which God's works are bound up; and
this volume hath three great leaves in it, heaven, earth, and sea.
The author of the creation is God, so it is in the text, 'God created.'
The world was created in time, and could not be from eternity, as
Aristotle thought. The world must have a maker, it could not make
itself. If one should go into a far country, and see stately edifices
there, he would never imagine that these could build themselves, but
that there had been some artificer there to raise such goodly
structures; so this great fabric of the world could not create itself, it
must have some builder or maker, and that is God; "In the beginning
God created." To imagine that the work of the creation was not
framed by the Lord Jehovah, is as if we should conceive a curious
landscape to be drawn without the hand of a limner: Acts 17:24.,
"God that made the world and all things therein."
In the work of creation there are two things to be considered: I. The
making. II. The adorning of it.
I. The making of the world. Here consider, 1. God made the world
without any pre-existent matter. This is the difference between
generation and creation. In generation there is materia habilis et
disposita,—some matter to work upon; but in creation there is no

pre-existent matter. God brought all this glorious fabric of the world
out of the womb of nothing. We see our beginning, it was of nothing.
Some brag of their birth and ancestry; you see how little cause they
have to boast, they came of nothing.
2. God made the world with a word. When Solomon had to build a
temple, he needed many workmen, and they all had tools to work
with, but God wrought without tools, Ps. 33:6., "By the word of the
Lord were the heavens made." The disciples wondered that Christ
could with a word calm the sea, Mat. 8:26, 27. But it was more with a
word to make the sea.
3. God made all things at first very good, Gen. 1:31., no defect or
deformity. The creation came out of God's hands a curious piece; it
was a fair copy, without any blot, written with God's own fingers, Ps.
8:3. So perfect was God's work.
II. The adorning of the world. 1. God made this great lump and mass,
—rudis indigeslaque moles, and then beautified it, and put it into a
dress. He divided the sea and the earth, he decked the earth with
flowers, the trees with fruit; but what is beauty when it is masked
over? Therefore, that we might behold this glory, God made the light.
The heavens were bespangled with the sun, moon, and stars, that so
the world's beauty might be beheld and admired. God, in the
creation, began with things less noble and excellent, vegetables and
sensitives; and then the rational creatures, angels and men. Man was
the most exquisite piece in the creation. He is a microcosm, or little
world. Man was made with deliberation and counsel, Gen. 1:26., "Let
us make man." It is the manner of artificers to be more than ordinary
accurate, when they are about their master-pieces. Man was to be the
master-piece of this visible world, therefore God did consult about
the making of so rare a piece. A solemn council of the sacred persons

in the Trinity was called, "Let us make man, and let us make him in
our own image." On the king's coin his image or effigies is stampt; so
God stampt his image on man, and made him partake of many divine
qualities.
I shall speak, 1. Of the parts of man's body. (1.) The head, the most
excellent architectonical part, it is the fountain of spirits, and the seat
of reason. In nature the head is the best piece, but in grace the heart
excels. (2.) The eye, it is the beauty of the face; it shines and sparkles
like a lesser sun in the body. The eye occasions much sin, and
therefore well may it have tears in it. (3.) The ear, which is the
conduit-pipe through which knowledge is conveyed. Better lose our
seeing than our hearing, for "faith cometh by hearing," Rom. 10:17.
To have an ear open to God, is the best jewel on the ear. (4.) The
tongue. David calls the tongue his glory, Ps. 16:9., because it is an
instrument to set forth the glory of God; the soul at first was a viol in
tune to praise God, and the tongue did make the music. God hath
given us two ears, but one tongue, to shew that we should be swift to
hear, but slow to speak. God hath set a double fence before the
tongue, the teeth and the lips, to teach us to be wary that we offend
not with our tongue. (5.) The heart, this is a noble part, and seat of
life.
2. The Soul of man; this is the man of the man. Man, in regard of his
soul, partakes with the angels; nay, as Plato saith, The
understanding, will, and conscience, are a glass that resemble the
Trinity. The soul is the diamond in the ring; the soul is a vessel of
honour; God himself is served in this vessel. It is a sparkle of celestial
brightness, saith Damascene. If David did so admire the rare
contexture and workmanship of his body, Ps. 139:14, 15., "I am
wonderfully made, I was curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the
earth,"—if the cabinet be so curiously wrought, what is the jewel?

How richly is the soul embroidered? Thus you see how glorious a
work the creation is, and man especially, who is the epitome of the
world.
QUEST. But why did God make the world?
Ans. 1. Negatively: Not for himself: he did not need it, being infinite.
He was happy before the world was, in reflecting upon his own
sublime excellencies and perfections. 2. God did not make the world
to be a place of mansion for us, we are not to abide here for ever.
Heaven is the mansion-house, John 14:2. The world is only a
passage-room to eternity; the world is to us as the wilderness was to
Israel, not to rest in, but to travel through to the glorious Canaan.
The world is a dressing-room to dress our souls in, not a place where
we are to stay for ever. The apostle tells us of the world's funeral, 2
Pet. 3:10., "The elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also
and the works that are therein shall be burnt up."
A. 2. Positively: God made the world to demonstrate his own glory.
The world is a looking-glass in which we may see the power and
goodness of God shine forth: "The heavens declare the glory of God,"
Ps. 19:1. The world is like a curious piece of arras or tapestry, in
which we may see the skill and wisdom of him that made it.
Use 1st. Did God create this world? This convinceth us of the truth of
his Godhead; to create is proper to a Deity, Acts 17:24. This
convinced Plato of a Deity, when he saw all the world could not make
a fly. Thus God proves himself to be the true God, and distinguisheth
himself from idols, Jer. 10:11. It is written in Chaldee, "Thus shall ye
say to them, The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth,
even they shall perish." Who but God can create? The creation is
enough to convince the heathen that there is a God. There are two
books out of which God will judge and condemn the heathen, viz. the

book of Conscience, Rom. 2:15., "Who have the law written in their
heart;" and the book of the Creation, Rom. 1:20., "The invisible
things of him are clearly seen by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead." The world is full of emblems and
hieroglyphics; every star in the sky,—every bird that flies in the air,—
is a witness against the heathen. A creature could not make itself.
Use 2d. Here is a mighty support for faith, God creates. He that made
all things with a word, what cannot he do? He can create strength in
weakness; he can create a supply of our wants. What a foolish
question was that, Ps. 78:19., "Can he prepare a table in the
wilderness?" Cannot he that made the world do much more? Ps.
124:8., "Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth." Rest on this God for help, who made heaven and earth." The
work of creation, as it is a monument of God's power, so it is a stay to
faith. Is thy heart hard; he can with a word create softness. Is it
unclean, he can create purity? Ps. 51:10., "Create in me a clean heart,
O God!" Is the church of God low, he can create Jerusalem a praise,
Isa. 65:18. No such golden pillar for faith to stay upon, as a creating
power.
Use 3d. Did God make this world full of beauty and glory, every thing
very good,—then, what an evil thing is sin, that hath put out of frame
the whole creation! Sin hath much eclipsed the beauty, soured the
sweetness, and marred the harmony of the world. How bitter is that
gall, a drop whereof can embitter a whole sea? Sin hath brought
vanity and vexation into the world, yea, a curse. God cursed the
ground for man's sake, Gen. 3. There were several fruits of the curse.
—1. "In sorrow shalt thou eat of it," ver. 17. By that word sorrow, is to
be understood all the troubles and cares of this life.—2. "In the sweat
of thy face shalt thou eat bread," v. 19. In innocency Adam did till the
ground, (he must not live idly) but it was rather a delight than a

labour; that tilling was without toiling. The eating in sorrow, and the
sweat of the brow, came in after sin.—3. "Thorns also and thistles
shall it bring forth," v. 18.
QUEST. Whether in innocency did not the earth bear thorns, because
it is threatened as a punishment?
Ans. It is likely it did bear thorns; for, when God had done creating,
he made no new species or kinds of things; but the meaning is, Now,
after sin the earth should bring forth more plenty of thorns, and now
those thorns should be hurtful, and choke the corn, which hurtful
quality was not in them before. Ever since the fall, all the comforts of
this life have a thorn and a thistle in them.
4. The fourth fruit of the curse was the driving man out of paradise,
v. 24., "So he drove out the man." God at first brought Adam into
paradise, as into an house ready furnished, or as a king into his
throne, Gen. 1:28., "Have dominion over every living thing that
moveth;" now God's driving Adam out of paradise, signified his
dethroning and banishing him, that he might look after an heavenly
and a better paradise.—5. A fifth fruit of the curse was death, v. 19.,
"To dust thou shalt return." Death was not natural to Adam, it came
in after sin. Josephus is of opinion, man should have died though he
had a longer term of years added to his life; but out of question,
death grew out of the root of sin; the apostle saith, Rom. 5:12., "By
sin came death." See then how cursed a thing sin is, that hath
brought so many curses upon the creation. If we will not hate sin for
its deformity, let us hate it for the curse it brings.
Use 4th. Did God make this glorious world? Did he make every thing
good? Was there in the creature so much beauty and sweetness? Oh!
then what sweetness is there in God? Quicquid efficit tale, illud est
magis tale,—the cause is always more noble than the effect. Think

with yourselves, is there so much excellency in house and lands—
then how much more is there in God, that made these! Is there
beauty in a rose? What beauty then is there in Christ, the rose of
Sharon! Doth oil make the face shine? Ps. 104:15. How will the light
of God's countenance make it shine! Doth wine cheer the heart? O
what virtue is there in the true vine! How doth the blood of this grape
cheer the heart! Is the fruit of the garden sweet? how delicious are
the fruits of the Spirit! Is a gold mine so precious; how precious is he
who founded this mine! What is Christ, in whom are hid all
treasures? Col. 2:3. We should ascend from the creature to the
Creator. If there be any comfort here below, how much more is there
in God, who made all these things! How unreasonable is it, that we
should delight in the world, and not much more in him that made it?
How should our hearts be set on God, and how should we long to be
with God, who hath infinitely more sweetness in him, than any
creature!
Use 5th. Of Exhortation. 1. Did God create the world? let us wisely
observe those works of creation. God hath given us not only the book
of the scriptures to read in, but the book of the creation; look up to
the heavens, they shew much of God's glory,—the sun gilds the world
with its bright beams,—behold the stars, their regular motion in their
orbs, their magnitude, their light, their influence. We may see God's
glory blazing in the sun, twinkling in the stars. Look into the sea, and
see the wonders of God in the deep, Ps. 107:24. Look into the air,
there the birds make melody, and sing forth the praises of their
Creator. Look into the earth, there we may wonder at the nature of
minerals,—the power of the loadstone,—the virtue of herbs; see the
earth decked as a bride with flowers; all these are the glorious effects
of God's power. God hath wrought the creation as with curious
needle-work, that we may observe his wisdom and goodness, and

give him the praise due to him, Ps. 104:24., "O Lord, how manifold
are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all."
2. Did God create all things? Let us obey our Maker. We are his jure
creationis; we owe ourselves to him; if another gives us our
maintenance we think ourselves bound to serve him, much more
should we serve and obey God who gives us our life, Acts 17:28., "In
him we live and move." God hath made every thing for man's service,
—the corn for nourishment,—the beasts for usefulness,—the birds for
music,—that man should be for God's service. The rivers come from
the sea, and they run into the sea again. All we have is from God; let
us honour our Creator, and live to him that made us.
3. Did God make our bodies out of the dust, and that dust out of
nothing? Let this keep down pride. When God would humble Adam
he useth this expression, "Out of it (the dust) wast thou taken," Gen.
3:19. Why art thou proud, O dust and ashes? Thou art made but of
course metal. Cum sis humi limus, cur non humilimus? BERN. David
saith, "I was curiously wrought," Ps. 139:15. Thy being curiously
wrought, may make thee thankful; but being made of the dust, may
keep thee humble. If thou hast beauty, it is but well coloured earth.
Thy body is but air and dust mingled together, and this dust will drop
into the dust. When the Lord had said of the Judges, they were gods,
Ps. 82:6. Lest they should grow proud, he tells them, they were dying
gods, v. 7., "Ye shall die like men."
4. Did God create our souls after his image, but we lost it? let us
never rest till we are restored to God's image again. We have now got
the devil's image in pride, malice, envy; let us get God's image
restored, which consists in knowledge and righteousness, Col. 3:10.
Grace is our best beauty, it makes us like God and angels; as the sun
is to the world, so is holiness to the soul. Let us go to God to repair

his image in us. Lord! thou hast once made me, make me anew; sin
hath defaced thy image in me, O draw it again by the pencil of the
Holy Ghost!

OF THE PROVIDENCE OF GOD
QUEST. XI. WHAT are God's works of Providence?
ANS. God's works of providence are his most holy, wise, and
powerful preserving and governing all his creatures, and all their
actions.
The work of God's providence, John 5:17., "My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work." The great God hath rested from the works of
creation, he doth not create any new species of things, Gen. 2:2., "He
rested from all his works:" and therefore this scripture must needs be
meant of God's works of providence, "My Father worketh, and I
work" Ps. 103:19., "His kingdom ruleth over all;" i.e. His providential
kingdom. Now, for the clearing of this point, I shall,
1. Show you that there is a providence. 2. What that providence is. 3.
Lay down some maxims or propositions concerning the providence
of God.
1st. That there is a providence: there is no such thing as blind fate,
but there is a providence that guides and governs in the world: Prov.
16:33., "The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is
of the Lord."
2dly. What this providence is? I answer, Providence is God's ordering
all issues and events of things, after the counsel of his will, to his own

glory. 1. I call providence God's ordering of things, to distinguish it
from his decrees: God's decree ordains things that shall fall out,
God's providence ordereth them.—2. I call providence the ordering of
things after the counsel of God's will.—3. God ordereth all events of
things, after the counsel of his will, to his own glory; the glory of God
being the ultimate end of all God's actings, and the centre where all
the lines of providence do meet. The providence of God is Regina
mundi,—the queen and governess of the world; it is the eye that sees,
and the hand that turns all the wheels in the universe. God is not like
an artificer that builds a house, and then leaves it, and is gone; but
like a pilot, that does with a great deal of care, steer on the ship of the
whole creation.
3dly. Positions about God's providence.
1. God's providence reaches to all places, persons, and occurrences. 1.
To all places, Jer. 23:23., "Am I a God at hand, and not a God afar
off?" The diocese where providence visits is very large; it reaches to
heaven, earth, and sea, Ps. 107:23, 24., "They that go down to the
sea, see the wonders of God in the deep." Now, that the sea, which is
higher than the earth, should not drown the earth, is a wonder of
providence; and the prophet Jonah, he saw the wonders of God in
the deep, when the very fish which did devour him and swallow him,
did bring him safe to shore.—2. God's providence reaches to all
persons, especially the persons of the godly, they are in a special
manner taken notice of. God takes care of every saint in particular, as
if he had none else to take care for, 1 Pet. 5:7., "He careth for you,"
i.e. Elect in a special manner. Ps. 33:18, 19., "The eye of the Lord is
upon them that fear him; to preserve them from death, and to keep
them alive in famine." God by his providential care, shields off
dangers from his people, he sets a life-guard of angels about them,
Ps. 34:7. God's providence keeps the very bones of the saints, Ps.

34:10 It bottles their tears, Ps. 56:8. It strengthens the saints in their
weaknesses, Heb. 11:34. It supplies all their wants out of its alms
basket, Ps. 23:5. Thus providence doth wonderfully supply the wants
of the elect. When the Protestants in Rochelle were besieged by the
French king, God by his providence, sent in a great number of small
fishes that fed them, such as were never seen before in that haven. So
the raven, that unnatural creature that will hardly feed its own
young, yet providentially brought sustenance to the prophet Elijah, 1
Kings 17:6. The virgin Mary, though by bearing and bringing forth
the Messiah she helped to make the world rich, yet she herself was
very poor, and now, being warned of the angel to go into Egypt, Mat.
2:13., the virgin had scarce enough to bear her charges thither: see
now how God provides for her before-hand; he, by his providence,
sends the wise men from the east, and they bring costly gifts, gold,
myrrh, and frankincense, and present these to Christ, and now the
virgin had enough to defray her charges into Egypt. God's children
sometimes scarce know how they are fed, and yet providence feeds
them, Ps. 37:3., "Verily thou shalt be fed." If God will give his people
a kingdom when they die, he will not deny them daily bread while
they live.—3. God's providence reaches to all affairs and occurrences
in the world; there is nothing that stirs in the world, but God hath, by
his providence, the over-ruling of it. The raising of a man to honour:
Ps. 75:7., "He puteth down one, and raises up another." Success and
victory in battle is the result of providence: Saul had the victory, but
God wrought the salvation, 1 Sam. 11:13. That among all virgins that
were brought before the king, that Esther should find favour in the
eyes of the king, was not without God's special providence; for, by
this means, the Lord saved the Jews alive that were destinated to
destruction. Providence reaches to the least of things, to the birds
and pismires; providence feeds the young raven, when the dam
forsakes it, and will give it no food, Ps. 147:9. Providence reaches to
the very hairs of our head, Mat. 10:30., "The very hairs of your head

are all numbered;" and surely if providence reaches to our hairs then
much more to our souls. And thus you have seen that God's
providence reaches to all places, to all persons, to all occurrences and
affairs. Now there are two objections against this doctrine.
OBJ. 1. But some say, There are many things done in the world which
are eccentrical, they are very disorderly and irregular; and surely
God's providence doth not these things.
Ans. Yes, these things that seem to us irregular, God makes use of to
his own glory. For instance: suppose you were in a smith's shop, and
there should see several sorts of tools, some crooked, some bowed,
others hooked, would you condemn all these things for nought,
because they do not look handsome? the smith makes use of them all
for the doing of his work. Thus it is with the providences of God, they
seem to us to be very crooked and strange, yet they all carry on God's
work. I shall clear this to you in two particular cases:
1st. God's people are low; why, this seems to be very much out of
order, that these that are best should be in the lowest condition; but
there is much wisdom to be seen in this providence, as appears thus:
1. Perhaps the hearts of the godly were lifted up with riches, or with
success: now God comes with an humbling providence to afflict them
and fleece them; better is the loss that makes them humble, than the
success that makes them proud. Again, 2. If the godly were not
sometimes afflicted, and suffered an eclipse in their outward
comforts, how could their graces be seen, their faith and patience? If
it were always sunshine, we should see no stars; if we should have
always prosperity, it would be hard to see the actings of men's faith.
Thus you see God's providences are wise and regular, though to us
they seem very strange and crooked.

2dly. Here's another case, the wicked flourish; this seems to be very
much out of order; aye, but God, in his providence, sees good
sometimes that the worst of men should be exalted; they may do
some work to God, though against their will, Isa. 10:7. God will be in
no man's debt. God makes use of the wicked sometimes to protect
and shield his church: he makes use of them to refine and purify his
people, Hab. 1:12., "Thou hast established them for correction." As if
the prophet had said, 'Thou hast ordained the wicked to correct thy
children.' And indeed, as Austin saith well, "We are beholden to
wicked men, who against their wills do us good." As the corn is
beholden to the flail to thrash off its husks, or as the iron is beholden
to the file to brighten it, so the godly are beholden to the wicked,
though it be against their will, to brighten and refine their graces.
Now, then, if the wicked do God's own work, though against their
will, God will not let them be losers by it, he will raise them in the
world, exalt them, and wring out the waters of a full cup to them.
Thus you see these providences are wise and regular, which to us
seem strange and crooked.
OBJ. 2. But, may some say, if God hath a hand in ordering all things
that fall out, why then he hath a hand in the sins of men.
I answer, No, by no means, he hath no hand in any man's sin. God
cannot go contrary to his own nature, he cannot do any unholy
action, no more than the sun can be said to be darkened. Here you
must take heed of two things; as you must take heed of making God
ignorant of men's sins, so you must take heed of making God to have
a hand in men's sins. Is it a thing likely, that God is the author of sin,
that is an avenger of it? Is it a likely thing that God should make a
law against sin, and then have a hand in breaking his own law? Is
that likely? And therefore to answer the objection, God in his
providence doth permit men's sins: Acts 14:16., "He suffered all

nations to walk in their own ways." God permitted their sin, and he
would never permit their sin if he could not bring good out of it; as
the apothecary can make a treacle of poison. Had not sin been at all
permitted, God's justice in punishing sin, and his mercy in pardoning
sin, had never been so well known. The Lord is pleased to permit it,
but he hath no hand in sin.
OBJ. But is it not said, that God hardened Pharaoh's heart? Here's
more than God's bare permitting of sin.
Ans. God doth not infuse evil into men, only he withdraws the
influence of his graces, and then the heart hardens of itself; even as
the light being withdrawn, darkness presently follows in the air; but
it were absurd to say, that therefore the light darkens the air; and
therefore you will observe, that Pharaoh is said to harden his own
heart, Exod. 8:15. God is the cause of no man's sin; it is true God
hath a hand in the action where sin is, but no hand in the sin of the
action. A man may play upon a jarring instrument, but the jarring is
from itself: so it is here, the actions of men, so far as they are natural,
are from God; but so far as they are sinful, they are from men
themselves, and God has no hand at all in them. And so much for the
first position, that God's providence reaches to all places, to all
persons, and to all occurrences.
2. A second position is this: there are providences that are casual and
accidental to us that are pre-determined by the Lord: the falling of a
tile upon one's head, the breaking out of a fire, to us is casual, but it
is ordered by a providence of God. You have a clear instance of this, 1
Kings 22:34., "A certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the
king of Israel between the joints of the harness." This accident was
casual as to the man that drew the bow; but it was divinely ordered
by the providence of God; God's providence directed the arrow to hit

the mark. Things that seem to fall out casual, and by chance, they are
the issues of God's decrees, and the interpretation of his will.
3. God's providence is greatly to be observed, but we are not to make
it the rule of our actions, Ps. 107:43., "Whoso is wise will observe
these things." It is good to observe providence, but we must not
make it our rule to walk by; providence is a Christian's diurnal, but
not his Bible. Sometimes a bad cause prevails and gets ground; it is
not to be liked because it doth prevail; we must not think the better
of what is sinful, because it is successful; here is no rule for our
actions to be directed by.
4. Divine providence is irresistible, there is no standing in the way of
God's providence to hinder it; when God's time was come for
Joseph's release, the prison could hold him no longer, "The king sent
and loosed him," Ps. 105:20. When God would indulge the Jews with
liberty in their religion, Cyrus, by a providence, puts forth a
proclamation to encourage the Jews to go and build their temple at
Jerusalem, and worship God, Ezra 1:2, 3. If God will shield and
protect Jeremiah's person in captivity, the very king of Babylon shall
nurse up the prophet, give charge concerning him that he want
nothing, Jer. 39:11, 12.
5. God is to be trusted when his providences seem to run contrary to
his promises. God promised David to give him the crown, to make
him king, but providence runs contrary to his promise. David was
pursued by Saul, was in danger of his life, but all this while it was
David's duty to trust God. Pray observe, the Lord doth oftentimes by
cross providences bring to pass his promise. God promised Paul the
lives of all that were with him in the ship; but now the providence of
God seems to run quite contrary to his promise,—the winds blew,—
the ship splits and breaks in pieces; and thus God fulfilled his

promise, upon the broken pieces of the ship, they all came safe to
shore. Trust God when providences seem to run quite contrary to
promises.
6. The providences of God are chequer-work; they are intermingled;
in the life to come, there shall be no more mixture,—in hell there is
nothing but bitter,—in heaven there is nothing but sweet,—but in this
life the providences of God are mixed, there is something of the
sweet in them, and something of the bitter. Providences are just like
Israel's pillar of cloud that conducted them in their march; it was
dark on one side, and light on the other; so the providences of God
are a dark part and a light part. In the ark there was laid up the rod
and manna, so are God's providences to his children; there is
something of the rod, and something of the manna; so that we may
say with David, "I will sing of mercy and judgment." Joseph was in
prison, there was the dark side of the cloud; but God was with
Joseph, there was the light side of the cloud. Asher's shoes were of
brass, but his feet were dipt in oil, Deut. 33:24. So affliction is the
shoe of brass that pinches; aye, but there is mercy mingled with the
affliction, there's the foot dipt in oil.
7. The very same action, as it comes from God's providence, may be
good, which, as it comes from men, may be evil. For instance, Joseph
being sold into Egypt; as he was sold by his brethren, it was evil, very
wicked, for it was the fruit of their envy; but as it was an act of God's
providence, so it was good; for by this means Jacob and all his family
were preserved alive in Egypt. Another instance is in Shimei's
cursing David; now as Shimei cursed David, it was wicked and sinful,
for it was the fruit of his malice; but as his cursing was ordered by
God's providence, so it was an act of God's justice to punish David,
and to humble him for his adultery and murder. The crucifying of
Christ, as it came from the Jews, was an act of hatred and malice to

Christ, so Judas's betraying him was an act of covetousness, but as it
was an act of God's providence, so there was good in it; for, see it was
an act of God's love in giving Christ to die for the world. Thus I have
cleared to you the doctrine of God's providence, in these several
positions: let me now speak something by way of aplication.
Use 1. By way of exhortation in these particulars. (1.) Admire God's
providence: the providence of God keeps the whole creation upon the
wheels, or else it would soon be dissolved, and the very axle-tree
would break in pieces: if God's providence should be withdrawn but
for a while, creatures would be dissolved, and run into their first
nothing. Without this wise providence of God there would be anxiety
and confusion in the whole world, just like an army when it is routed
and scattered. The providence of God infuses comfort and virtue into
every thing we enjoy; our clothes would not warm us, our food would
not nourish us without the special providence of God. And doth not
all this deserve your admiration of providence?
(2.) Learn quietly to submit to divine providence; do not murmur at
things that are ordered by divine wisdom. We may no more find fault
with the works of providence than we may with the works of
creation. It is a sin as well to quarrel with God's providence, as to
deny God's providence. If men do not act as we would have them,
they shall act as God would have them. His providence is his masterwheel that turns these lesser wheels, and God will bring his glory out
of all at last: Ps. 39:9., "I was dumb and opened not my mouth,
because thou, Lord, didst it." It may be, we think sometimes we
could order things better if we had the government of the world in
our hands; but alas! should we be left to our own choice, we should
choose those things that are hurtful for us. David did earnestly desire
the life of his child, which was the fruit of his sin; now, had the child
lived, it had been a perpetual monument of his shame. Let us be

content God should rule the world, learn to acquiesce in his will and
submit to his providence. Doth any affliction befall you? remember
God sees it is that which is fit for you, or it should not come; your
clothes cannot be so fit for you, as your crosses. God's providence
may sometimes be secret, but it is alwavs wise; though we may not be
silent under God's dishonour, yet we should learn to be silent under
his displeasure.
(3.) You that are Christians, believe that all God's providence shall
conspire for your good at last. The providences of God are sometimes
dark, and our eyes dim, and we can hardly tell what to make of them;
but when ye cannot unriddle providence, believe it shall work
together for the good of the elect, Rom. 8:28. The wheels in a clock
seem to move cross one to another, but they help forward the motion
of the clock, and make the larum strike: so the providences of God
seem to be cross wheels; but for all that they shall carry on the good
of the elect. The pricking of a vein is in itself evil and hurtful, but as it
prevents a fever, and tends to the health of the patient, so it is good;
so affliction in itself is not joyous but grievous, but the Lord turns
this to the good of his saints. Poverty shall starve their sins,
afflictions shall prepare them for a kingdom. Therefore, Christians,
believe that God loves us, that he will make the most cross
providences to promote his glory and our good.
(4.) Let this be an antidote against immoderate fear; for nothing
comes to pass but what is ordained by God's decree, and ordered by
his providence. We sometimes fear what the issue of things will be,
men grow high in their actings: let us not make things worse by our
fear. Men are limited in their power, and shall not go one hair's
breadth further than God's providence will permit; he might let
Sennacherib's army march towards Jerusalem, but he shall not shoot
one arrow against it. 2 Kings 19:35., "Then the angel of the Lord went

forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians an hundred and
fourscore and five thousand." When Israel was compassed in
between Pharaoh and the Red-sea, no question, some of their hearts
did begin to tremble, and they looked upon themselves as dead men;
but providence so ordered it, that the sea was a safe passage to Israel,
and a sepulchre to Pharaoh and all his host.
Use 2d. Comfort in respect of the church of God. God's providence
reacheth in a more special manner to his church, Isa. 27:2., "Sing ye
unto her, a vineyard of red wine." God waters this vineyard with his
blessings, and watcheth over it by his providence, "I the Lord keep it
night and day." Such as think totally to ruin the church, must do it in
a time when it is neither day nor night; for the Lord keeps it by his
providence night and day. What a miraculous conduct of providence
had Israel! God led them by a pillar of fire, gave them manna from
heaven, set the rock abroach. God by his providence preserves his
church in the midst of enemies; which is as to see a spark kept alive
in the ocean, or a flock of sheep among wolves. God saves his church
strangely; 1. By giving unexpected mercies to his church, when she
looked for nothing but ruin, Ps. 126:1., "When the Lord turned again
the captivity of Sion, we were like them that dreamed." How
strangely did God raise up queen Esther to preserve alive the Jews,
when Haman had got a bloody warrant signed for their execution?—
2. Strangely, by saving in that very way in which we think he will
destroy. God works sometimes by contraries. He raiseth his church
by bringing it low. The blood of the martyrs hath watered the church,
and made it more fruitful, Exod. 1:12., "The more they afflicted them,
the more they multiplied." The church is like that plant which
Gregory Nazianzen speaks of, it lives by dying, and grows by cutting.
—3. Strangely, in that he makes the enemy to do his work When the
people of Ammon and Moab, and Mount Seir came against Judah,
God set the enemy one against another, 2 Chron. 20:23., "The

children of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of
Mount Seir utterly to slay and destroy them; and when they had
made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy
another." In the powder-treason he made the traitors to be their own
betrayers; God can do his work by the enemy's hand. God made the
Egyptians send away the people of Israel laden with jewels, Exod.
12:36. The church is the apple of God's eye, and the eyelid of his
providence doth daily cover and defend it.
Use 3d. Let the merciful providence of God cause thankfulness. We
are kept alive by a wonderful working providence. Providence makes
our clothes warm us, our meat nourish us; we are fed every day out
of the alms-basket of God's providence. That we are in health,—that
we have an estate,—it is not our diligence, but God's providence,
Deut. 8:18., "Thou shalt remember the Lord thy God, for he it is that
giveth thee power to get wealth." Especially if we go a step higher, we
may see cause of thankfulness,—that we should be born and bred in a
gospel-land,—that we should live in such a place where the Sun of
Righteousness shines,—this is a signal providence! Why might we
not have been born in such places where Paganism prevails? That
Christ should make himself known to us, and touch our hearts with
his Spirit when he passeth by others: whence is this, but from the
miraculous providence of God, which is the effect of his free grace?
Use 4th. See here that which may make us long for that time when
the great mystery of God's providence shall be fully unfolded to us.
Now we scarce know what to make of God's providence, therefore are
ready to censure what we do not understand; but in heaven we shall
see how all God's providences (sickness, losses, sufferings) carried on
our salvation. Here we see but some dark pieces of God's providence,
and it is impossible to judge of God's works by pieces; but when we
come to heaven, and see the full body and portraiture of God's

providence drawn out into its lively colours, it will be a glorious sight
to behold; then we shall see how all God's providences helped to fulfil
his promises. Never a providence but we shall see had either a
wonder or a mercy in it.

OF THE COVENANT OF WORKS
QUEST. XII. I PROCEED to the next question, What special
providence did God exercise towards man in the estate wherein he
was created?
ANS. When God had created man, he entered into a covenant of life
with him, upon condition of perfect obedience, forbidding him to eat
of the tree of knowledge, upon pain of death.
For this, consult with Gen. 2:16, 17., "And the Lord commanded the
man, saying, 'Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat; but
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat; for
in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die.' " The
subject then of our next discourse is the covenant of works. This
covenant was made with Adam and all mankind; for Adam was a
public person, and the representative of the world.
QUEST. For what reason did God make a covenant with Adam and
his posterity in innocency?
Ans. 1. To show his sovereignty over us: we were his creatures, and as
God was the great monarch of heaven and earth, God might impose
upon us terms of a covenant.—2. God made a covenant with Adam,

to bind him fast to God: as God bound himself to Adam, so Adam
was bound to God by the covenant.
QUEST. What was the covenant?
Ans. God commanded Adam not to eat of the tree of knowledge; God
gave Adam leave to eat of all the other trees of the garden. God did
not envy him any happiness; only meddle not with this tree of
knowledge, because God would try Adam's obedience. As king
Pharaoh made Joseph chief ruler of his kingdom, and gave him a
ring off his finger, and a chain of gold, only he must not touch his
throne, Gen. 41:40., in like manner God dealt with Adam: he gave
him a sparkling jewel, knowledge, and arrayed him with a fine
vesture, put upon him the garment of original righteousness, only,
saith God, touch not the tree of knowledge, for that is aspiring after
omniciency. Adam had power to have kept this law: Adam had the
copy of God's law written in his heart. This covenant of works had a
promise annexed to it, and a threatening. 1. The promise, 'Do this
and live.' In case man had stood, it is probable he had not died, but
had been translated to a better paradise. 2. The threatening, "Thou
shalt die the death;" Hebrew, "In dying thou shalt die;" that is, thou
shalt die both a natural death, and an eternal, unless some other
expedient be found out for thy restoration.
QUEST. But why did God give Adam this law, seeing God did foresee
that Adam would transgress it?
Ans. 1. It was Adam's fault that he did not keep the law; God gave
him a stock of grace to trade with, but he of himself broke.—2.
Though God foresaw Adam would transgress, yet that was not a
sufficient reason that Adam should have no law given him: for, by
the same reason, God should not have given his written word to men,
to be a rule of faith and manners, because he foresaw that some

would not believe, and others would be profane. Shall not laws be
made in the land, because some break them?—3. God, though he
foresaw Adam would break the law, he knew how to turn it to a
greater good, in sending Christ. The first covenant being broken, he
knew how to establish a second, and a better. Well, concerning the
first covenant, consider these four things.
1. The form of the first covenant, in innocence, was working; Gen.
42:18., "do this and live." Working was the ground and condition of
our justification, Gal. 3:12. Not but that working is required in the
covenant of grace: we are bid to work out our salvation, and be rich
in good works. But works in the covenant of grace are not required
under the same notion, as in the first covenant with Adam. Works
are not required to the justification of our persons, but as a
testification of our love to God; not as a cause of our salvation, but as
an evidence of our adoption. Works are required in the covenant of
grace, not so much in our own strength, as in the strength of another;
"It is God which worketh in you," Phil. 2:13. As the scrivener guides
the child's hand, and helps him to form his letters, so that it is not so
much the child's writing as the master's, in like manner our
obedience is not so much our working as the Spirit's co-working.
2. The covenant of works was very strict. God required of Adam and
all mankind, 1. Perfect obedience. Adam must do all things written in
the 'book of the law,' Gal. 3:10., and not fail, either in the matter or
manner. Adam was to live up to the whole breadth of the moral law,
and go exactly according to it, as a well-made dial goes with the sun;
a sinful thought had forfeited the covenant.—2. Personal obedience:
Adam must not do his work by a proxy, or have any surety bound for
him; no, it must be done in his own person.—3. Perpetual obedience:
he must continue in all things written in the 'book of the law,' Gal.
3:10. Thus it was very strict. There was no mercy in case of failure.

3. The covenant of works was not built upon a very firm basis:
therefore it must needs leave men full of fears and doubts. The
covenant of works rested upon the strength of men's inherent
righteousness; which though in innocency was perfect, yet was
subject to a change. Adam was created holy, but mutable; he had a
power to stand, but not a power not to fall. Adam had a stock of
original righteousness to begin the world with, but he was not sure
he would not break. Adam was his own pilot, and could steer right in
the time of innocency; but he was not so secured, but that he might
dash against the rock of a temptation, and he and his posterity suffer
shipwreck; so that the covenant of works must needs leave jealousies
and doubtings in Adam's heart, he having no security given him, that
he should not fall from that glorious state.
4. The covenant of works being broken by sin, man's condition was
very deplorable and desperate; he was left in himself helpless; there
was no place for repentance; the justice of God being offended sets
all the other attributes against mankind. When Adam lost his
righteousness, he lost his anchor of hope and his crown: there was no
way for man's relief, unless God would find out such a way, as
neither man nor angel could devise.
Use 1st. See the condescension of God, who was pleased to stoop so
low, as to make a covenant with us. For the God of glory to make a
covenant with dust and ashes: for God to bind himself to us, to give
us life in case of obedience; entering into a covenant was a sign of
God's friendship with us, and a royal act of his favour.
Use 2d. See what a glorious condition man was in, when God entered
into covenant with him. 1. He was placed in the garden of God, which
for the pleasure of it was called paradise, Gen. 2:8. He had his choice
of all the trees, one only excepted; he had all kinds of precious

stones, pure metals, rich cedars; he was a king upon the throne, and
all the creation did obeisance to him, as in Joseph's dream, all his
brethren's sheaves did bow to his sheaf. Man, in innocency, had all
kinds of pleasure that might ravish his senses with delight, and be as
baits to allure him to serve and worship his Maker.—2. Besides he
was full of holiness; paradise was not more adorned with fruit, than
Adam's soul was with grace. He was the coin on which God had
stamped his lively image: light sparkled in his understanding, he was
like an earthly angel; his will and affections were full of order, tuning
harmoniously to the will of God. Adam was a perfect pattern of
sanctity.—3. Adam had intimacy of communion with God and
conversed with him, as a favourite with his prince. Adam knew God's
mind, and had his heart: he not only enjoyed the light of the sun in
paradise, but the light of God's countenance. This condition was
Adam in, when God entered into a covenant with him; but this did
not long continue: "man being in honour abideth not," Ps. 49 ult.,—
lodged not for a night; his teeth watered at the apple, and ever since
it hath made our eyes water.
Use 3d. Learn, from Adam's fall, how unable we are to stand in our
own strength. If Adam, in the state of integrity, did not stand, how
unable are we now, when the lock of our original righteousness is
cut? If purified nature did not stand, how then shall corrupt nature?
We need more strength to uphold us than our own.
Use 4th. See in what a sad condition all unbelievers and impenitent
persons are; as long as they continue in their sins, they continue
under the curse,—under the first covenant. Faith entitles us to the
mercy of the second covenant: but, while men are under the power of
their sins, they are under the curse of the first covenant, and if they
die in this condition, they are damned to eternity.

Use 5th. See the wonderful goodness of God, who was pleased when
he had forfeited the first covenant, to enter into a new covenant with
us. Well may it be called fœdus gratæ,—a covenant of grace; it is
bespangled with promises, as the heaven with stars. When the
angels, those glorious spirits, fell, God did not enter into a new
covenant with them to be their God, but let those golden vessels lie
broken; but hath entered into a second covenant with us, better than
the first, Heb. 8:6. It is better, because it is surer; it is made in Christ,
and cannot be reversed; Christ hath engaged his strength to keep
every believer. In the first covenant we had a posse stare,—a power of
standing: in the second we had a non posse cadere,—an impossibility
of falling finally, 1 Pet. 1:5.
Use 6th. Whosoever they are that look for righteousness and
salvation by the power of their free-will, or the inherent goodness of
their nature, or by virtue of their merit, as the Socinians and Papists,
these are all under the covenant of works; they do not submit to the
righteousness of faith, therefore they are bound to keep the whole
law, and in case of failure, they are condemned. The covenant of
grace is like a court of chancery, to relieve the sinner, and help him
who is cast by the first covenant; it saith, 'Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and be saved;' but such as will stand upon their own inherent
righteousness, free-will and merit, they fall under the first covenant
of works, and are in a perishing estate.
Use 7th. Let us labour by faith to get into the second covenant of
grace, and then the curse of the first covenant is taken away by
Christ. If we once get to be heirs of the covenant of grace, we are in a
better state than before. Adam stood on his own legs, therefore fell;
we stand in the strength of Christ; under the first covenant, the
justice of God, as an avenger of blood, pursues you; but if ye get into

the second covenant you are got into the city of refuge,—you are safe,
and the justice of God is pacified towards you.

CONCERNING SIN
QUEST. XIV. WHAT is sin?
ANS. Sin is any want of conformity unto, or transgression of the law
of God.—1 John 3:4., "Sin is the transgression of the law." Of sin in
general:
1. Sin is a violation or transgression; the Latin word, transgredior, 'to
transgress,' signifies to go beyond one's bounds; the moral law is to
keep us within the bounds of our duty,—sin is a going beyond our
bounds.
2. The law of God; it is not the law of an inferior prince that is
broken, but of Jehovah, who gives laws as well to angels as men it is a
law that is just, and holy, and good, Rom. 7:12. It is just, there is
nothing in it unequal; holy, nothing in it impure; good, nothing in it
prejudical. So that there is no reason to break this law, no more than
for a beast that is in a fat pasture, to break over the hedge, to leap
into a barren heath or quagmire.
I shall shew what an heinous and execrable thing sin is. It is
malorum colluvies,—the complication of all evil; it is the spirits of
mischief distilled; the scripture calls it the 'accursed thing,' Josh.
7:13., it is compared to the venom of serpents, the stench of
sepulchres. The apostle useth this expression of sin, Out of measure
sinful, Rom. 7:13., or, as it is in the Greek, 'Hyperbolically sinful.' The

devil would paint over sin with the vermillion colour of pleasure and
profit, that he may make it look fair: but I shall pull off the paint
from sin, that you may see the ugly face of it. We are apt to have
slight thoughts of sin, and say to it, as Lot of Zoar, Gen. 19:20., 'Is it
not a little one?' But that you may see how great an evil sin is,
consider these four things:
1st. The original of sin, from whence it comes: it fetcheth its pedigree
from hell. Sin is of the devil, 1 John 3:8., "He that committeth sin is
of the devil." Satan was the first actor of sin, and the first tempter to
sin: Sin is the devil's first-born.
2d. Sin is evil in the nature of it.
1. It is a defiling thing. Sin is not only a defection, but a pollution. It
is to the soul as rust is to gold, as a stain is to beauty. It makes the
soul red with guilt, and black with filth. Sin in scripture is compared
to a 'menstruous cloth,' Is. 30:22., to a plague-sore, 1 Kings 8:38.;
Joshua's filthy garments, in which he stood before the angel, Zech.
3:3., were nothing but a type and hieroglyphic of sin. Sin hath blotted
God's image, and stained the orient brightness of the soul. Sin makes
God loathe a sinner, Zech. 11:8., and when a sinner sees his sin, he
loathes himself, Ezek. 20:42. Sin drops poison on our holy things, it
infects our prayers. The high priest was to make atonement for sin
on the altar, Exod. 29:36., to typify that our holiest services need
Christ to make an atonement for them. Duties of religion in
themselves are good, but sin corrupts them, as the purest water is
pollutted running through muddy ground. The leper, under the law,
if he had touched the altar, the altar had not cleansed him, but he
had defiled the altar. The apostle calls sin, "Filthiness of the flesh and
spirit," 2 Cor. 7:1. Sin stamps the devil's image on a man; malice is

the devil's eye, hypocrisy his cloven foot. It turns a man into a devil,
John 6:70., "Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil."
2. Sin is a grieving of God's Spirit, Eph. 4:30., "Grieve not the Holy
Spirit of God." To grieve, is more than to anger.
QUEST. How can the Spirit be said to be grieved? For, seeing he is
God, he cannot be subject to any passion.
Ans. This is spoken metaphorically: Sin is said to grieve the Spirit;
because it is an injury offered to the Spirit, and he takes it unkindly,
and, as it were, lays it to heart. And, is it not much thus to grieve the
Spirit? The Holy Ghost descended in the likeness of a dove; sin
makes this blessed dove mourn. Were it only an angel, we should not
grieve him, much less the Spirit of God. Is it not sad to grieve our
Comforter?
3. Sin is an act of contumacy against God; a walking antipodes to
heaven, Lev. 26:27., "If ye will walk contrary to me." A sinner
tramples upon God's law,—crosseth his will,—doth all he can to
affront, yea to spite God. The Hebrew word for sin, pashang, signifies
'rebellion;' there is the heart of a rebel in every sin, Jer. 44:17., "We
will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our own mouth,
to burn incense unto the queen of heaven." Sin strikes at the very
Deity, Peccatum est Deicidium; Sin would not only unthrone God,
but un-god him. If the sinner could help it, God would no longer be
God.
4. Sin is an act of disingenuity and unkindness. God feeds the sinner,
keeps off evils from him, bemiracles him with mercy; but the sinner
not only forgets God's mercies, but abuseth them; he is the worse for
mercy; like Absalom, who, as soon as David had kissed him, and
taken him into favour, plotted treason against him, 2 Sam. 15:10.

Like the mule, who kicks the dam after she hath given it milk, vas
partusum, 2 Sam. 16:17., "Is this thy kindness to thy friend?" God
may upbraid the sinner: I have given thee (may God say) thy health,
strength, and estate,—thou requitest me evil for good, thou woundest
me with my own mercies,—is this thy kindness to thy friend? Did I
give thee life to sin? Did I give thee wages to serve the devil?
5. Sin is a disease, Isa. 1:5., "The whole head is sick;" some are sick of
pride, others of lust, others of envy. Sin hath distempered the
intellectual part, it is a leprosy in the head, it hath poisoned the
vitals, Tit. 1:15., "Their conscience is defiled." It is with a sinner as
with a sick patient, his palate is distempered, the sweetest things
taste bitter to him. The word which is 'sweeter than the honey-comb,'
Isa. 5:20., tastes bitter to him; they 'put sweet for bitter.' This is a
disease, and nothing can cure this disease but the blood of the
Physician.
6. Sin is an irrational thing; it makes a man act not only wickedly, but
foolishly. It is absurd and irrational to prefer the lesser before the
greater,—the pleasures of life, before the rivers of pleasures at God's
right-hand for evermore. Is it not irrational to lose heaven for the
satisfying or indulging of lust? As Lysimachus who, for a draught of
water lost a kingdom. Is it not irrational to gratify an enemy? In sin
we do so. When lust or rash anger burns in the soul, Satan warms
himself at this fire. Men's sins feast the devil.
7. Sin is a painful thing: its costs men much labour in pursuing their
sins. How do men tire themselves in doing the devil's drudgery? Jer.
9:5., "They weary themselves to commit iniquity." What pains did
Judas take to bring about his treason? He goes to the high priest, and
then after to the band of soldiers, and then back again to the garden.
St. Chrysostom saith, "Virtue is easier than vice." It is more pains to

some to follow their sins, than to others to worship their God. While
the sinner travails with his sin, in sorrow he brings forth; it is called
'serving divers lusts,' Tit. 3:3. Not enjoy, but serve: Why so? because
not only of the slavery in sin, but the hard labour; it is 'serving divers
lusts.' Many a man goes to hell in the sweat of his brow.
8. Sin is the only thing God hath an antipathy against. God doth not
hate a man because he is poor, or despised in the world, you do not
hate your friend because he is sick; but that which draws forth the
keenness of God's hatred, is sin, Jer. 44:4., "O do not this
abominable thing which I hate." And sure, if the sinner dies under
God's hatred, he cannot be admitted into the celestial mansions. Will
God let him live with him whom he hates? God will never lay a viper
in his bosom. The feathers of the eagle will not mix with the feathers
of the other fowls; God will not mix and incorporate with a sinner.
Till sin be removed, there is no coming where God is.
3d. See the evil of sin, in the price paid for it; it cost the blood of God
to expiate it. "O man (saith St. Austin) consider the greatness of thy
sin, by the greatness of the price paid for sin." All the princes on
earth, or angels in heaven, could not satisfy for sin; only Christ. Nay,
Christ's active obedience was not enough to make atonement for sin,
but he must suffer upon the cross; for, "without shedding of blood is
no remission," Heb. 9:22. O what an accursed thing is sin that Christ
should die for it! The evil of sin is not so much seen in that one
thousand are damned for it, as that Christ died for it.
4th. Sin is evil in the effects of it.
1. Sin hath degraded us of our honour Reuben by incest lost his
dignity; and though he were the first-born, he could not excel, Gen.
49:4. God made us in his own image, a little lower than the angels;
but sin hath debased us. Before Adam sinned, he was like an herald

that bath his coat of arms upon him; all reverence him, because he
carries the king's coat of arms; but let this coat be pulled off, and he
is despised, no man regards him. Sin hath done this, it hath plucked
off our coat of innocency, and now it hath debased us, and turned
our glory into shame: Dan. 11:21., "And in his estate shall stand up a
vile person." This was spoken of Antiochus Epiphanes, who was a
king, and his name signifies 'illustrious;' yet sin hath degraded him,
he was a vile person.
2. Sin disquiets the peace of the soul. Whatever defiles, disturbs; as
poison tortures the bowels, corrupts the blood, so sin doth the soul,
Isa. 57:21. Sin breeds a trembling at the heart; it creates fears, and
there is torment in fear, 1 John 4:18. Sin makes sad convulsions in
the conscience. Judas was so terrified with guilt and horror, that he
hanged himself to quiet his conscience. And is not he like to be ill
cured, that throws himself into hell for ease?
3. Sin produceth all temporal evil, Lam. 1:8., "Jerusalem hath
grievously sinned, therefore she is removed." It is the Trojan horse,—
it hath sword, and famine, and pestilence, in the belly of it. Sin is a
coal that not only blacks but burns. Sin creates all our troubles; it
puts gravel into our bread, wormwood in our cup. Sin rots the name,
consumes the estate, buries relations. Sin shoots the flying roll of
God's curses into a family and kingdom, Zech. 5:4. It is reported of
Phocas, that having built a wall of mighty strength about his city,
there was a voice heard, "Sin is within the city, and that will throw
down the wall."
4. Sin unrepented of brings final damnation. The canker that breeds
in the rose is the cause of its perishing; and corruptions that breed in
men's souls are the cause of their damning. Sin, without repentance,
brings the 'second death,' Rev. 20:14., that is, mors sin morte,

BERN.,—"a death always dying." Sin's pleasure will turn to sorrow at
last; like the book the prophet did eat, Ezek. 3:3., sweet in the mouth,
but bitter in the belly. Sin brings the wrath of God, and what buckets
or engines can quench that fire? Mark 9:44., "Where the worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched."
Use 1st. See how deadly an evil sin is, how strange is it that any one
should love it? Ps. 4:2., "How long will ye love vanity?" Hos. 3:1.,
"Who look to other gods and love flagons of wine." Sin is a dish men
cannot forbear though it make them sick. Who would pour rosewater into a kennel? What pity is it so sweet an affection as love
should be poured upon so filthy a thing as sin! Sin brings a sting in
the conscience,—a curse in the estate,—yet men love it. A sinner is
the greatest self-denier; for his sin he will deny himself a part in
heaven.
Use 2d. Do any thing rather than sin! O hate sin! There is more evil
in the least sin, than in the greatest bodily evils that can befall us.
The ermine rather chooseth to die than defile her beautiful skin.
There is more evil in a drop of sin, than in a sea of affliction;
affliction is but like a rent in a coat, sin a prick at the heart. In
affliction there is aliquid boni, some good; in this lion there is some
honey to be found, Ps. 119:71., "It is good for me that I have been
afflicted." Utile est anima si in hac area mundi flagellis trituretur
corpus, AUG. Affliction is God's flail to thrash off our husks; not to
consume; but refine. There is no good in sin; it is the spirit and
quintessence of evil. Sin is worse than hell; for the pains of hell only
are a burden to the creature; but sin is a burden to God, Amos. 2:13.,
"I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves."
Use 3d. Is sin so great an evil? Then how thankful should you be to
God, if he hath taken away your sin? Zech. 3:4., "I have caused thy

iniquity to pass from thee." If you had a disease on your body, plague
or dropsy, how thankful would you be to have it taken away? Much
more to have sin taken away. God takes away the guilt of sin by
pardoning grace, and the power of sin by mortifying grace. O be
thankful that this sickness is "not unto death;" that God hath
changed your nature, and by grafting you into Christ, made you
partake of the sweetness of that olive; that sin, though it live, doth
not reign, but the elder serves the younger, the elder of sin serves the
younger of grace.

ADAM'S SIN
QUEST. XV. WHAT was the sin whereby our first parents fell from
the estate wherein they were created?
ANS. The sin was their eating the forbidden fruit: Gen. 3:6., "She
took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband."
Here is implied, 1st. That our first parents fell from their estate of
innocency. 2d. The sin by which they fell, eating the forbidden fruit.
1st. Our first parents fell from their glorious state of innocency: Eccl.
7:29., "God made man upright, but they have sought out many
inventions." Adam was perfectly holy,—he had rectitude of mind, and
liberty of will to good,—but his head ached till he had invented his
own and our death,—he sought out many inventions, 1. Adam's fall
was voluntary; he had a posse non peccare,—a power not to fall.
Freewill was a sufficient shield to repel temptation; the devil could
not have forced him, unless he had given his consent. Satan was only
a suitor to woo, not a king to compel: but Adam gave away his own
power, and suffered himself to be decoyed into sin, like a young
gallant, who, at one throw, loseth a fair lordship. Adam had a fair
lordship, he was lord of the world, Gen. 1:28., "Have dominion over
the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living
thing that moveth." But he lost all at one throw. As soon as he
sinned, he forfeited paradise.—2. Adam's fall was sudden, he did not
long continue in his royal majesty.
QUEST. How long did Adam continue in paradise before he fell?

Ans. Tostatus saith, he fell the next day. Pererius saith, he fell the
eighth day after his creation. But the most probable and received
opinion is, that Adam fell the very same day in which he was created:
So Irenæus, Cyril, Epiphanius, and many others. The reasons which
incline me to believe so, are,
1. It is said, Satan was a murderer 'from the beginning,' John 8:44.
Now, whom did he murder? Not the blessed angels, he could not
reach them; nor the cursed angels, for they had before destroyed
themselves. How then was Satan a murderer from the beginning? As
soon as Satan fell, he began to tempt mankind to sin; this was a
murdering temptation. By which it appears Adam did not stay long
in paradise, soon after his creation the devil set upon him, and
murdered him by his temptation.
2. Argument to prove that Adam fell the same day he was created:
Adam had not yet eaten of the tree of life, Gen. 3:22, 23., "And now
lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat,
and live for ever; the Lord sent him forth from the garden." This tree
of life, being one of the choicest fruits in the garden, and being
placed in the midst of paradise, it is very like Adam would have eaten
of this tree of life one of the first, had not the serpent beguiled him
with the tree of knowledge. So that hence I conclude, Adam fell the
very day of his creation, because he had not yet tasted the tree of life,
that tree that was most in his eye, and had such delicious fruit
growing upon it.
3. Argument from Ps. 49:12., "Man being in honour, abideth not."
The Rabbins read it thus, 'Adam being in honour, lodged not one
night.' The Hebrew word for abide, signifies, 'to stay or lodge all
night.' Adam then, it seems, did not take up one night's lodging in
Paradise.

Inference. From Adam's sudden fall, he fell the same day in which he
was created, learn: 1. The weakness of human nature. Adam in a
state of integrity, quickly made a defection from God, he soon lost
the robe of innocency, and the glory of Paradise. And, was our nature
thus weak when it was at the best, what is it now when it is at the
worst? If Adam did not stand when he was perfectly righteous, how
unable are we to stand when sin hath cut the lock of our original
righteousness? If purified nature did not stand, how then shall
corrupt nature? If Adam, in a few hours, sinned himself out of
Paradise, how quickly would we sin ourselves into hell, if we were not
kept by a greater power than our own! But God puts underneath his
everlasting arms, Deut. 32:17.—2. From Adam's sudden fall, he fell
the same day; learn how sad it is for a man to be left to himself. (1.)
Adam being left to himself, fell: O then, what will become of us, how
soon fall, if God leave us to ourselves! A man without God's grace,
left to himself, is like a ship in a storm, without pilot or anchor, and
is ready to dash upon every rock. Make this prayer to God, "Lord, do
not leave me to myself: If Adam fell so soon who had strength, how
soon shall I fall who have no strength!" O urge God with his hand
and seal, 2 Cor. 12:9., "My strength shall be made perfect in
weakness."
2d. The sin by which our first parents fell was 'eating the forbidden
fruit;' where, consider two things: I. The occasion of it. II. The sin
itself.
I. The occasion of it; the serpent's temptation. The devil did creep
into the serpent, and spake in the serpent, as the angel in Balaam's
ass; where, consider,
1st. The subtlety of Satan's temptation; his wiles are worse than his
darts. Satan's subtlety in tempting: (1.) He deals all along as an

impostor, he ushered in his temptation by a lie, Gen. 3:4., "Ye shall
not surely die." 2d. Lie, That God did envy our first parents their
happiness, v. 5., "God knows, that in the day ye eat, your eyes shall
be opened;" q. d. It is God's envying your felicity; that he forbids you
this tree. 3d. Lie, That they should be thereby made like unto God, v.
5., "Ye shall be as gods." Here was his subtlety in tempting: The devil
was first a liar, then a murderer.
(2.) In that he set upon our first parents so quickly, before they were
confirmed in their obedience; the angels in heaven are fully
confirmed in holiness,—they are called 'stars of the morning,' Job
38:7., and they are fixed stars. But our first parents were not
confirmed in their obedience,—they were not fixed in their orb of
holiness; though they had a possibility of standing, they had not an
impossibility of falling: they were holy, but mutable; here was Satan's
subtlety, in tempting our first parents before they were confirmed in
their obedience.
(3.) His subtlety in tempting was, That he set upon Eve first; 1.
Because he thought she was less able to resist. Satan did break over
the hedge, where it was weakest; he knew he could more easily
insinuate and wind himself into her by a temptation. An expert
soldier, when he is to storm or enter a castle, observes warily where
there is a breach, or how he may enter with more facility; so did
Satan the weaker vessel. 2. He tempted Eve first, because he knew, if
once he could prevail with her, she would easily draw her husband.
Thus the devil handed over a temptation to Job by his wife, Job 2:9.,
"Curse God and die." Agrippina poisoned the emperor Commodus
with wine in a perfumed cup; the cup being perfumed and given him
by his wife, it was the less suspected. Satan knew a temptation
coming to Adam from his wife, would be more prevailing, and would
be less suspected: O bitter! Sometimes relations prove temptations: a

wife may be a snare, when she dissuades her husband from doing his
duty, or enticeth him to evil. "Ahab which did sell himself to work
wickedness, whom his wife Jezebel stirred up," 1 Kings 21:25. She
blew the coals and made his sin flame out the more. Satan's subtlety
was in tempting Adam by his wife, he thought she would draw him to
sin.
(4.) Satan's subtlety in tempting, was in assaulting Eve's faith; he
would persuade her that God had not spoken truth, "Ye shall not
surely die," Gen. 3:4. This was Satan's master-piece, to weaken her
faith; when he had shaken that, and had brought her once to
distrust; then 'she yielded,'—she presently put forth her hand to evil.
2dly. Satan's cruelty in tempting: as soon as Adam was invested in all
his glory, the devil cruelly, as it were on the day of Adam's
coronation, would dethrone him, and bring forth him and all his
posterity under a curse. We see how little love Satan hath to
mankind; he hath an implacable antipathy against us, and
antipathies can never be reconciled. So much for the occasion of
Adam's sin, tempted by the serpent.
II. The sin itself, 'Eating the forbidden fruit.' This was very heinous,
and that appears three ways: 1. In respect of the person that
committed it. 2. The aggravation of the sin. 3. The dreadfulness of
the effect.
1st. Very heinous in respect of the person that committed it: Adam
had excellent and noble endowments; he was illuminated with
knowledge,—embellished with holiness,—he knew his duty, and it
was as easy to him to obey God's command as to know it,—he might
have chosen whether he would sin or no,—yet he wilfully did eat of
the tree which he was forbidden.

2dly. The aggravation of Adam's sin.
QUEST. Wherein did it appear to be so great? 'Twas but raptus pomi,
was this such a great matter to pluck an apple?
Ans. Besides that, it was against an infinite God; it was malum
complexum,—a voluminous sin,—there were many twisted together
in it, as Cicero saith of parricide, "he who is guilty of it, plurima
committit peccata in uno, commits many sins in one;" so there were
many sins in this one sin of Adam. A big-bellied sin, a chain with
many links. Ten sins in it.
1. Incredulity. Our first parents did not believe what God had spoken
was truth. God said, They shall die the death, in the day they eat of
that tree. They believed not that they should die; they could not be
persuaded that such fair fruit had death at the door. Thus, by
unbelief they made God a liar; nay, which was worse, they believed
the devil rather than God.
2. Unthankfulness, which is the epitome of all sin. Adam's sin was
committed in the midst of Paradise. God had enriched him with
variety of mercies; he had stamped his own image upon him; he had
made him lord of the world, gave him of all the trees of the garden to
eat (one only excepted) and now to take of that tree! This was high
ingratitude; this was like the dye to the wool, which made it crimson.
When Adam's eyes were opened, and he saw what he had done, well
he might be ashamed, and hide himself; to sin in the midst of
Paradise, how could he look God in the face without blushing!
3. In Adam's sin was discontent: had he not been discontented, he
would never have sought to have altered his condition. Adam, one
would think, had enough,—he differed but little from the angels,—he
had the robe of innocence to clothe him, and the glory of Paradise to

crown him,—yet he was not content, he would have more, he would
be above the ordinary rank of creatures. How wide was Adam's heart,
that a whole world could not fill it!
4. Pride, in that he would be like God. This worm, that was but newly
crept out of the dust, now aspires after Deity; "Ye shall be as gods,"
saith Satan, and Adam hoped to have been so indeed; he supposed
the tree of knowledge would have anointed his eyes, and made him
omniscient. But, by climbing too high, he got a fall.
5. Disobedience. God said, "Thou shalt not eat of the tree;" he would
eat of it, though it cost him his life. Disobedience is a sin against
equity; it is equal we should serve him from whom we have our
subsistence; God gave Adam his allowance, therefore it was but equal
he should give God his allegiance; therefore disobedience was against
equity. How could God endure to see his laws trampled on before his
face? This made God place a flaming sword at the end of the garden.
6. Curiosity: to meddle with that which was out of his sphere, and did
not belong to him. God smote the men of Bethshemish but for
looking into the ark, 1 Sam. 6:19. Adam would be prying into God's
secrets, and tasting what was forbidden.
7. Wantonness: though Adam had a choice of all the other trees, yet
his palate grew wanton, and he must have this tree. Like Israel, God
sent them manna, angels' food, aye, but they had an hankering after
quails; it was not enough God did supply their wants, unless he
should satisfy their lusts. Adam had not only for necessity, but for
delight; yet his wanton palate lusted after forbidden fruit.
8. Sacrilege: the tree of knowledge was none of Adam's, yet he took of
it, and did sacrilegiously rob God of his due. It was counted a great
crime in Harpalus to rob the temple, and steal the silver vessels; so in

Adam to steal fruit from that tree, which God had peculiarly enclosed
for himself Sacrilege is double theft.
9. Murder: Adam was a public person, and all his posterity were
involved and wrapped up in him, and he sinning, did at once destroy
all his posterity, if free grace did not interpose. If Abel's blood did cry
so loud in God's ears, Gen. 4:10., "The voice of thy brother's blood
crieth unto me from the ground," then how loud did the blood of all
Adam's posterity cry against him for vengeance!
10. Presumption: Adam presumed of God's mercy; he blessed
himself saying, he should have peace; he thought, though he did
transgress, he should not die, God would sooner reverse his decree,
than punish him. High presumption; what an heinous sin then was
Adam's breach of covenant!
Use. One sin may have many sins in it. We are apt to have slight
thoughts of sin, it is but a little one. How many sins were in Adam's
sin? O take heed of any sin! As in one volume there may be many
works bound up, so there may be many sins in one sin.
3dly. The dreadfulness of the effect: it hath corrupted man's nature.
How rank is that poison a drop whereof could poison a whole sea!
And how deadly is that sin of Adam, that could poison all mankind,
and bring a curse upon them, till it be taken away by him who was
'made a curse for us.'
