PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 38 of 51
Physicians and Mourning

---

CHAPTER 38

Verse 1. Honor a physician with the honor due unto him for the uses which ye may have of him; for the Lord hath created him.

Verse 2. For of the Most High cometh healing, and he shall receive honor of the king.

Verse 3. The skill of the physician shall lift up his head, and in the sight of great men he shall be in admiration.

Verse 4. The Lord hath created medicines out of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them.

Verse 5. Was not the water made sweet with wood, that the virtue thereof might be known?

Verse 6. And He hath given men skill, that He might be honored in His marvelous works.

Verse 7. With such doth He heal men and taketh away their pains.

Verse 8. Of such doth the apothecary make a confection; and of His works there is no end; and from Him is peace over all the earth.

Verse 9. My son, in thy sickness be not negligent, but pray unto the Lord, and He will make thee whole.

Verse 10. Leave off from sin, and order thine hands aright, and cleanse thy heart from all wickedness.

Verse 11. Give a sweet savor, and a memorial of fine flour, and make a fat offering, as not being.

Verse 12. Then give place to the physician, for the Lord hath created him; let him not go from thee, for thou hast need of him.

Verse 13. There is a time when in their hands there is good success.

Verse 14. For they shall also pray unto the Lord, that He would prosper that which they give for ease and remedy to prolong life.

Verse 15. He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the hand of the physician.

Verse 16. My son, let tears fall down over the dead, and begin to lament as if thou hadst suffered great harm thyself; and then cover his body according to the custom, and neglect not his burial.

Verse 17. Weep bitterly, and make great moan, and use lamentation as he is worthy, and that a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken of; and then comfort thyself for thy heaviness.

Verse 18. For of heaviness cometh death, and the heaviness of the heart breaketh strength.

Verse 19. In affliction also sorrow remaineth, and the life of the poor is the curse of the heart.

Verse 20. Take no heaviness to heart; drive it away, and remember the last end.

Verse 21. Forget it not, for there is no turning again; thou shalt not do him good, but hurt thyself.

Verse 22. Remember my judgment, for thine also shall be so: yesterday for me, and today for thee.

Verse 23. When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest; and be comforted for him when his spirit is departed from him.

Verse 24. The wisdom of a learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure, and he that hath little business shall become wise.

Verse 25. How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough, and he that glorieth in the goad, that driveth oxen, and is occupied in their labors, and whose talk is of bullocks?

Verse 26. He giveth his mind to make furrows, and is diligent to give the kine fodder.

Verse 27. So every carpenter and workmaster, that laboreth night and day; and they that cut and grave seals, and are diligent to make great variety, and give themselves to counterfeit imagery, and watch to finish a work.

Verse 28. The smith also sitting by the anvil, and considering the iron work; the vapor of the fire wasteth his flesh, and he fighteth with the heat of the furnace. The noise of the hammer and the anvil is ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the pattern of the thing that he maketh; he setteth his mind to finish his work, and watcheth to polish it perfectly.

Verse 29. So doth the potter sitting at his work, and turning the wheel about with his feet, who is always carefully set at his work, and maketh all his work by number.

Verse 30. He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and boweth down his strength before his feet; he applieth himself to lead it over; and he is diligent to make clean the furnace.

Verse 31. All these trust to their hands, and every one is wise in his work.

Verse 32. Without these cannot a city be inhabited, and they shall not dwell where they will, nor go up and down.

Verse 33. They shall not be sought for in public counsel, nor sit high in the congregation. They shall not sit on the judge's seat, nor understand the sentence of judgment; they cannot declare justice and judgment, and they shall not be found where parables are spoken.

Verse 34. But they will maintain the state of the world, and all their desire is in the work of their craft.