PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 21 of 51
Flee from Sin


CHAPTER 21

Verse 1. My son, hast thou sinned? Do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former sins.

Verse 2. Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent; for if thou comest too near it, it will bite thee. The teeth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, slaying the souls of men.

Verse 3. All iniquity is as a two-edged sword; the wounds thereof cannot be healed.

Verse 4. To terrify and do wrong will waste riches; thus the house of proud men shall be made desolate.

Verse 5. A prayer out of a poor man's mouth reacheth to the ears of God, and His judgment cometh speedily.

Verse 6. He that hateth to be reproved is in the way of sinners, but he that feareth the Lord will repent from his heart.

Verse 7. An eloquent man is known far and near, but a man of understanding knoweth when he slippeth.

Verse 8. He that buildeth his house with other men's money is like one that gathereth himself stones for the tomb of his burial.

Verse 9. The congregation of the wicked is like tow wrapped together, and the end of them is a flame of fire to destroy them.

Verse 10. The way of sinners is made plain with stones, but at the end thereof is the pit of hell.

Verse 11. He that keepeth the law of the Lord getteth the understanding thereof, and the perfection of the fear of the Lord is wisdom.

Verse 12. He that is not wise will not be taught, but there is a wisdom which multiplieth bitterness.

Verse 13. The knowledge of a wise man shall abound like a flood, and his counsel is like a pure fountain of life.

Verse 14. The inner parts of a fool are like a broken vessel, and he will hold no knowledge as long as he liveth.

Verse 15. If a skillful man hear a wise word, he will commend it and add unto it; but as soon as one of no understanding heareth it, it displeaseth him, and he casteth it behind his back.

Verse 16. The talking of a fool is like a burden in the way, but grace shall be found in the lips of the wise.

Verse 17. They enquire at the mouth of the wise man in the congregation, and they shall ponder his words in their heart.

Verse 18. As is a house that is destroyed, so is wisdom to a fool; and the knowledge of the unwise is as talk without sense.

Verse 19. Doctrine unto fools is as fetters on the feet, and like manacles on the right hand.

Verse 20. A fool lifteth up his voice with laughter, but a wise man doth scarce smile a little.

Verse 21. Learning is unto a wise man as an ornament of gold, and like a bracelet upon his right arm.

Verse 22. A foolish man's foot is soon in his neighbor's house, but a man of experience is ashamed of him.

Verse 23. A fool will peep in at the door into the house, but he that is well nurtured will stand without.

Verse 24. It is the rudeness of a man to hearken at the door, but a wise man will be grieved with the disgrace.

Verse 25. The lips of talkers will be telling such things as pertain not unto them, but the words of such as have understanding are weighed in the balance.

Verse 26. The heart of fools is in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart.

Verse 27. When the ungodly curseth Satan, he curseth his own soul.

Verse 28. A whisperer defileth his own soul, and is hated wheresoever he dwelleth.
