PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 37 of 51
True and False Counsel


CHAPTER 37

Verse 1. Every friend saith, I am his friend also; but there is a friend which is only a friend in name.

Verse 2. Is it not a grief unto death, when a companion and friend is turned to an enemy?

Verse 3. O wicked imagination, whence camest thou in to cover the earth with deceit?

Verse 4. There is a companion which rejoiceth in the prosperity of a friend, but in the time of trouble will be against him.

Verse 5. There is a companion which helpeth his friend for the belly, and taketh up the buckler against the enemy.

Verse 6. Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful of him in thy riches.

Verse 7. Every counselor extolleth counsel, but there is some that counseleth for himself.

Verse 8. Beware of a counselor, and know before what need he hath; for he also will counsel for himself, lest he cast the lot upon thee.

Verse 9. And say unto thee, Thy way is good; and afterward he stand on the other side, to see what shall befall thee.

Verse 10. Consult not with one that suspecteth thee, and hide thy counsel from such as envy thee.

Verse 11. Neither consult with a woman touching her of whom she is jealous, neither with a coward in matters of war, nor with a merchant concerning exchange, nor with a buyer of selling, nor with an envious man of thankfulness.

Verse 12. Nor with an unmerciful man touching kindness, nor with the slothful for any work, nor with a hireling for a year of finishing work, nor with an idle servant of much business. Hearken not unto these in any matter of counsel.

Verse 13. But be continually with a godly man, whom thou knowest to keep the commandments of the Lord, whose mind is according to thy mind, and will sorrow with thee if thou shalt miscarry.

Verse 14. And let the counsel of thine own heart stand, for there is no man more faithful unto thee than it.

Verse 15. For a man's mind is sometimes wont to tell him more than seven watchmen that sit above in a high tower.

Verse 16. And above all this pray to the Most High, that He will direct thy way in truth.

Verse 17. Let reason go before every enterprise, and counsel before every action.

Verse 18. The countenance is a sign of changing of the heart.

Verse 19. Four manner of things appear: good and evil, life and death; but the tongue ruleth over them continually.

Verse 20. There is one that is wise and teacheth many, and yet is unprofitable to himself.

Verse 21. There is one that showeth wisdom in words, and is hated; he shall be destitute of all food.

Verse 22. For grace is not given him from the Lord, because he is deprived of all wisdom.

Verse 23. Another is wise to himself; and the fruits of understanding are commendable in his mouth.

Verse 24. A wise man instructeth his people, and the fruits of his understanding fail not.

Verse 25. A wise man shall be filled with blessing, and all they that see him shall count him happy.

Verse 26. The days of the life of man may be numbered, but the days of Israel are innumerable.

Verse 27. A wise man shall inherit glory among his people, and his name shall be perpetual.

Verse 28. My son, prove thy soul in thy life, and see what is evil for it, and give not that unto it.

Verse 29. For all things are not profitable for all men, neither hath every soul pleasure in every thing.

Verse 30. Be not insatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon meats.

Verse 31. For excess of meats bringeth sickness, and surfeiting will turn into choler.

Verse 32. By surfeiting have many perished; but he that taketh heed prolongeth his life.
