PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 51
Seeking Wisdom


CHAPTER 4

Verse 1. My son, defraud not the poor of his living, and make not the needy eyes to wait long.

Verse 2. Make not a hungry soul sorrowful, neither provoke a man in his distress.

Verse 3. Add not more trouble to a heart that is vexed, and defer not to give to him that is in need.

Verse 4. Reject not the supplication of the afflicted, neither turn away thy face from a poor man.

Verse 5. Turn not away thine eye from the needy, and give him none occasion to curse thee.

Verse 6. For if he curse thee in the bitterness of his soul, his prayer shall be heard of Him that made him.

Verse 7. Get thyself the love of the congregation, and bow thy head to a great man.

Verse 8. Let it not grieve thee to bow down thine ear to the poor, and give him a friendly answer with meekness.

Verse 9. Deliver him that suffereth wrong from the hand of the oppressor, and be not fainthearted when thou sittest in judgment.

Verse 10. Be as a father unto the fatherless, and as a husband unto their mother; so shalt thou be as the son of the Most High, and He shall love thee more than thy mother doth.

Verse 11. Wisdom exalteth her children, and layeth hold of them that seek her.

Verse 12. He that loveth her loveth life, and they that seek her early shall be filled with joy.

Verse 13. He that holdeth her fast shall inherit glory, and wheresoever she entereth, the Lord will bless.

Verse 14. They that serve her shall minister to the Holy One, and them that love her the Lord doth love.

Verse 15. Whoso giveth ear unto her shall judge the nations, and he that attendeth unto her shall dwell securely.

Verse 16. If a man commit himself unto her, he shall inherit her, and his generation shall hold her in possession.

Verse 17. For at the first she will walk with him by crooked ways, and bring fear and dread upon him, and torment him with her discipline, until she may trust his soul and try him by her laws.

Verse 18. Then will she return the straight way unto him, and comfort him, and show him her secrets.

Verse 19. But if he go wrong, she will forsake him, and give him over to his own ruin.

Verse 20. Observe the opportunity, and beware of evil, and be not ashamed when it concerneth thy soul.

Verse 21. For there is a shame that bringeth sin, and there is a shame which is glory and grace.

Verse 22. Accept no person against thy soul, and let not the reverence of any man cause thee to fall.

Verse 23. Refrain not to speak when there is occasion to do good, and hide not thy wisdom in her beauty.

Verse 24. For by speech wisdom shall be known, and learning by the word of the tongue.

Verse 25. In no wise speak against the truth, but be abashed of the error of thine ignorance.

Verse 26. Be not ashamed to confess thy sins, and force not the course of the river.

Verse 27. Make not thyself an underling to a foolish man, neither accept the person of the mighty.

Verse 28. Strive for the truth unto death, and the Lord shall fight for thee.

Verse 29. Be not hasty in thy tongue, and in thy deeds slack and remiss.

Verse 30. Be not as a lion in thy house, nor frantic among thy servants.

Verse 31. Let not thine hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou shouldest repay.
