PURITAN GOLD -- Exposition of 1 John by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 36 of 39
Our Anointing (2:27)

---

“But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you,
and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same
anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no
lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in him.”
In this verse and the next one the apostle continues and virtually completes what he had said upon the saints’ abiding in
Christ. Though our text be by no means free of difficulty, yet by carefully noting its coherence with the context, its meaning
is more or less obvious. In view of the defection of so many (verse 19) and the continued activities of antichrists to draw
away others, John had addressed their responsibility and bade them persevere in the faith, and heed not those who sought to
entice them away from it. It was their duty to store the truth in their minds and treasure it in their hearts, to yield their
entire beings to its sway and reduce its substance to practice. Abandon it not for any specious novelty (verse 24). In verse 25
an incentive was supplied to encourage and stimulate them in the performance of that duty. In verse 26 a solemn warning is
added for the purpose of showing the necessity for their compliance therewith.
The apostle’s design, then, in the verse now before us, is threefold: explanatory, consolatory, cautionary. First, he states
the reason why believers had stood firm under the testing which had shaken and overthrown so many of their fellows. It was
not because of any superior native sagacity, but was to be attributed solely unto the gracious and effectual provision that
God has made for the preservation of His children from the deceits of Satan. In verse 20, John had stated implicitly how it
was that the saints had been delivered from serious error; now he affirms explicitly that they would continue to be kept
from receiving lying vanities. Here, as everywhere else in the writings of the apostles, the grand end in view was to remove
all ground for boasting from the saints and to move them to ascribe all the glory unto their Redeemer. Our security for
abiding in God—in the Father and the Son—is here attributed to that which is imparted to us at regeneration: there is now
that within us which preserves from the evil without us; we have been given a sure antidote against the poison of the serpent. At the new birth we received that which ensures our abiding in Christ.
Second, whereas that clear statement redounded to the honour of Christ, for it was from Him that the preservative benefit was received, it could not fail to comfort and assure the hearts of those to whom it was addressed. It must not be over74

sagacity – sound in judgment; discernment.



looked that, at that time, those believers were in special need of solace. They had been witnessing a most mysterious and
distressing spectacle. They had seen a large number of their professing brethren forsaking the churches to which they belonged, and not a few of the ministers themselves apostatizing. That was enough thoroughly to discourage mature Christians, and much more so the babes of the family. How strengthening then to their faith to be divinely assured that the
anointing which they had received from Christ was no temporary thing or evanescent experience, which would soon wear
off, but a durable and effective one that would stand them in good stead unto the close of their earthly pilgrimage. How
comforting to be authoritatively informed that the same divine illumination that taught them at the beginning and that had
imparted to them the saving knowledge of Christ, would remain to instruct them so that they would be kept steadfast in the
faith and would most certainly abide in Christ.
Third, the above declaration was also intended to animate them unto increased watchfulness and diligence. While our
last-made remarks stand in need of no qualification, they do need amplification lest they be perverted to a wrong use. Such
an assurance must not be abused to rashness and self-confidence. However sound and extensive their spiritual knowledge,
they had real need of more. There is no remaining stationary in the Christian life; unless we progress, we retrogress. Unless
we make good use of what God has given us, we are in real danger of losing what we seem to have (Luk 8:18). In order to
grow in grace and in the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, we are required to make daily use of the means
that God has provided. This anointing is not given to slothfulness and laziness. It is a vile perversion of this heavenly privilege to make God the patron of negligence and the indulger of the ease of the flesh. This divine gift increases our obligations: “for unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required” (Luk 12:48). Nor must it be abused unto pride
and self-sufficiency, so that we look contemptuously upon the more ignorant, for we have nothing good but what we have
received (1Co 4:7).
The nature of the “anointing”
But we must now inquire into the precise nature of this inestimable gift. Some have thought that by this “anointing” the
truth itself is intended, that the doctrine of the Gospel which they had received would preserve them from the seducers
warned against. But such a view accords not with either the text or the context, for the truth of the Gospel was the very
thing which the antichrists were attacking, and it was a true and experiential knowledge thereof which constituted the
saint’s safeguard. This “anointing” is here said to abide in those who were the favoured recipients of the same, whereas
strictly speaking we are said to abide in the truth. Again, this anointing is said to teach us all things, whereas the truth is
that which we are taught: thus we must distinguish between that which instructs and that wherein we are instructed. Finally, it must be borne in mind that everywhere else in Scripture, the Holy Spirit is said to be the teacher of the saints, the One
who establishes them in the truth, and there is nothing whatever in our text or the context which requires us to adopt any
other signification.
The Greek word for “anointing” in our text is identical with the one rendered “unction” in verse 20, and has reference to
one and the same thing. In our exposition of that verse we showed, first, that under the Old Testament economy prophets,
priests and kings were appointed unto and confirmed in their office by being anointed with the holy oil, and that they typified the anointing of Christ Himself with the Holy Spirit (Isa 61:1; Act 10:38). It was from that enduement He was denominated “the Christ,” which means “the Anointed One.” At His incarnation His humanity received a fullness of the Spirit’s
grace, being born “that holy thing” (Luk 1:35); at His baptism and entrance upon His public ministry He received a fullness
of the Spirit’s gifts (Isa 11:2; Mat 3:17); while at His ascension He was anointed with the oil of gladness (Psa 45:7; Act 2:33).
“And of His fullness have we all received, and grace for grace” (Joh 1:16)—the grace in us answering (according to our proportion) to the grace that is in Him—foreshadowed of old in the anointing of Israel’s high priest, concerning which we read,
“It is like the precious ointment upon the head…that went down to the skirts of his garments” (Psa 133:2), reaching to the
lowest of his members. In like manner, the believer’s anointing is an emanation from Christ.
Christ is our Anointer, and the anointing that believers receive from Him is the Holy Spirit, and thus are the members
conformed to their glorious Head, yet with this difference: He was anointed with the Spirit without measure (Joh 3:34), we
“according to the measure of the gift of Christ” (Eph 4:7). This “anointing,” then, is nothing less than the gift of the Holy
Spirit and supply of grace which is received from the Anointed One, who is “full of grace and truth” (Joh 1:14). It is an invaluable blessing which cannot be too highly esteemed. It is a divine gift “without repentance” (Rom 11:29), never to be
recalled or rescinded. It is incorruptible, and cannot be destroyed, being that good part which shall continue with them and
which none can take away. This is the “oil in their vessels” (that is, in their hearts) that distinguishes the wise virgins from
the foolish ones (Mat 25:4). Both had the “lamp” in their hands; that which differentiates the gracious soul from the graceless professor is something within, namely the indwelling Spirit. By this divine unction the regenerate receive light into the
sacred mysteries of the Gospel, so that they have a saving and satisfying acquaintance with and experience thereof, which
effectually preserves them from being imposed upon by counterfeits.
The figure of “anointing” is a very comprehensive one, which more plainly appears when we compare all the passages
where the holy oil was used under the Old Testament economy. It was employed with the design of dedicating a thing or a
person unto God (Gen 22:18). It was provided for the purpose of illumination, to furnish light (Exo 25:6). It was designed to
lubricate and refresh, “oil to make his face to shine” (Psa 104:15). Since it was compounded of sweet spices (Exo 30:24-25),



it produced a fragrance in those using the same. In the blessing pronounced on Asher it was said, “Let him dip his foot in
oil. Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy strength be” (Deu 33:24-25), which, in figurative language, signified the Spirit supplying power for the walk. Now in all these respects the antitypical substance is communicated by Christ through the unction of the Spirit. Thereby believers are set apart and consecrated to God, illuminated and
instructed, quickened and comforted, made a sweet savour unto God and unto one another. There are two beautiful allusions unto the last in the Song of Solomon. First, the spouse says of her Beloved, “Thy love is better than wine. Because of
the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as ointment poured forth” (1:2-3); while He in turn declares, “How fair is thy
love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is thy love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices” (4:10),
where He admires the graces that the Spirit has wrought in her.
Observations about this anointing
“But the anointing which ye have received of him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the
same anointing teacheth you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide in
him.”
Now it is the second aspect of the above that is principally in view in our text. No less than seven things are here predicated of this anointing. First, it was from Christ that it proceeded. Those unto whom John was writing had remained steadfast in the truth, unshaken by heresy, and he would have them know the reason for this or from whence their constancy
originated: they were indebted to the Holy One for His unction. Thus were fulfilled the several promises that He made to
His disciples ere He departed from this world. “But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father...for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you” (Joh 15:26; 16:7).
It was the bestowment of the risen Saviour, for when He ascended on high He “gave gifts unto men” (Eph 4:8)—an earnest
of which was imparted when He “breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost” (Joh 20:22).
Second, this enduement was a subjective one: it “abideth in you.” It is a gracious experience in the inner man, which is
entirely beyond the cognizance of the unregenerate. As the Lord Jesus had announced, “the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in
you” (Joh 14:17). This is made good when it can be said, “For our gospel came not unto you in word only, but also in power,
and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance” (1Th 1:5). The external Word is now applied internally. The mind is divinely
illumined, so as to receive a clear, convincing, contenting knowledge of the truth. At the same time the affections are purified and the heart turned unto God, so that it is fitted for spiritual and heavenly things; this is that “washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Spirit” (Ti 3:5). Then it is that the Word is received “in much affliction [as we are convicted
of our sins], with joy of the Holy Spirit” (1Th 1:6), as He makes known to us our divine pardon. In the latter respect this
anointing is “the oil of gladness” (Psa 45:7), for the Spirit is a Comforter as well as a Sanctifier. Combine divine illumination, purification, and consolation, and what a sure means are they for establishing in the truth!
Third, this anointing is a permanent blessing: it “abideth in you,” “that he [the Comforter] may abide with you for ever”
(Joh 14:16). It is very much more than a fitful emotion or brief rapture of spirit which soon gives place to depression; namely, stable, and enduring. Therein it is to be distinguished from our varying frames and feelings. It is indeed exercised and
manifested in different ways and directions: sometimes producing groans that cannot be uttered, sometimes bestowing
sweet foretastes of celestial bliss. But beneath all surface perception it is exerting a steadying influence, keeping God and
eternity before the soul, so that in the hour of temptation or tribulation it turns to Him for succour.
Fourth, this unction is, in itself, sufficient: so truly so that it is affirmed of its beneficiaries, “ye need not that any man
teach you”—either to convey authority to the truth, to impart a saving knowledge of it to the soul, or to induce the regenerate to adhere firmly unto it in love and obedience. The Gospel carries its own witness, and when, through the Spirit’s
anointing, it is applied to the heart in saving power, it is received “not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of
God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe” (1Th 2:13).
Fifth, it instructs its recipients: “the same anointing teacheth you of all things.” This is fulfillment of God’s newcovenant promise: “I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall
be my people. And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the LORD:
for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD” (Jer 31:33-34). In the accomplishment of that promise the Lord works so effectually upon and within His elect that, to use the language of another apostle, they are made “partakers of the divine nature” (2Pe 1:4). There is a peculiar power accompanying the teaching of the
Lord by His Spirit: “Behold, God exalteth by his power: who teacheth like him?” (Job 36:22). So our Lord interpreted His
promise, “All thy children shall be taught of the LORD” (Isa 54:13), as “every man therefore that hath heard, and hath
learned of the Father, cometh unto me” (Joh 6:45). There is such an efficacy attending the divine teaching that whosoever is
favoured therewith is positively assured that the same is of and from God Himself, for he now has the certifying evidence of
its verity within his own soul.
The anointing of believers with the Spirit is for the purpose of giving them an experiential acquaintance and saving
knowledge of the Gospel, enlightening their understandings and causing their hearts to receive the same with delight, casting their inner man into the holy image of the same (Rom 6:17). Thereby they are given the spirit of wisdom and revelation



in the knowledge of God in Christ, the eyes of their understanding being enlightened, that they may know what is the hope
of His calling, and what the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints (Eph 1:17-18). Such impressions of the holiness, righteousness, goodness, and grace of God are indelibly left in their souls that Satan can no longer deceive them with
lying substitutes. As another apostle said, “Ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written
not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart” (2Co 3:3). They
have received the Spirit which is of God, that they may know the things which are freely given to them by God (1Co 2:12),
that they may be assured of their reality, convinced of their value, appropriate, enjoy, and embody them in their lives. They
now have a spirit of discernment, but flee from hirelings (Joh 10:5).
Sixth, it is genuine and wholesome: “and is truth, and is no lie”—no darkness mars the light. Thus it is simple or pure
blessing, no heresy being mixed with it. Therefore it is reliable and trustworthy. The Spirit is like a seal, by which the truth
is testified and certified to the soul. “For while faith ought to look to God, He alone can be a witness to Himself, so as to
convince our hearts that what our ears receive has come from Him” (Calvin). The added words “and is no lie” signify that
God has so endowed the regenerate with sound judgment and discernment that they will not be deceived by falsehoods, or
even left in a state of uncertainty and vacillation about them. There is no danger, no possibility, of anyone being misled by
what this holy unction teaches; no erring while we walk according to this direction. Therefore we are to measure everything
by what the Spirit teaches in the Word. Thus not only is it thorough and complete—for “By this teaching of God Himself,
they were instructed in all things essential to salvation, and could not be deceived” (Thos. Scott)—it also conveys a conviction which cannot be called into question or shaken by man or devil.
“There is truth and no lie in what the Spirit shows you of the love of God in Christ, and sheds abroad in your heart of
that love. Be sure of that, and be not afraid to act upon the assurance of it. There is truth and no lie in what the Spirit
opens up to you of the freeness and fullness of the Father’s overtures of mercy in the Son. Be sure of that, and be not
afraid to act upon the assurance of it. There is truth and no lie in what the Spirit would have you grasp of the peace that
passeth understanding, the hope that maketh not ashamed, the joy unspeakable that is full of glory. Be sure of that, and
be not afraid to act upon the assurance of it. There is truth and no lie in that which ye have heard from the beginning,
so abiding in you that you abide in the Son and in the Father. That really is the anointing that is truth and no lie. Be
sure of that, and be not afraid to act out and out upon the assurance of it” (Robert Candlish).
Instead of now taking up the seventh thing that is here predicated of our anointing (namely that it ensures our abiding
in Christ), we defer it to our next chapter, and instead proffer some further remarks upon the oft-misunderstood clause
“and ye need not that any man teach you.” That language calls for the expositor, to explain the force of its terms, for some
ignorant souls who fail to understand the sense have been misled by its sound. Certain fanatics suppose it means that the
Christian is independent of all preachers, and therefore have contended for the exclusion of oral ministry from the churches. Now it is obvious that John wrote not to promote a spirit of presumption and unwillingness to be taught by others—his
own example contradicted any such idea, for he was then engaged in instructing these very persons. Nor was there any inconsistency between his statement and his practice. He taught the disciples and they were grateful and much edified. Yet
supposing him to be withdrawn from them and his pen silenced, it did not follow that they must remain ignorant. The Spirit would teach them, by him and without him as He pleased. The child of God, with the Bible in his hand and the Holy Spirit
in his heart, is capable of all spiritual knowledge. Whereas divine teaching does not supersede ministerial instruction, it
does surpass the same.
