PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 14 of 18
The Law of God (Continued)


2. THE LAW OF GOD (CONTINUED).
After what has been pointed out in the previous section of this article, there is little need for us to
devote much space here to demonstrating the error of those who affirm that the moral law was
given only to and for the nation of Israel. One plain Scripture is quite sufficient to expose such a
fallacy. In Rom 3.19 we read, “Now we know that whatever things the law says, it says to those
who are under the law: that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become guilty
before God.” Observe, “the law says,” not “said” — it is still speaking with Divine authority,
commanding and threatening. It speaks to “those who are under the law,” and who these are is
distinctly defined as “all the world.” Nothing could be simpler or more conclusive; and no
arguments of ours can possibly strengthen its force; nor can any repudiation of others blunt its
sharp edge.
We pass on, then, to test by Scripture the third great error which Dispensationalists have made
on this subject: namely, that Christians are not “under the law” in any sense, that it is not a Rule
of Life to them for regulating their conduct. Concerning this particular, the utmost confusion now
prevails in many quarters. And as it is an important part of the work committed to God’s servants
to heed that Divine command, “Take up the stumbling block out of the way of My people” (Isa
57:14), we will endeavour to deal with this point with greater care, and at some length. No doubt
some of our readers will regret this, and would much prefer for us to write on other subjects. We
ask all such readers to kindly bear in mind the needs of others who urgently require to be delivered
from the baneful effects of this pernicious error.
“Therefore, my brethren, you also have become dead to the law by the body of Christ... But now
we are delivered from the law” (Rom 7.4, 6); “For through the law I died to the law” (Gal 2.19
R.V.). Such verses as these are eagerly pressed into their service by those who declare that the law
has no jurisdiction over the Christian. And yet, let it be pointed out that these very verses flatly
contradict their other assertion that the law was never given to any but the nation of Israel. How
could the Roman saints be “delivered from the law” if they were never under it? And how could
the Gentile Galatians have “died to the law” if they had never been alive to it? Thus, the very verses
which these errorists are so fond of quoting, argue directly against one of their own positions.
Truly, “the legs of the lame are not equal” (Pro 26.7).
“For sin shall not have dominion over you: for you are not under the law, but under grace” (Rom
6.14). Yet we are expressly told that we are “outside the law of God, but under the law of Christ”
(1Cor 9.21). Obviously these two verses need “rightly dividing,” or properly interpreting, or we will
have the New Testament contradicting itself. And here we may perceive the real need for an
anointed teacher; for surely the man who toils hard for his living through the day, and spends
only a few minutes in the evening or on the Sabbath cursorily reading the Scriptures, can scarcely
expect to acquire the skill needed to see into the mysteries and solve the difficulties of the Word.
No, a lifetime of prayerful, diligent, and patient study is called for, if one is to be an “able minister
of the New Testament” (2Cor 3.6), and such study is not possible where one is in the pulpit or on
the platform almost every day of the week.
To understand the above verses, a four-fold distinction needs to be made in regard to the
Christian’s relation to the law. First, as he was in and federally represented by Adam when he was
under the law as a covenant of works, life being promised to him if his legal head obeyed it. Second,
as a fallen descendant of Adam, a personal transgressor of the law; being under its curse in his
unconverted days. Third, as he was in and federally represented by Christ, who was made under
the law, fulfilled all its requirements by a perfect obedience, and suffered its penalty on behalf of
and in the stead of His people. Fourth, as converted: the Holy Spirit having united him to Christ,
so that God now pronounces him free from the condemnation of the law and imputes to him the
perfect obedience of his Surety. And, the Spirit having worked in him a desire and determination
to love and serve God, he delights in the law and takes it as his Rule of Life, or standard of conduct.

55

The Christian is released from the law as the procuring ground of his justification and as the
ground of his condemnation before God, because Christ has rendered in his room and stead, that
perfect obedience which the law required, and also suffered its penalty. Therefore, he is freed from
the law as a covenant of works, to obtain life and glory by it, but not from that submission to God
which its terms enjoin. The Christian has been delivered from the curse of the law (Gal 3.13), but
not from its requirements. The Christian has been delivered from the condemning power of the
law, but not from its precepts — otherwise it would be his liberty to live in sin, which is the only
other possible alternative. The Christian has been delivered from the terror of the law, but not
from obedience to it. The Christian died to the penalty of the law when his Surety suffered in his
stead, but he is under the law to Christ as a Rule of Life or director of his conduct.
One thinks this issue would be settled once for all by a calm reading of Exodus 20. Is a Christian,
any more than a non-Christian, permitted to have more gods than one? May the Christian make
for himself a graven image and fall down and worship it? Will the Lord hold him guiltless if he
takes His name in vain? May the Christian break the Sabbath? Is he at liberty to dishonour his
parents, kill his neighbor, commit adultery, steal, or covet something which belongs to another?
Surely the very things required by the law approve themselves to every honest man’s conscience.
What a state of heart they must be in who hate the law! We earnestly beg every Christian parent
who reads these pages to diligently teach the Ten Commandments to his or her children. If you
do not, you are an enemy of God, an enemy to your offspring, and an enemy to the State. What
right do you have to denounce the lawlessness which is so rife throughout the land, if you fail to
enforce the law in your own home?
It is contended by many that since the Law of God requires perfect obedience in heart and life,
and since men are depraved and cannot obey it, or obtain life by it, that Christ has therefore
introduced a new regime, on easier terms — a regime which enjoins conditions that are in the
power of fallen man to keep, and secure eternal life by it. But mark well what such a theory
involves. It sets the Son against the Father: it places Christ in opposition to the moral Governor
of Heaven and earth. It represents the Redeemer as deserting the Father’s honor and interests —
the honor of His Law and government. And it supposes that He shed His precious blood with the
object of persuading the Ruler of this world to slacken the reins of government and grant an
impious license to iniquity. To suppose that, would make the holy Saviour a friend to sin and the
enemy of God. May Divine grace preserve both writer and reader from such horrible blasphemy.
So far was Christ from setting aside the law, or even abating its high requirements, that in His
first sermon (published in the New Testament) He said, “Do not think that I have come to destroy
the law, or the prophets: I have not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For truly I say to you, Till heaven
and earth pass, not one jot or tittle shall in any way pass from the law, till all is fulfilled” (Mat 5.17,
18). In that same Sermon He condemned the Pharisees for their sin of abating the law. They taught
that though the law forbade certain external and gross sins, yet it did not forbid the first stirrings
of corruption in the heart. They affirmed that a man must not commit murder, but that there was
no harm in his being angry without a cause, in speaking reproachfully, and harbouring a secret
grudge in the heart (Mat 5.21, 22).
The Pharisees taught that a man must not commit adultery, but that he should be excused for
secret lascivious thoughts (Mat 5.27, 29). They affirmed that a man must not be guilty of perjury,
but that petty oaths in common conversation were quite permissible (vv. 33-37). They argued that
a man should not hate his friends, but supposed it was quite right for him to hate an enemy (vv.
43, 44). The Pharisees imagined that these and like allowances were made by the law, and
therefore, that such things were not sinful. But the Lord Jesus condemned their doctrine as false
and damnable. He insisted that the high and holy demands of the law were not abated in the
slightest degree, nor ever shall be. Rather, the law required us to be “perfect” as our heavenly
Father (v. 48). And He declared, “I say to you, that unless your righteousness exceeds the

56

righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven”
(5.20). No wonder the Dispensationalists so bitterly hate the Sermon on the Mount!
But the carping objector will reply, Is it fair and just for God to require of His creatures more than
they can possibly render? In answering, let it be duly considered what it is that God requires from
us. In Mat 22.37-40 we find the Lord Jesus declaring, “you shall love the Lord your God with all
your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind. This is the first and great
commandment. And the second is like it: you shall love your neighbour as yourself. On these two
commandments hang all the law and the prophets.” We turn, then, to the objector and ask, Is it
wrong that the Governor of Heaven and earth requires men to love Him with all their hearts? Is
that too much to ask from them? Is it more than He deserves from us? Shame! Shame! Is it not
rather the truth that the objector hates God so much that he cannot find it in his heart to love
Him? And therefore he says, “He must not insist upon it; and if He does, He is unjust and very
hard with us.” What is this but the objector saying, “We will not have this man to reign over us”
(Luke 19.14)!
Yet notwithstanding all that has been pointed out above, there are many who loudly insist that
Christ’s death entirely annulled the Law of God, and that it has now wholly ceased to be a Rule of
Life to the believer. Whereas one great and declared design of Christ’s coming into the world, was
to recover His people to obedience, to bring them back in heart and life to God: “That He would
grant to us, that being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, we might serve Him without fear,
in holiness and righteousness before Him, all the days of our life” (Luke 1.74, 75). The Lord Jesus
came here not to dissolve our obligations to God, but rather to promote them. Christ died to
restore His people to conformity to the law: Titus 2.11, 12. Why, to deliver any creature from the
law would be to make it supreme, and independent! How could there be a “kingdom” (Col. 1.13)
without any law to regulate its subjects?
No, so far from Christ’s death having repealed God’s Law, as the Psalmist declared, “The
righteousness of your testimonies is everlasting... Concerning your testimonies, I have known
from old that you have founded them forever... your Word is true from the beginning: and every
one of your righteous judgments endures forever” (Psa 119.144, 152, 160). And again, “The works
of His hands are verity and judgment; all his commandments are sure. They stand fast for ever
and ever” (Psa 111.7, 8). O how men love their own corruptions, and hate God and His Holy Law;
though, of course, they seek to conceal that under a religious disguise, as Cain and Judas did.
Nevertheless, “The LORD sits King forever” (Psa 29.10). Yes, and He will yet assert the rights of
His crown, maintain the honor of His majesty, glorify His great name, and vindicate His injured
Law, although it is in the eternal damnation of millions of His creatures: “But My enemies, who
would not have Me reign over them, bring them here, and slay them before Me” (Luke 19.27).
From the last-quoted Scripture, the real Christian may perceive what an aversion men have to
right thoughts of God and Divine things. And in view of it (and John 7.47, 1Cor 2.14, etc.) they
may be convinced of the absolute necessity of a supernatural and invincible power being brought
to bear upon them if their prejudices are to be removed, and their hearts made to really love the
Truth. A holy God does not appear infinitely glorious to an unholy heart; and the unregenerate —
not seeing the grounds of loving God with all their hearts — do not see the reason of the law, nor
do they see how “holy, just, and good” the law is. The carnal mind being enmity against God, it is,
at the same time, enmity against His Law, which is a transcript of the Divine nature (Rom 8.7).
Hence, sinners do not wish to believe that either God or His Law are what they really are. And
their depraved inclinations make them blind to what Scripture so plainly says, leading them to
frame a false image of God, and to entertain wrong notions of His Law, that they may have a God
and a law to suit their own minds.
From Luke 19.27, we may also perceive what the character is of genuine regeneration and
conversion. It is a marvel and miracle of Divine grace, which transforms a lawless rebel into a

57

loving and law-abiding subject. By a “lawless rebel,” we mean one who is determined to please
himself, have his own way, follow his own plans, and gratify his own desires. By a “loving and lawabiding subject,” we mean one who is brought to recognize the claims of God upon him, and who
yields to those claims; one who surrenders himself to God — to honor, please, and serve Him —
not by constraint, but gladly; not through fear of Hell, but out of gratitude and love. But such a
transformation of character and conduct is only brought about by the supernatural operations of
the Holy Spirit. The great triumph of Divine grace is to win the heart to God, so that the favored
recipient of it sincerely declares, “I delight in the law of God after the inward man” (Rom 7.22).
From what has just been set before us, we may clearly perceive the worthlessness of the religion
of our degenerate age. The poor deluded creatures in most of the “churches” and “assemblies” will
dearly love those ministers who cry “Peace, peace” to them, but bitterly hate any who expose their
“refuge of lies.” The religion of vast multitudes consists in little more than a firm confidence that
their sins are forgiven and that their souls are eternally secure. They consider it a serious fault to
doubt their salvation; and the whole of their experience is made up of “faith” and “joy” — faith
that their sins are blotted out, and joy in the sure prospect of eternal bliss. But there is no
conformity to God’s Holy Law, no mourning before Him because of self-love and self-seeking, no
humility and brokenness of heart. Let one bid them to “examine themselves,” test their
foundations, take upon themselves the yoke of Christ, and they at once raise the howl of “Legalism,
Dangerous teaching!” O what a rude awakening awaits them all the first five minutes after death!
