PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 51 of 51
A Prayer of Thanksgiving


CHAPTER 51

Verse 1. I will thank Thee, O Lord and King, and praise Thee, O God my Savior; I do give praise unto Thy name.

Verse 2. For Thou art my defender and helper, and hast preserved my body from destruction, and from the snare of the slanderous tongue, and from the lips that forge lies, and hast been mine helper against mine adversaries;

Verse 3. And hast delivered me, according to the multitude of Thy mercies and greatness of Thy name, from the teeth of them that were ready to devour me, and out of the hands of such as sought after my life, and from the manifold afflictions which I had;

Verse 4. From the choking of fire on every side, and from the midst of the fire which I kindled not;

Verse 5. From the depth of the belly of hell, and from an unclean tongue, and from lying words.

Verse 6. By an accusation to the king from an unrighteous tongue my soul drew near even unto death, my life was near to the hell beneath.

Verse 7. They compassed me on every side, and there was no man to help me; I looked for the succor of men, but there was none.

Verse 8. Then thought I upon Thy mercy, O Lord, and upon Thy acts of old, how Thou deliverest such as wait for Thee, and savest them out of the hands of the enemies.

Verse 9. Then lifted I up my supplication from the earth, and prayed for deliverance from death.

Verse 10. I called upon the Lord, the Father of my Lord, that He would not leave me in the days of my trouble, and in the time of the proud, when there was no help.

Verse 11. I will praise Thy name continually, and will sing praise with thanksgiving; and so my prayer was heard.

Verse 12. For Thou savedst me from destruction, and deliveredst me from the evil time; therefore will I give thanks, and praise Thee, and bless Thy name, O Lord.

Verse 13. When I was yet young, or ever I went abroad, I desired wisdom openly in my prayer.

Verse 14. I prayed for her before the temple, and will seek her out even to the end.

Verse 15. Even from the flower till the grape was ripe hath my heart delighted in her; my foot went the right way; from my youth up sought I after her.

Verse 16. I bowed down mine ear a little, and received her, and gat much learning.

Verse 17. I profited therein, and unto Him that gave me wisdom will I give glory.

Verse 18. For I purposed to do after her, and earnestly I followed that which is good; so shall I not be confounded.

Verse 19. My soul hath wrestled with her, and in my doings I was exact; I stretched forth my hands to the heaven above, and bewailed mine ignorances of her.

Verse 20. I directed my soul unto her, and I found her in pureness; I have had my heart joined with her from the beginning; therefore shall I not be forsaken.

Verse 21. My heart was troubled in seeking her; therefore have I gotten a good possession.

Verse 22. The Lord hath given me a tongue for my reward, and I will praise Him therewith.

Verse 23. Draw near unto me, ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of learning.

Verse 24. Wherefore are ye slow, and what say ye to these things, seeing your souls are very thirsty?

Verse 25. I opened my mouth and said, Buy her for yourselves without money.

Verse 26. Put your neck under the yoke, and let your soul receive instruction; she is hard at hand to find.

Verse 27. Behold with your eyes, how that I have had but little labor and have gotten unto me much rest.

Verse 28. Get learning with a great sum of money, and get much gold by her.

Verse 29. Let your soul rejoice in His mercy, and be not ashamed of His praise.

Verse 30. Work your work betimes, and in His time He will give you your reward.

This concludes Part 10 and our complete reading of the Book of Sirach, also known as Ecclesiasticus. From the fear of the Lord as the beginning of wisdom to this final hymn of thanksgiving, Ben Sira has given us a treasury of practical wisdom for the godly life. May the instruction of understanding and knowledge found in this book be a lamp unto our feet. Blessed be the name of the Lord forever. Amen.
