PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 51
True Friendship

CHAPTER 6

Verse 1. Instead of a friend become not an enemy, for thereby thou shalt inherit an ill name, shame, and reproach; even so shall a sinner that hath a double tongue.

Verse 2. Extol not thyself in the counsel of thine own heart, that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a bull.

Verse 3. Thou shalt eat up thy leaves, and lose thy fruit, and leave thyself as a dry tree.

Verse 4. A wicked soul shall destroy him that hath it, and shall make him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies.

Verse 5. Sweet language will multiply friends, and a fair-speaking tongue will increase kind greetings.

Verse 6. Be in peace with many, nevertheless have but one counselor of a thousand.

Verse 7. If thou wouldest get a friend, prove him first, and be not hasty to credit him.

Verse 8. For some man is a friend for his own occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble.

Verse 9. And there is a friend who, being turned to enmity and strife, will discover thy reproach.

Verse 10. Again, some friend is a companion at the table, and will not continue in the day of thy affliction.

Verse 11. But in thy prosperity he will be as thyself, and will be bold over thy servants.

Verse 12. If thou be brought low, he will be against thee, and will hide himself from thy face.

Verse 13. Separate thyself from thine enemies, and take heed of thy friends.

Verse 14. A faithful friend is a strong defense, and he that hath found such an one hath found a treasure.

Verse 15. Nothing doth countervail a faithful friend, and his excellency is invaluable.

Verse 16. A faithful friend is the medicine of life, and they that fear the Lord shall find him.

Verse 17. Whoso feareth the Lord shall direct his friendship aright, for as he is, so shall his neighbor be also.

Verse 18. My son, gather instruction from thy youth up; so shalt thou find wisdom till thine old age.

Verse 19. Come unto her as one that ploweth and soweth, and wait for her good fruits; for thou shalt not toil much in laboring about her, but thou shalt eat of her fruits right soon.

Verse 20. She is very unpleasant to the unlearned; he that is without understanding will not remain with her.

Verse 21. She will lie upon him as a mighty stone of trial, and he will cast her from him ere it be long.

Verse 22. For wisdom is according to her name, and she is not manifest unto many.

Verse 23. Give ear, my son, receive my counsel, and refuse not my advice.

Verse 24. Put thy feet into her fetters, and thy neck into her chain.

Verse 25. Bow down thy shoulder unto her, and bear her, and be not grieved with her bonds.

Verse 26. Come unto her with thy whole heart, and keep her ways with all thy power.

Verse 27. Search, and seek, and she shall be made known unto thee; and when thou hast got hold of her, let her not go.

Verse 28. For at the last thou shalt find her rest, and that shall be turned to thy joy.

Verse 29. Then shall her fetters be a strong defense for thee, and her chains a robe of glory.

Verse 30. For there is a golden ornament upon her, and her bands are purple lace.

Verse 31. Thou shalt put her on as a robe of honor, and shalt put her about thee as a crown of joy.

Verse 32. My son, if thou wilt, thou shalt be taught; and if thou wilt apply thy mind, thou shalt be prudent.

Verse 33. If thou love to hear, thou shalt receive understanding; and if thou bow thine ear, thou shalt be wise.

Verse 34. Stand in the multitude of the elders, and cleave unto him that is wise.

Verse 35. Be willing to hear every godly discourse, and let not the parables of understanding escape thee.

Verse 36. And if thou seest a man of understanding, get thee betimes unto him, and let thy foot wear the steps of his door.

Verse 37. Let thy mind be upon the ordinances of the Lord, and meditate continually in His commandments; He shall establish thine heart, and give thee wisdom at thine own desire.
