PURITAN GOLD -- Exposition of 1 John by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 39 of 39
Amazing Grace (3:1)


“Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: therefore the
world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.”
Having stated that “If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him”
(2:29)—which means, in a word, that the performing of good works is one of the sure evidences of the new birth—the apostle’s mind was carried back to the originating cause, namely, the eternal love of the Father. The contemplation thereof
moved him to break forth into adoring and joyous celebration of the same. But human language is entirely inadequate to
express and describe the divine acts that produce our salvation, and great care needs to be taken lest we either carnalize or
unduly restrict the terms that are employed in connection therewith. We agree with Calvin that “when he says love has bestowed, he means that it is from mere bounty and benevolence that God makes us His children...Love, then, is declared here
to be gratuitous. There is, indeed, an impropriety in the language, but the apostle preferred speaking thus rather than not to
express that the more abundantly God’s goodness has been manifested toward us, the greater are our obligations to Him.”
Thus by “love” here we understand the divine benignity or His amazing grace.
The chapter division at this point is apt to mislead, detaching in our minds that which is here said from what immediately precedes: 3:1 is closely connected with 2:29. The thought of sonship is carried forward, with the design of emphasizing
the blessedness of such a high dignity and honour bestowed. That is first denoted by the call to “behold” it, and then by considering the “manner” of the same. So far from regarding 3:1 as the commencement of a new subject, the perspicuous Calvin considered that it furnished the second (implied) argument in proving that faith is necessarily connected with a holy
and pure life. “The first argument is that we are spiritually begotten after the likeness of Christ; it hence follows that no one
is born of Him except he who lives righteously. The second argument is from the dignity and excellence of our calling, for it
was no common honour he says that the heavenly Father bestowed upon us when He adopted us as His children. This being
so great a favour, the desire for purity ought to be kindled in us, so as to be conformed to His image. Nor, indeed, can it be
otherwise, but that he who acknowledges himself to be one of God’s children purifies himself. And to make this exhortation
more forceful, he amplifies the favour of God.”
The apostle was overwhelmed with astonishment as he contemplated the amazing grace that conferred such honour and
felicity upon worms of the earth, as to call them into the relation of sons. Whether he viewed the ineffable greatness and
elevation of the Father, the insignificance and degradation of the subjects, the uniqueness and inestimable value of the
blessing bestowed, or the manner and marvel of its communication, he was “lost to wonder, love, and praise.” That the Fa79
ther should ever deign to notice us at all is an act of infinite condescension on His part: that He should so highly distinguish us as to set His heart upon us, choose in Christ, redeem and regenerate lifelong rebels against Him, completely passes
knowledge, and so far exceeds human comprehension as to defy expression by tongue or pen. Such a prodigy is without parallel, not only on earth but in heaven also; as T. Scott rightly said, it is “incapable of being illustrated by any comparison”—
any attempt to do so beclouds its uniqueness and is only a darkening of counsel by mere words. Rather let us earnestly seek
grace to evince our gratitude thereat, and endeavour to walk worthy of such a calling by a humble and obedient walk.
Our text opens with a call to attention, for while the word “behold ” here is a word of adoring wonderment, an exclamation of astonishment at such a display of grace, yet it is much more than a bare interjection. It is a verb summoning to action. Manton, with his customary thoroughness, showed that there is a threefold “behold” in Scripture, and that each of
them is applicable in this place. First, the behold of demonstration, to denote the reality of the object, as in “Behold your
king” (Joh 19:14)—there He is before your very eyes, said Pilate unto the Jews. When prefixed to a doctrinal statement, it
avers the certainty of it, as in “Lo [behold] this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it for thy good” (Job
5:27). Second, there is the behold of admiration, which is designed to awaken our drowsy minds when something extraordinary is presented to our attention, challenging our most serious thoughts, as in “Behold, and see if there be any sorrow like

carnalize – to limit to man’s experience; to derive from human reasoning.
deign – stoop down to us; lower oneself.


unto my sorrow” (Lam 1:12). Third, the behold of gratulation, rejoicing and delighting ourselves in the privilege, as in
“Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep” (Psa 121:4)—take comfort therefrom.
Now each of those senses is to be included here, “Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us.” Behold it with faith and confidence. Though so astonishing and mysterious, entertain not the least doubt about it, for it is certified by a “Thus saith the Lord.” Behold it with adoring gratitude. It is of vast importance and inestimable value, so give the
same your most careful and prayerful attention. Ponder it deeply, meditate much thereon, that the Father Himself has laid
hold of depraved and hell-deserving sinners and made them the brethren of His dear Son. This too is “the Lord’s doing: it is
marvelous in our eyes” (Mat 21:42). Behold it with exultation and jubilation, that so blessed a privilege and high a dignity is
yours as to be made the children of God, the high favourites of heaven, more closely related to God than the holy angels.
How that should bow us in wonderment and worship before the throne of grace! What comfort and consolation should it
afford us amid the trials and tribulations of this life! How it should quicken our thankfulness and draw out our affections
godward—the chief motives and springs of Gospel obedience. How it should make us contented with our present portion; if
you be a child of God, it matters little what your earthly possessions amount to.
This word “behold” is used all through Scripture on particular and special occasions. When the Lord God made mention
of the incarnation and mission of the Messiah, He said, “Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his
name Immanuel”; and again, “Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him…Behold,
the Lord GOD will come with strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him” (Isa 7:14; 40:10). When the Father would have us
fix our hearts and minds on the person of His co-equal Son, He says, “Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in
whom my soul delighteth” (Isa 42:1). When His forerunner introduced Him to the Jews he cried, “Behold the Lamb of God,
which taketh away the sin of the world” (Joh 1:29). During His earthly ministry, Christ prefaced many of His weightiest utterances with a “behold!” (Mat 12:42; 23:38; 25:6, etc.). After His ascension the Lord Jesus declared, “Behold, I come quickly” (Rev 22:7, 12). So that this word “behold” is used in the sacred page by the Father, by the Son, by the Holy Spirit, by the
prophets, and by the apostles as introductory to the most blessed and momentous subjects revealed and recorded therein.
John would have his little children contemplate this glorious truth of the Father’s love with reverence and awe, for he
would stir up their pure minds to holy wonderment and admiration. He would have them engage their best thoughts thereon to the ravishing of their souls.
“Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us.” The “behold” is intensified by the words immediately
following. It is not simply take notice of and adore the love of the Father, but particularly the sort of love that is here in
view, the wonderful expression thereof. The question has been raised as to whether the reference be to the kind or degree of
His love. Personally, we consider that both ideas are included: its uniqueness and its greatness. According to its usage in the
New Testament this expression is a contrastive one. When Gabriel addressed the virgin Mary as “thou that art highly favoured...blessed art thou among women,” she “cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be” (Luk 1:28-29)—
she was mystified by such an unprecedented experience. When the Saviour calmed the raging tempest with a word of command, His disciples marveled, saying, “What manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him!” (Mat 8:27);
they have witnessed the supernatural. “What manner of persons you ought to be in all holy conversation and godliness”
(2Pe 3:11), which means (in contrast with the wicked) what paragons of virtue you should be—signifying not only the kind
but also the degree of piety which God requires from us.
In view of the above examples (to which Luke 7:39 and Mark 13:1 may be added), “Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us” imports: Consider and adore the nature and extent, the marvel and magnitude, the uniqueness
and superlative excellence of that love. It is in marked contrast, both in character and in greatness, with all other. It is incomparable, transcendent, infinite. Its cause is inexplicable; its effects are most glorious. Perhaps this is one reason why the
divine benignity is here termed His love, rather than His grace. Love is especially sensitive: “God commendeth his love to81
ward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us” (Rom 5:8). Thomas Goodwin pointed out, “Of all things in
God or man, love desires to have itself considered and taken notice of, as much as wisdom, and power, or any other thing;
therefore he calls on them to behold God’s love. Above all, love desires notice taken by the parties beloved, to whom it is in
special directed unto more than any other, for the emphasis lies in the speciality of it; therefore he would not have them run
out in general thoughts admiring God’s love to mankind and giving His Son, but as having bestowed Him upon us,” His
dear children.
Our present verse is one of many which illustrates the importance of observing the connection between a statement and
the setting in which it occurs—failure to take into account the context conveys a wrong idea of its scope, that which is
qualified being taken in an unlimited sense. Such is the case here; a wrong use has been made of it. It is appealed to by
those who believe in what is termed “the universal Fatherhood of God”—i.e., that all men are spiritually God’s children.

gratulation – expression of joy or gratification at the sight of something.
Thomas Goodwin (1600-1680) – born in Norfolk and educated at Cambridge, Goodwin became vicar of Holy Trinity Church, Cambridge.
He became a Congregationalist in London in 1634. In 1639 persecution drove him to Holland, where he pastored a church at Arnheim. He
returned to London as a member of the Westminster Assembly and leader of the Dissenting Brethren in it. In 1650 he was appointed president of Magdalen College, Oxford. He was a prominent member of the Savoy Assembly in 1658.


Apart from any other consideration, the principles of honest exegesis exclude such an interpretation of this sentence. The
question, “Who are the ‘us’ upon whom the Father has bestowed His love?” requires answer. Obviously it is those whom the
apostle is addressing. And who are they? 2:29 tells us plainly: they are those that give unmistakable evidence of being born
of Christ by being doers of righteousness, and the only ones of whom that is the case are those who have received from Him
the Holy Spirit (verse 27). Thus the “Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us” has no reference
whatever to the unregenerate, nor is any individual warranted in regarding God as his heavenly Father unless he be walking
in newness of life and bears His moral image.
“Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us.” John would have us look not only to the fountainhead or spring of our blessings, attentively [to] consider the matchless mercy shown us, but he would engage our hearts
with that which has been communicated to us personally. John is not here calling upon the saints to believe the love
wherewith God has loved them, nor is he bidding them receive the knowledge of it into their minds that they might rejoice
over the same in their hearts. Rather is he exhorting them to contemplate that love in its grand original, in its freeness and
sovereignty, in its nature and manner, in its gifts and blessedness; that it was actually bestowed upon them—that the Father
had not only conceived love toward them, and willed it unto them, but that He had really and truly imparted it to them.
That statement is almost parallel with “the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto
us” (Rom 5:5). That is what the “behold” directs our attention unto: to ponder and adore that love not abstractly but concretely; that is, not simply as it exists within the bosom of Deity, but in its outward manifestation, its actual bestowment
upon us.
Love
We are invited to look upon and admire the Father’s love in its infinite condescension, in its gratuitous character, in its
blessed application. It is indeed a great wonder that He preserves in being such worthless wretches, supplying our temporal
needs, and having any love for us. It is yet more wonderful that His love should be actually engaged toward us. But it is
surely most wonderful of all that His love should be communicated to us—given freely, disinterestedly, abundantly. No
other cause can be assigned why He should have set His heart upon them, other than His own determination: “Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the
praise of the glory of his grace” (Eph 1:5-6). The good pleasure of the divine will is the originating cause; the manifestation
of divine grace the end and issue of all. That love is not one merely of pity and compassion, but of delight and complacency:
as it is written, “The LORD thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy; he will
rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing” (Zep 3:17). To take that into our minds and have it realized in our hearts,
to live in the apprehension thereof, is to have real communion with the Father in all the blessedness of His love.
Consider the inestimable privilege which is here specified: “that we should be called the sons of God.” The word “called”
does not here refer to God’s making us His children by an effectual or inward call from death unto life, but rather the acknowledging of us to be His children. It is not the act of regeneration that is in view, but the fact of our sonship that is affirmed. “In Isaac shall thy seed be called” (Gen 21:12) means, The children of Isaac shall be regarded and recognized as thy
seed. Yea, of Christ Himself after the flesh, it was said to Mary, “that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called
the Son of God” (Luk 1:35), which obviously signifies shall be acknowledged as such, and not made so. Thus it is here: the
Father owning the ones born of Christ, [as] mentioned in the previous verse. When the Father calls us His sons, it is not
that He bestows the title upon us, but avers that relationship; as in Romans 9:26, where the apostle quotes from Hosea,
“And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people; there shall they be called the
children of the living God,” that is, God recognizes none as His children but those born of His Spirit and conformed to the
image of His Son. And again, “If thou...call the Sabbath a delight” (Isa 58:13), [i.e.,] regard and treat it as such.
This is what we are called upon to behold: the fathomless love of the Father in owning us not merely as His subjects or
servants, but as His sons. It is a particular and peculiar relationship that pertains to the regenerate, for it is not a blessing
that is common to all men. It originates in the Father’s love. It is based upon our union with Christ, our being born of Him.
To be a child of God is to be an heir of glory (Rom 8:17), and to be regarded as such by the Father is a confirmation of it. It
is a very high honour indeed to sustain this relationship, far, far greater than any which this world can bestow. David asked,
“Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king’s son in law?” (1Sa 18:23); then what is it to be acknowledged as a son of the
King of kings! “Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable, and I have loved thee” (Isa 43:4) is His
own blessed testimony. What weight should that have with us! What assurance it should convey to our minds! What wonderment it should evoke! Does it not move each of us to admit with the returning prodigal, I am not worthy “to be called
thy son” (Luk 15:19)? How it should influence our daily lives: “Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children; and walk
in love, as Christ also loved us” (Eph 5:1-2).


disinterestedly – without expectation for personal gain.


The qualities of the Father’s love
We must not conclude this chapter without pointing out the principal qualities of the Father’s love. It was spontaneous.
Nothing outside God Himself moved Him to it. There was nothing in us to attract it, but everything to the contrary (Eze
16:5-6). It was eternal (Jer 31:3), for God chose us in Christ before the foundation of the world, and entered into an everlasting covenant of grace with Him on our behalf. It was sovereign, selective, and discriminating, for He loves not all; it is peculiar to the elect—“Remember me, O LORD, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people” (Psa 106:4). It is sacrificial,
for God “spared not his own Son” but delivered Him up to the cross in order that sinners might be saved (Rom 8:32). Christ
shed not His blood in order to induce God to love His people; it was because God loved them that He provided such a costly
offering for them. It is infinite. There is a depth to it that none can fathom, a height that none can reach, a length and
breadth that cannot be measured. It is invincible. “Put not your trust in princes” said the Psalmist, for they will fail you; but
God’s love is reliable and cannot be thwarted. It is immutable, knowing no change (Mal 3:6), being without variableness or
shadow of turning. Truly His love is unique.
How the Father’s love is exercised
Equally blessed is it to observe how His love is exercised. Behold His foreordaining love: “In love having predestinated us
unto the adoption of children” (Eph 1:4-5). Deuteronomy 7:7-8 shows that election is the fruit of God’s love; likewise does 2
Thessalonians 2:13 teach us. Behold God’s redeeming love: “In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that
God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins” (1Jo 4:9-10). Behold His regenerating love: “But God,
who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together
with Christ” (Eph 2:4-5). Behold His drawing love: “I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with lovingkindness
have I drawn thee” (Jer 31:3), sweetly wooing us unto Himself. Behold His communicating love: “The love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit” (Rom 5:5). Behold His comforting love: “even our Father, which hath loved us, and
hath given us everlasting consolation” (2Th 2:16). Behold His preserving love: “nothing does or can separate us from it”
(Rom 8:38-39). Thus its manner is as matchless as its nature.
A brief word now on the present modification of our enjoyment of God’s love. “Therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not.” Though so greatly honoured by the Father, that will not bring you into favour with those who are
strangers to Him. No matter how lavish He be in the display of His love toward us, the unregenerate will not value us on
that account. The natural man is devoid of spiritual discernment, and perceives not that the saints are the excellent of the
earth (Psa 16:3), the blessed ones—rather does he regard them as fools and fanatics who are turning their backs on the
happiness of life.
But so far from stumbling the Christian, or even discouraging him, it is just what he should expect. Nor will this disesteem be only from the openly godless: it is from professors that the most cruel treatment will come. It was the religious
element that persecuted Christ! They perceived not His glory, though it shone constantly before them in His character and
conduct, His ministry and miracles; but they were blind, seeing in Him no beauty. Sufficient for the disciple to be as his
Master: to be unknown, despised, opposed, is part of our conformity to Him (Rom 8:29).
The excellency of our sonship is not to be measured by the world’s judgment, for its opinion is worthless. Sufficient for
the believer to be assured that his Father loves him, that he has His approbation. Suffer not the slights of godless professors
to dim your joy in Him.
