PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 51
Humility and Appearances


CHAPTER 11

Verse 1. Wisdom lifteth up the head of him that is of low degree, and maketh him to sit among great men.

Verse 2. Commend not a man for his beauty, neither abhor a man for his outward appearance.

Verse 3. The bee is little among such as fly, but her fruit is the chief of sweet things.

Verse 4. Boast not of thy clothing and raiment, and exalt not thyself in the day of honor; for the works of the Lord are wonderful, and His works among men are hidden.

Verse 5. Many kings have sat down upon the ground, and one that was never thought of hath worn the crown.

Verse 6. Many mighty men have been greatly disgraced, and the honorable delivered into other men's hands.

Verse 7. Blame not before thou hast examined the truth; understand first, and then rebuke.

Verse 8. Answer not before thou hast heard the cause; neither interrupt men in the midst of their talk.

Verse 9. Strive not in a matter that concerneth thee not, and sit not in judgment with sinners.

Verse 10. My son, meddle not with many matters; for if thou meddle much, thou shalt not be innocent; and if thou follow after, thou shalt not obtain, neither shalt thou escape by fleeing.

Verse 11. There is one that laboreth, and taketh pains, and maketh haste, and is so much the more behind.

Verse 12. Again, there is another that is slow and hath need of help, wanting ability, and full of poverty; yet the eye of the Lord looked upon him for good, and set him up from his low estate.

Verse 13. And lifted up his head from misery, so that many that saw it marveled at him.

Verse 14. Prosperity and adversity, life and death, poverty and riches, come of the Lord.

Verse 15. Wisdom, knowledge, and understanding of the law are of the Lord; love and the way of good works are from Him.

Verse 16. Error and darkness had their beginning together with sinners, and evil shall wax old with them that glory therein.

Verse 17. The gift of the Lord remaineth with the godly, and His favor bringeth prosperity forever.

Verse 18. There is that waxeth rich by his wariness and pinching, and this is the portion of his reward.

Verse 19. Whereas he saith, I have found rest, and now will eat continually of my goods; and yet he knoweth not what time shall come upon him, and that he must leave those things to others and die.

Verse 20. Be steadfast in thy covenant, and be conversant therein, and wax old in thy work.

Verse 21. Marvel not at the works of sinners, but trust in the Lord and abide in thy labor; for it is an easy thing in the sight of the Lord on the sudden to make a poor man rich.

Verse 22. The blessing of the Lord is in the reward of the godly, and in an hour that cometh swiftly He maketh His blessing to flourish.

Verse 23. Say not, What profit is there of my service? And what good things shall I have hereafter?

Verse 24. Again, say not, I have enough, and possess many things, and what evil can come to me hereafter?

Verse 25. In the day of prosperity there is a forgetfulness of affliction, and in the day of affliction there is no more remembrance of prosperity.

Verse 26. For it is an easy thing unto the Lord in the day of death to reward a man according to his ways.

Verse 27. The affliction of an hour maketh a man forget pleasure, and in his end his deeds shall be discovered.

Verse 28. Judge none blessed before his death, for a man shall be known in his children.

Verse 29. Bring not every man into thine house, for the deceitful man hath many trains.

Verse 30. Like as a partridge taken and kept in a cage, so is the heart of the proud; and like as a spy, watcheth he for thy fall.

Verse 31. For he lieth in wait, and turneth good into evil, and in things worthy of praise will lay blame upon thee.

Verse 32. Of a spark of fire a heap of coals is kindled, and a sinful man layeth wait for blood.

Verse 33. Take heed of a mischievous man, for he worketh wickedness; lest he bring upon thee a perpetual blot.

Verse 34. Receive a stranger into thine house, and he will disturb thee and turn thee out of thine own.
