PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 20 of 51
Wise Sayings

CHAPTER 20

Verse 1. There is a reproof that is not comely; again, some man holdeth his tongue, and he is wise.

Verse 2. It is much better to reprove than to be angry secretly, and he that confesseth his fault shall be preserved from hurt.

Verse 3. How good is it, when thou art reproved, to show repentance! For so shalt thou escape wilful sin.

Verse 4. As is the lust of an eunuch to deflower a virgin, so is he that executeth judgment with violence.

Verse 5. There is one that keepeth silence, and is found wise; and another by much babbling becometh hateful.

Verse 6. Some man holdeth his tongue, because he hath not to answer; and some keepeth silence, knowing his time.

Verse 7. A wise man will hold his tongue till he see opportunity; but a babbler and a fool will regard no time.

Verse 8. He that useth many words shall be abhorred, and he that taketh to himself authority therein shall be hated.

Verse 9. There is a sinner that hath good success in evil things, and there is a gain that turneth to loss.

Verse 10. There is a gift that shall not profit thee, and there is a gift whose recompense is double.

Verse 11. There is an abasement because of glory, and there is that lifteth up his head from a low estate.

Verse 12. There is that buyeth much for a little, and repayeth it sevenfold.

Verse 13. A wise man by his words maketh himself beloved, but the graces of fools shall be poured out.

Verse 14. The gift of a fool shall do thee no good when thou hast it, neither yet of the envious for his necessity; for he looketh to receive many things for one.

Verse 15. He giveth little, and upbraideth much; he openeth his mouth like a crier. Today he lendeth, and tomorrow will he ask it again; such an one is to be hated of God and man.

Verse 16. The fool saith, I have no friends; I have no thanks for all my good deeds, and they that eat my bread speak evil of me.

Verse 17. How oft, and of how many, shall he be laughed to scorn! For he knoweth not aright what it is to have; and it is all one unto him as if he had it not.

Verse 18. To slip upon a pavement is better than to slip with the tongue; so the fall of the wicked shall come speedily.

Verse 19. An unseasonable tale will always be in the mouth of the unwise.

Verse 20. A wise sentence shall be rejected when it cometh out of a fool's mouth, for he will not speak it in due season.

Verse 21. There is that is hindered from sinning through want, and when he taketh rest he shall not be troubled.

Verse 22. There is that destroyeth his own soul through bashfulness, and by accepting of persons overthroweth himself.

Verse 23. There is that for bashfulness promiseth to his friend, and maketh him his enemy for nothing.

Verse 24. A lie is a foul blot in a man, yet it is continually in the mouth of the untaught.

Verse 25. A thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie; but they both shall have destruction to heritage.

Verse 26. The disposition of a liar is dishonorable, and his shame is ever with him.

Verse 27. A wise man shall promote himself to honor with his words, and he that hath understanding will please great men.

Verse 28. He that tilleth his land shall increase his heap, and he that pleaseth great men shall get pardon for iniquity.

Verse 29. Presents and gifts blind the eyes of the wise, and stop up his mouth that he cannot reprove.

Verse 30. Wisdom that is hid, and treasure that is hoarded up, what profit is in them both?

Verse 31. Better is he that hideth his folly than a man that hideth his wisdom.

This concludes Part 4 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 21 through Chapter 25, covering the avoidance of sin, prudent speech, the contrast between the fool and the wise, and warnings against wickedness.

In these chapters, Ben Sira teaches on fleeing from sin as from a serpent, the marks of prudent and foolish speech, the sharp contrast between the wise man and the fool in daily conduct, counsel on good and bad wives and household order, and grave warnings against the wickedness that corrupts the heart.
