PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 33 of 51
The Fear of the Lord's Power

CHAPTER 33

Verse 1. There shall no evil happen unto him that feareth the Lord; but in temptation even again He will deliver him.

Verse 2. A wise man hateth not the law; but he that is a hypocrite therein is as a ship in a storm.

Verse 3. A man of understanding trusteth in the law, and the law is faithful unto him, as when one asketh at the oracle.

Verse 4. Prepare thy speech, and so shalt thou be heard; bind up instruction and then make answer.

Verse 5. The heart of the foolish is like a cart wheel, and his thoughts are like a rolling axle-tree.

Verse 6. A stallion horse is as a mocking friend; he neigheth under every one that sitteth upon him.

Verse 7. Why doth one day excel another, when as all the light of every day in the year is of the sun?

Verse 8. By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished, and He altered seasons and feasts.

Verse 9. Some of them hath He made high days, and hallowed them; and some of them hath He made ordinary days.

Verse 10. And all men are from the ground, and Adam was created of earth.

Verse 11. In much knowledge the Lord hath divided them, and made their ways diverse.

Verse 12. Some of them hath He blessed and exalted, and some of them He hath sanctified and set near Himself; but some of them hath He cursed and brought low, and turned out of their places.

Verse 13. As the clay is in the potter's hand, to fashion it at his pleasure, so man is in the hand of Him that made him, to render to them as He seeth fit.

Verse 14. Good is set against evil, and life against death; so is the godly against the sinner, and the sinner against the godly.

Verse 15. So look upon all the works of the Most High, and there are two and two, one against another.

Verse 16. I awaked up last of all, as one that gathereth after the grape-gatherers; by the blessing of the Lord I profited, and trod my wine-press like a gatherer of grapes.

Verse 17. Consider that I labored not for myself only, but for all them that seek learning.

Verse 18. Hear me, O ye great men of the people, and hearken with your ears, ye rulers of the congregation.

Verse 19. Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over thee while thou livest, and give not thy goods to another, lest it repent thee and thou entreat for the same again.

Verse 20. As long as thou livest and hast breath in thee, give not thyself over to any.

Verse 21. For better it is that thy children should seek to thee than that thou shouldest stand to their courtesy.

Verse 22. In all thy works keep to thyself the pre-eminence; leave not a stain upon thine honor.

Verse 23. At the time when thou shalt end thy days, and finish thy life, distribute thine inheritance.

Verse 24. Fodder, a wand, and burdens are for the ass; and bread, correction, and work for a servant.

Verse 25. If thou set thy servant to labor, thou shalt find rest; but if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty.

Verse 26. A yoke and a collar do bow the neck, so are tortures and torments for an evil servant.

Verse 27. Send him to labor, that he be not idle; for idleness teacheth much evil.

Verse 28. Set him to work, as is fit for him; if he be not obedient, put on more heavy fetters.

Verse 29. But be not excessive toward any, and without discretion do nothing.

Verse 30. If thou have a servant, let him be unto thee as thyself, because thou hast bought him with a price.

Verse 31. If thou have a servant, treat him as a brother, for thou hast need of him as of thine own soul. If thou entreat him evil, and he run from thee, which way shalt thou go to seek him?
