PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 22 of 51
Laziness and Folly

---

CHAPTER 22

Verse 1. The slothful man is compared to a filthy stone, and every one will hiss him out to his disgrace.

Verse 2. The slothful man is compared to the filth of a dunghill; every man that taketh it up will shake his hand.

Verse 3. An evil-nurtured son is the dishonor of his father that begat him, and a foolish daughter is born to his loss.

Verse 4. A wise daughter shall bring an inheritance to her husband, but she that liveth dishonestly is her father's heaviness.

Verse 5. She that is bold dishonoreth both her father and her husband, but they both shall despise her.

Verse 6. A tale out of season is as music in mourning, but stripes and correction of wisdom are never out of time.

Verse 7. Whoso teacheth a fool is as one that glueth a potsherd together, and as he that waketh one from a sound sleep.

Verse 8. He that telleth a tale to a fool speaketh to one in a slumber; when he hath told his tale, he will say, What is the matter?

Verse 9. If children live honestly and have wherewithal, they shall cover the baseness of their parents.

Verse 10. But children, being haughty, through disdain and want of nurture do stain the nobility of their kindred.

Verse 11. Weep for the dead, for he hath lost the light; and weep for the fool, for he wanteth understanding. Make little weeping for the dead, for he is at rest; but the life of the fool is worse than death.

Verse 12. Seven days do men mourn for him that is dead, but for a fool and an ungodly man all the days of his life.

Verse 13. Talk not much with a fool, and go not to him that hath no understanding. Beware of him, lest thou have trouble, and thou shalt never be defiled with his fooleries. Depart from him, and thou shalt find rest, and never be disquieted with madness.

Verse 14. What is heavier than lead? And what is the name thereof, but a fool?

Verse 15. Sand, and salt, and a mass of iron, is easier to bear than a man without understanding.

Verse 16. As timber girt and bound together in a building cannot be loosed with shaking, so the heart that is stablished by advised counsel shall fear at no time.

Verse 17. A heart settled upon a thought of understanding is as a fair plastering on the wall of a gallery.

Verse 18. Pales set on a high place will never stand against the wind, so a fearful heart in the imagination of a fool cannot stand against any fear.

Verse 19. He that pricketh the eye will make tears to fall, and he that pricketh the heart maketh it to show her knowledge.

Verse 20. Whoso casteth a stone at the birds frayeth them away, and he that upbraideth his friend breaketh friendship.

Verse 21. Though thou drewest a sword at thy friend, yet despair not, for there may be a returning to favor.

Verse 22. If thou hast opened thy mouth against thy friend, fear not, for there may be a reconciliation; except for upbraiding, or pride, or disclosing of secrets, or a treacherous wound, for these things every friend will depart.

Verse 23. Be faithful to thy neighbor in his poverty, that thou mayest rejoice in his prosperity; abide steadfast unto him in the time of his trouble, that thou mayest be heir with him in his heritage.

Verse 24. As the vapor and smoke of a furnace goeth before the fire, so reviling before blood.

Verse 25. I will not be ashamed to defend a friend, neither will I hide myself from him.

Verse 26. And if any evil happen unto me by him, every one that heareth it will beware of him.

Verse 27. Who shall set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wisdom upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them, and that my tongue destroy me not?