PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 47 of 51
David and Solomon

---

CHAPTER 47

Verse 1. And after him rose up Nathan to prophesy in the time of David.

Verse 2. As is the fat taken away from the peace offering, so was David chosen out of the children of Israel.

Verse 3. He played with lions as with kids, and with bears as with lambs.

Verse 4. Slew he not a giant when he was yet but young? And did he not take away reproach from the people, when he lifted up his hand with the stone in the sling, and beat down the boasting of Goliath?

Verse 5. For he called upon the Most High Lord, and He gave him strength in his right hand to slay that mighty warrior, and set up the horn of his people.

Verse 6. So the people honored him with ten thousands, and praised him in the blessings of the Lord, in that he gave him a crown of glory.

Verse 7. For he destroyed the enemies on every side, and brought to nought the Philistines his adversaries, and brake their horn in sunder unto this day.

Verse 8. In all his works he praised the Holy One Most High with words of glory; with his whole heart he sang songs, and loved Him that made him.

Verse 9. He set singers also before the altar, that by their voices they might make sweet melody, and daily sing praises in their songs.

Verse 10. He beautified their feasts, and set in order the solemn times until the end, that they should praise His holy name, and that the temple should sound from morning.

Verse 11. The Lord took away his sins, and exalted his horn forever; He gave him a covenant of kings, and a throne of glory in Israel.

Verse 12. After him rose up a wise son, and for his sake he dwelt at large.

Verse 13. Solomon reigned in a peaceable time, and was honored; for God made all quiet round about him, that he might build a house in His name, and prepare His sanctuary forever.

Verse 14. How wise wast thou in thy youth, and as a flood filled with understanding!

Verse 15. Thy soul covered the whole earth, and thou filledst it with dark parables.

Verse 16. Thy name went far unto the islands, and for thy peace thou wast beloved.

Verse 17. The countries marveled at thee for thy songs, and proverbs, and parables, and interpretations.

Verse 18. By the name of the Lord God, which is called the Lord God of Israel, thou didst gather gold as tin, and didst multiply silver as lead.

Verse 19. Thou didst bow thy loins unto women, and by thy body thou wast brought into subjection.

Verse 20. Thou didst stain thine honor, and pollute thy seed, so that thou broughtest wrath upon thy children, and wast grieved for thy folly.

Verse 21. So the kingdom was divided, and out of Ephraim ruled a rebellious kingdom.

Verse 22. But the Lord will never leave off His mercy, neither shall any of His works perish, neither will He abolish the posterity of His elect, and the seed of him that loveth Him He will not take away; wherefore He gave a remnant unto Jacob, and out of him a root unto David.

Verse 23. Thus rested Solomon with his fathers, and of his seed he left behind him Rehoboam, even the foolishness of the people and one that had no understanding, who turned away the people through his counsel.

Verse 24. There was also Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin, and showed Ephraim the way of sin; and their sins were multiplied exceedingly, that they drove them out of the land.

Verse 25. For they sought out all wickedness, till the vengeance came upon them.

This concludes Part 9 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 43 through 47. In our final reading, we shall hear the conclusion of the praise of famous men — Elijah, Elisha, the kings, the high priest Simon — and Ben Sira's closing prayer and hymn of thanksgiving.

We come now to the final reading of the Book of Sirach. In these concluding chapters, Ben Sira continues his praise of the famous men of Israel — the prophets Elijah and Elisha, the faithful kings, and the high priest Simon — and then closes with his own personal prayer and a hymn of thanksgiving to God.