PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 18
The Israel of God (Concluded)

---

2. THE ISRAEL OF GOD (CONCLUDED).
We feel that an apology is almost due some of our readers for continuing this present series at
such length, and for discussing each aspect of the subject in such detail; but we are constrained
so to do, for the sake of another class who sorely need them. Please pray that it may please God
to use these particular articles in dispersing the mists of error from many minds.
We resume at the point where we left off in our last article. In Rom 9.6, 7, the Apostle enunciates
a principle which it is highly important for us to heed. Failure to do so must only lead to a
misunderstanding of the greater part of the Old Testament. That principle simply stated is, that
God had an election within an election: that while the nation of Israel as such were His peculiar
people, separated from all other nations, and favoured with great privileges, yet only a predestined
remnant of them had been chosen for salvation and ordained to spend eternity in Heaven. Each
member of that chosen remnant was, in God’s appointed time, regenerated and sanctified by the
operations of the Holy Spirit; each was endowed with a “new nature” and spiritual faith. These,
and these alone, were the real “children of promise,” and these were foreshadowed by Isaac —
born after Ishmael was set aside by God, born according to His promise, born by His miracleworking power.
This great fact was quite unknown to the carnal Jews; and hence we find them, at the beginning
of the New Testament, hotly opposing the Gospel message. They were not “lost” sinners, “dead in
trespasses,” needing to be born again. Why no (in their estimation), they were already the children
of God; they had Abraham as their father, and were “just persons, who need no repentance” (Luke
15.7). Theirs were the covenants, theirs were the promises, theirs was the Messiah. Consequently,
when the Messiah did come, and called on them to “repent” (Mat 4.17), and presented Himself as
the One who had come to “seek and to save that which was lost” (Luke 19.10), they despised and
rejected Him, and ultimately crucified Him as a blaspheming impostor. It was this spirit which
Paul had to contend with, and most of all when the Judaisers sought to corrupt his converts. Much
in his Epistles can only be rightly understood in the light of this fact.
In our last article, we pointed out that when the Apostle said, “For they are not all Israel, who are
of Israel” (Rom 9.6), he meant, The entire posterity of Jacob are not commensurate with the real
and spiritual “Israel.” Then he added, “Neither are they all children, because they are the seed of
Abraham; but in Isaac your seed shall be called” (v. 7). The great error of the carnal Jews was that
they thought they were the children of God by virtue of their being the descendants of Abraham.
But the grand promise given to Abraham was not made to all his progeny in general, but to
himself and a particular “seed.” As the descendants of Abraham, they were all indeed, in one
sense, the children of God. For He said to Pharaoh, with reference to them, “Let My son go.”
(Exo. 4.23); But the natural sonship was only a figure of the spiritual sonship of all believers of
every nation.” — Robert Haldane on Romans 6.7
The principle affirmed here by the Apostle was no invention of his for the purpose of silencing his
opponents, but one which had been illustrated from the beginning of God’s dispensations in
reference to the Abrahamic family: the principle of restricting promises, couched in general terms,
to a particular class of those to whom they might seem to refer. In proof of this, the Apostle quotes
from the plain words of Jehovah to Abraham (recorded in Gen 21.12), “In Isaac your seed shall be
called” — Ishmael was passed by, as were all the sons which he later had by Keturah. And it is very
evident from Gal 4.28 that Isaac, the child “of promise,” was a type of all the elect, redeemed, and
regenerated people of God.

39

In these verses of Romans 9, the Apostle was but amplifying and proving what he had declared
earlier in the Epistle: “For he is not a Jew, who is one outwardly; nor is circumcision, that which
is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew, who is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart,
in the spirit, and not in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God” (Rom 2.28, 29).
He who was a “Jew” outwardly, was one who was such merely by name, nature, and nationality;
but he who was a “Jew” inwardly, was one who had been a subject of an internal work of grace;
the one had the law of God in his hand, the other in his heart. The true and spiritual “Jew” — in
contrast to those who are “Jews by nature” (Gal 2.15) — is one whose excellence is inward, seen
and acknowledged by God alone.
A parallel passage to the last one before us, is found in Philippians 3.3, “For we are the
circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus.” What could possibly be
plainer than this? And in the light of it, who dares to deny that there are two kinds of “Israelites,”
two kinds of “Jews,” two kinds of “circumcision,” a natural and a spiritual — and that in the New
Testament, the Holy Spirit Himself has appropriated and applied to Christians the same names
under which the saints were known in Old Testament times. In the previous verse, the Apostle
warned the Philippian saints against the Judaisers, “Beware of the concision,” a term which
signifies “cutters off”; but he designates Christians as “the circumcision;” not because they were
the lineal descendants of the Patriarchs, but because by faith they enjoyed all the spiritual
privileges of God’s ancient people.
Circumcision was the seal of the covenant of God. It was a mark of identification and the sign of
separation. The spiritual import of circumcision was plainly taught in the Old Testament.
“Circumcise, therefore, the foreskin of your heart, and no longer be stiff-necked” (Deu 10.16);
“And the LORD your God will circumcise your heart, and the heart of your seed, to love the LORD
your God” (Deu 30.6); “Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and take away the foreskins of your
heart” (Jer 4.4). By circumcision, the Jew professed to cut off from his heart every carnal thought
and affection, that he might thereafter serve God in spirit and in truth, devoting himself to Him
alone, putting all his trust in Him. The same is true of the real Christian. See Gal 5.24, Col 2.11.27
Circumcising the Jewish babe on the eighth day, foreshadowed the dedicating of himself to God
of the babe in Christ. It also signified the removal of our natural hardness of heart, the iniquity of
it (by the Spirit’s conviction) being laid open to our view, which is accompanied by pain or
contrition for sin, and shame because of it. Thus, when the Apostle affirms of Christians, “we are
the circumcision” he means we have the spiritual substance and reality of which the fleshly Israel
had only the name and sign; just as when the Lord Jesus said, “Whoever does the will of My Father
who is in heaven, the same is My brother, and sister, and mother” (Mat 12.50). He signified that
He holds them in that relationship; He loves them and feels for them.
“One shall say, I am the Lord’s; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel” (Isa
44.5). Here is a remarkable prophecy which announced centuries beforehand, the very thing for
which we are contending in this article: namely, that the New Testament saints should be known
by the same names as were the Old Testament believers. Since it is highly probable that the
attention of very few of our readers has ever been seriously directed to this passage, let us take a
closer, though brief, look at it.
The above prophecy begins at verse 1 of Isaiah 44, and is addressed to that remnant from among
the Jews which is “according to the election of grace,” to a spiritual “Israel” among the nation of
Israel. To that favoured remnant, the Lord promises an effusion or outpouring of His Spirit. See
27 Gal 5:24 And those who are Christ's have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires. Col 2:11 In Him you were

also circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, by putting off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the
circumcision of Christ;

40

verse 3.28 Note very carefully that the figurative expressions which are found in the first half of
that verse are definitely explained in the second half — this supplies a most valuable key to
understanding many passages in the Prophets, in which God promises to give “water” etc., but
which the gross materialists of our day carnalize, instead of viewing them spiritually. Then, in
verse 4, we are shown the blessed effects of this outpouring of the Spirit which occurred on the
day of Pentecost. Verse 5 gives us the success of the Apostolic ministry among the Gentiles, who
were not called by the name Israel, but who would now reckon themselves of the posterity of
Jacob in a spiritual sense, and Israelites “indeed”!
“Doubtless it looks further yet, to the conversion of the Gentiles, and the multitudes of those
who, upon the effusion of the Spirit after Christ’s ascension, would be joined to the Lord, and
added to the Church. These converts are ‘one and another.’ They are very many, of different
ranks and nations, and all are welcome to God, Col 3.11.29 When one does it, another, by his
example, will be invited to do it, and then another. First, they will resign themselves to God. Not
one in the name of the rest, but every one for himself will say, ‘I am the Lord’s. He has an
incontestable right to rule me, and I submit to Him, to all His commands, to all His disposals; I
am and will be His only, His wholly, His forever.’ Second, they will incorporate themselves with
the people of God, ‘call themselves by the name of Jacob,’ forgetting their own people and their
father’s house, and desirous to wear the character and garb of God’s family. They will love all
God’s people, associate with them, give them the right hand of fellowship, etc. Third, they will
do this very solemnly. They ‘will subscribe with their hand unto the Lord,’ as in confirming a
bargain, a man sets his hand to it, and delivers it as his act and deed.” — Matthew Henry
Another Old Testament prophecy which announced the same blessed truth is found in Jer 31.31,
“Behold, the days come, says the LORD, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel,
and with the house of Judah.” The “days come” refers to the Christian dispensation, as
unequivocally established by the Apostle’s application of this passage in Heb 8.8-12. The “new
covenant” (cf. Luke 22.20, 2Cor 3.6) is in contrast to the Mosaic covenant. The houses of Israel
and Judah are to be understood mystically, as including all those who are “fellow citizens with
the saints, and of the Household of God” (Eph 2.19), the middle wall of partition being broken
down.
“Who the persons are with whom this covenant is made: ‘the house of Israel and Judah,’ that is,
with the Gospel church, the Israel of God, on which peace shall rest (Gal 6.16); with the spiritual
seed of believing Abraham, and praying Jacob. Judah and Israel had been two separate
kingdoms, but were united after their return, in the joint favours God bestowed upon them; so
Jews and Gentiles are one in the Gospel church and covenant.” — Matthew Henry
Still another Old Testament prophecy announcing the same thing is found in Hos 1.10,
“Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be
measured nor numbered; and it shall come to pass that in the place where it was said to them,
you are not my people, there it shall be said to them, you are the sons of the living God.”
How many have been taught (this writer included) that this refers to God’s future dealings with
carnal Israel! But the New Testament makes it unmistakably plain that it is God’s elect among the
Gentiles, those belonging to the spiritual “Israel,” who are in view here. In Rom 9.24, Paul says,
“Even us, whom He has called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles.” He proves this with
“As He also says in Hosea, I will call them My people, who were not My people; and her beloved,

28 Isa 44:3 For I will pour water on him who is thirsty, And floods on the dry ground; I will pour My Spirit on your

descendants, And My blessing on your offspring;
29 Col 3:11 where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcised nor uncircumcised, barbarian, Scythian, slave nor free,
but Christ is all and in all.

41

who was not beloved. And it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said to them, you
are not My people; there they shall be called the children of the living God” (Rom 9.25, 26).
“It is certain that this promise (Hos 1.10) had its accomplishment in setting up the kingdom of
Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel, and bringing both Jews and Gentiles into it; for these
words are applied to it by Paul and Peter (1Pet 2.10). ‘Israel’ here is the Gospel church, the
spiritual Israel.” — Matthew Henry
“But you are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people; that you
should show forth the praises of Him who has called you out of darkness into His marvelous
light; who in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God; who had not obtained
mercy, but now have obtained mercy” (1Pet 2.9, 10).
It is of great importance that we recognize that the Old Testament abounds in typical promises
and prophecies. The various appellations which are here given to Christians, are borrowed from
the descriptive names used of the nation of Israel under a former dispensation, and they belong
to the people of God under a new economy, in a far higher sense and with a much deeper meaning
than they had of old. The New Testament Church is the antitype of Israel at Sinai. The language
of 1Pet 2.10 was another reference to Hos 1.10. Carnal Israel having proved unfaithful, all its
spiritual privileges have been transferred to the New Testament church. See Mat 21.43!
“In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up its breaches; and I
will raise up his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old: That they may possess the remnant
of Edom, and of all the heathen, who are called by My name, says the LORD who does this” (Amos
9.11, 12). We are not left to guess at the meaning of this prophecy, for its terms are infallibly
explained to us in the New Testament. After Peter had related to the church at Jerusalem how the
Holy Spirit had been poured out upon the household of Cornelius, James affirmed, “Simeon has
declared how God at the first visited the Gentiles, to take out of them a people for His name. And
to this agree the words of the prophets; as it is written, After this I will return, and will build again
the tabernacle of David, which has fallen down; and I will build again its ruins, and I will set it up:
That the residue of men might seek after the Lord, and all the Gentiles, on whom My name is
called, says the Lord, who does all these things” (Act 15.14-17).
“David’s tabernacle was to be rebuilt, and his kingdom restored by the Messiah, but in a spiritual
way; for the ‘tabernacle of David’ means the spiritual kingdom or church of Christ.... ‘And I will
build again its ruins, and I will set it up,’ which has been done by breaking down the middle wall
of partition between Jew and Gentile, and letting the latter into the Gospel church with the
former.... ‘That the residue of men might seek after the Lord,’ — the Builder and Proprietor of
this tabernacle, and who dwells in it — that they might attend His worship, pray to Him, and
seek Him for life and salvation. In Amos those are called ‘the remnant of Edom,’ meaning the
remnant according to the election of grace among the Gentiles — the Jews generally call all other
nations, and especially the Roman empire, Edom.” — John Gill
We trust that sufficient has now been said to convince every candid reader that the name “Israel”
is often used in the Old Testament in a mystical sense, as well as literal; and that there are
spiritual “Jews” as well as carnal ones. When the Lord said to the woman of Canaan (testing her
faith), “I was not sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel” (Mat 15.24), He certainly did
not mean that He had been sent only to the fleshly descendants of Jacob, for He said to some of
them, “But you do not believe, because you are not of My sheep” (Joh 10.26). No, it was to the lost
sheep of the mystical or spiritual “house of Israel” that He was sent. The spiritual “Israel” is also
in view in such passages as John 1.31; Act 5.31; 13.23; 28.20 — namely, that “Israel” whom the
Father elected, the Son redeemed, and the Spirit regenerates. O what praise is due to His sovereign
grace, if writer and reader belong to “the Israel of God” (Gal 6.16).

42

Part V