PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 13 of 18
The Law of God

---

1. THE LAW OF GOD
When the Son of God took upon Him the form of a servant, He announced, “I delight to do your
will, O My God: yes, your law is within My heart” (Psa 40.8). The sweet Psalmist of Israel declared,
“The law of your mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver... O how love I your law!
it is my meditation all the day... Great peace have they who love your law: and nothing offends
them” (Psa 119.72, 97, 165). The Apostle wrote to the Gentiles, “The law is holy, and the
commandment holy, just, and good... The law is spiritual... I delight in the law of God after the
inward man” (Rom 7.12, 14, 22). In view of these passages, how solemn and how sad is the
opposition against the holy Law of God that we now behold on every side.
It is grievous beyond expression to find so many who refused the fables of “Higher Criticism,” and
who have boldly stood for the full inspiration and Divine authority of the Sacred Scriptures, using
their influence against the holy Law of God, and telling their hearers that the few now left who
insist upon the law being the believer’s Rule of Life, only desire to “bring them into bondage.”
Satan indeed secured a great triumph when he succeeded in getting the “champions of orthodoxy”
to declare that Christians are dead to the law in every sense, and that its requirements are no
longer binding upon them. The vagaries of “Dispensationalism” have had much to do with this
modern outcry against the Law of God. And it is unspeakably solemn to think of what their
proponents will have to answer for in the Day to come, when they must render an account to the
Law-Giver Himself. O that it may please the Holy Spirit to open the eyes of some of them before
it is too late.
There have been four chief mistakes made by our moderns on the subject of the Law. First, that it
was never given by God until He promulgated it upon Mount Sinai. Second, that it was given only
to and for the nation of Israel, the fleshly descendants of Jacob. Third, that Christians are not
under it in any sense, and that every effort to press it upon them is an attempt to deprive them of
their spiritual liberty. Fourth, that law and grace are mutually antagonistic, and can no more be
combined than oil and water; that they are opposing principles, the one being the enemy of the
other. These are the principal errors which have been vigorously propagated the past two or three
generations by many who were, and are, regarded as the leading contenders for the Faith once
delivered to the saints. Is it too much to ask the reader to follow us now as we seek to challenge
these positions, to test them by Holy Writ?
Before proceeding further, let us give a definition of what we mean by the Law of God.
“It is the eternal rule of righteousness, which is essential to the being and glory of God’s moral
government and kingdom. And, in a sense, it is the foundation of it, pointing out and declaring
the duty of rational creatures, or moral agents — what is fit and proper to be required of them
— and containing the rule of God’s conduct toward them, as their Moral Governor”
— Sam Hopkins, 1800.
That “eternal rule of righteousness” was formally summarized in the Ten Commandments which
were written by the finger of Jehovah on the two tablets of stone. Those we speak of as “the moral
law” in distinction from the ceremonial law.
“Question 93. What is the moral law?
“Answer: The moral law is the declaration of the will of God to mankind, directing and binding
every one to personal, perfect, and perpetual conformity and obedience to it, in the frame and
disposition of the whole man, soul and body, and in performance of all those duties of holiness
and righteousness which he owes to God and man: promising life upon fulfilling it, and
threatening death upon the breach of it.

51

“Question 94: is there any use of the moral law to man since the Fall?
“Answer: Although no man since the Fall can attain righteousness and life by the moral law, yet
there is great use of it common to all men, as well as peculiar either to the unregenerate, or the
regenerate.
“Question 95: of what use is the moral law to all men?
“Answer: the moral law is of use to all men, to inform them of the holy nature and will of God,
and of their duty binding them to walk accordingly; to convince them of their disability to keep
it, and of the sinful pollution of their nature, hearts, and lives; to humble them in the sense of
their sin and misery, and thereby help them to a clearer sight of the need they have of Christ,
and of the perfection of His obedience.” — Westminster Catechism
The “Westminster Catechism” was drawn up by many of the ablest of the Puritans, assembling
first in 1643. It is still the standard of the Scottish Presbyterians, and was adopted by the synod of
New York and Philadelphia in 1788. We have transcribed the above, not because we regard them
as of any final authority, but because the definitions given are superior to any that we can frame.
“What is the moral law? I define it to be the holy, just, and good will of God made known and
promulgated to His creatures in all those particulars in which He requires their perfect
obedience, in order for their happiness. The law is the revelation of His will: for the Almighty
Creator and sovereign Lord of Heaven and earth governs all His works and creatures according
to the good pleasure of His own will.
“1. The Lord God, the Almighty Creator of all things visible and invisible, has an unalienable
right to make laws for the government of His creatures. This right is founded in His absolute
dominion on and sovereignty over them. They are His property, the work of His hands. He has
created and made them, and not they themselves. Their life, and all things belonging to it are
His, coming from His gift, and continued by His bounty; and therefore He has a most
indisputable claim to their obedience. What He requires, they must perform; because they are
His creatures. The relation between the Creator and His creatures puts them under a necessity
to obey His law and will, or else suffer whatever He threatens to inflict upon their disobedience.
“2. The Law of the Lord God, the Almighty Creator, is unalterable. It does not change; for it is
the copy of God’s most holy mind and will, in which there can be no variableness, nor shadow
of turning. If the mind and will of God were to change, then God would be a changeable being;
and whatever is changeable is imperfect; but God is perfect, therefore His mind and will cannot
change. His Word He will not break, nor alter the Law that has gone out of His mouth. His
infinite wisdom and His almighty power stand engaged to maintain its dignity, that it may
always be a holy, just, and good law, which He will not break or alter.
“3. The moral law, which the Lord God revealed to Adam in Paradise, required of him perfect
uninterrupted obedience. The whole moral law is summed up in one word, love; love to God for
the blessings of creation and providence, and love to man for God’s sake. This love was the
indispensable homage due to the Creator. It could not be alienated from Him, and given to any
other object without idolatry; for which reason the moral law is unalterable. If a man withdraws
his love in the least from God, he breaks that law which positively enjoins him to love the Lord
his God with all his heart, with all his soul, with all his mind, and with all his strength.
“4. The law given to Adam being unalterable, all his descendants are bound to keep it; for they
are all under the law, as God’s creatures. His will is the indispensable rule of their obedience.
He requires their love, and if they refuse to give it to Him, then their will is opposite to His,
which is rebellion against their sovereign Lord, and which must bring upon them swift
destruction.” — W. Romaine, 1760.

52

The law was given to Adam in a twofold manner: subjectively and objectively. Subjectively, God
endowed our first parents with a nature suited to and responding to all the requirements of His
holy will. The Creator placed in Adam’s heart holy instincts and inclinations toward whatever He
commanded, and an aversion for all which He prohibited. As it is the “nature” of beasts to care for
their young, for birds to build nests before they lay their eggs, for ants to lay up a store of food for
the winter, so it was the “nature” of unfallen man to love and fear God, and seek His glory in a
spiritual manner. This was wrought into the very constitution of his soul and spirit, enlightening
his understanding, inclining his affections, and moving his will Godward. He was endowed with
inward abilities suited to every duty required from him. It is one of the many errors of Plymouth
Brethren (echoed from Socinianism) that Adam merely had a negative “innocence,” and lacked a
positive righteousness and holiness.
In proof of what has been affirmed in the preceding paragraph, we appeal to Gen 1.26, “And God
said, Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness.” This cannot mean less than this: that in
his original state, man reflected in his nature the moral perfections of God — love, wisdom,
holiness. Adam was endowed with spiritual life; this is clear from the fact that on the day he
disobeyed his Maker, he died spiritually — and he could not have done so unless he had first been
in possession of spiritual life. Adam and all his posterity, as federally represented by him, were
originally in possession of spiritual life, is clear from Eph 4.18, where his fallen children are
declared to be “alienated from the LIFE OF GOD”: how could they be “alienated from” that life, had
it never been theirs? The Law of God was written on Adam’s heart in the day of his creation; this
formed his very “nature,” or the characteristic constitution of his soul (distinguishing him from
the beasts), and his being created in the image and likeness of God, signified that his nature
reflected His moral perfections. This is clear from the fact that in regeneration, the elect are
“renewed in knowledge after the image of Him who created him” (Col. 3.10). This is amplified in
Eph 4.24 as, “which is created after God, in righteousness and true holiness.”
Though all his descendants fell in and with Adam, who is their federal head, and have inherited
from him a depraved nature and constitution, being born into this world “dead in trespasses and
sins” — nevertheless, they still bear clear traces of that Law of God which was originally written
on their first parent’s heart. Positive proof of this is furnished in Rom 2.14, 15, “For when the
Gentiles, who do not have the law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, not having
the law (the scriptural revelation of it), are a law unto themselves: they show the work of the law
written in their hearts.” The “work of the law” is that which the law does; namely, it instructs
concerning the goodness and badness of actions, teaching men what is right and wrong. In
honouring their parents, paying their debts, being kind to the poor, men do (some of) “the things
contained in the law,” for those are actions which the law prescribes; and thereby they give
evidence that the law was once written on their hearts. The effects of it are sufficient to render
men inexcusable, but not enough to direct them in the way of holiness and happiness.
But Adam also had the Law of God set before him objectively. Being “made upright” (Ecc 7.29),
or perfectly holy, necessarily supposes a rule of conduct, or that there was a standard to determine
right and wrong in moral character and action. In other words, man was placed under moral
government, which supposes a law requiring perfect obedience of him — defining his whole duty
— and forbidding all disobedience on pain of suffering the just desert of it. He was required to
love God with all his heart, and his neighbor as himself; and to express this in all proper ways;
and to obey every precept which God would give him. To suppose otherwise would be to deny that
man was treated as a moral agent at his creation. Nor does this conclusion rest merely on logical
supposition. While it be true that no particular account is found in Genesis of man’s being placed
under this moral government, yet it may be clearly demonstrated from what has since been
revealed.

53

The Apostle Paul, speaking of the law under which all mankind are bound, asserts the tenor of it
in these words, “Cursed is every one that does not continue in all things which are written in the
book of the law, to do them” (Gal 3.10). Now that “law” must have existed before man sinned, and
while he had opportunity and a capacity to “continue” to do everything required by it. For if when
he was in those circumstances, man was not under law, with this sanction, and bound by it, there
could be no reason or propriety in making this requirement of such a penalty — not when man
had already violated it, which rendered it impossible for him to do what it required. It necessarily
follows, therefore, that man was originally made under the law, when in a state of innocence, and
the law pronounced a curse on him if he failed to render perfect obedience!
This is further confirmed by what the Apostle says of the law given to man in his primitive state;
namely, that it was “(ordained) unto life” (Rom 7.10), and that the man who does the things
required by it “shall live by them” (Rom 10.5). This must refer to the original law given to man
when innocent, or before he sinned; for no such law could be ordained or given “unto life,” that
is, proposing and promising life, on this condition: since sin took place. For it is impossible that,
since the first apostasy, men should obtain “life” in this way! The Apostle plainly observes this in
his own case: “the commandment which was ordained (or “given”) unto life, I found to be unto
death” (Rom 7.10). Thus, the law given to man in the day of his creation, and which threatened
death for transgression, also promised life to him upon obedience!
A careful study of the book of Genesis reveals the fact that, from the beginning, all the posterity of
Adam were under the Law of God, and that they possessed a knowledge of it. It is passing strange
that anyone should imagine the opposite: Rom 4.5 declares plainly enough, “Where there is no
law, there is no transgression.” If the early descendants of Adam had not been under the Law of
God, then they would have been left without any Divine standard for the regulation of their
conduct; they would have been without any moral government; and consequently, none of their
actions would have been either good or evil. What gross absurdities a departure from Holy Writ
reduces us to!
“Sin is not imputed when there is no law” (Rom 5.13). What could be plainer than that? If from
Adam to Moses, men had not been under the Law of God, then none of their actions would have
deserved punishment; for it is only a breach of God’s law which subjects men to God’s displeasure
and penalty. How could God charge Cain with the murder of Abel, if there had been no law
forbidding murder? By what authority did Noah curse his son (which curse was approved by God
Himself) if there was then no commandment to “honour” parents? Why was Abimelech held guilty
for taking to himself the wife of Abraham, if there had been no law forbidding it? God Himself
told him “I also withheld you from sinning against Me: therefore I did not suffer you to touch her”
(Gen 20.6). “Sinning” against what? Why, the commandment, “you shall not commit adultery”!
Why should Judah say “Bring her out, and let her be burnt” (Gen 38.24) when he learned his
daughter-in-law had “played the harlot,” unless the same law in Leviticus 21.9 had then been in
force: “And the daughter of any priest, if she profanes herself by playing the whore, she profanes
her father: she shall be burnt with fire”!
Noah was a “preacher of righteousness” (2Pet 2.5), and the standard or rule of “righteousness” is
the law. Noah pressed upon the Antediluvians the holy claims of God, denounced their rebellions
against Him, and threatened them with certain doom awaiting them if they did not repent and
turn from their evil ways. Sending the Flood upon the world of the ungodly, is clear proof that
God was then “imputing sins” and executing the penalty of His law. Once more: “I made a
covenant with my eyes; why then should I think upon a maid?” (Job 31.1). Read through the whole
of that chapter, and then ask, If the holy Law of God was unknown to men in those early times,
where had Job learned such a high standard of morality and piety? An echo will still answer
“where!” O the blindness of men who affirm that there was no Divine law given before Sinai.

54