PURITAN GOLD -- Exposition of 1 John by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 39
Introduction and The Humanity of Christ (1:1)

---

Introduction
When we completed our 1,500-page exposition of John’s Gospel more than twenty years ago, we were urged to take up
the First Epistle of John, but felt quite incompetent to engage in it. The closing books of the New Testament, as their position indicates, require their expositor to possess a fuller knowledge of God’s Word and a more mature spiritual experience
than do the earlier ones. The style of John’s Epistle is quite different from that of the other apostles, being more abstract,
and for that reason more difficult of apprehension and elucidation. We still feel very unfit for the task upon which we are
now entering, but if we wait until we deem ourselves spiritually qualified it will never be essayed. During the past quarter of
a century we have given no little prayerful thought to its contents, and have studied carefully all the writings of others on it
which the divine providence has brought our way. The benefits of, and gleanings from this we shall now share with our
Christian friends.
Not only is John’s Epistle much more difficult than his Gospel (which is manifestly designed for babes in Christ, though
even the ‘fathers’ never outgrow it) and the other apostolic writings, but it does not lend itself so readily to expositions of
equal length. Some of its contents afford much more scope to a sermonizer than do others; and thus, while a whole article
may be profitably devoted to certain single verses, others require to be grouped together, and because of this the reader is
likely to be disappointed at the varying lengths of their treatment. It is perhaps for these reasons that comparatively little
has been written upon this epistle—scarcely anything during the past fifty years. So far as we know, none of the Puritans
attempted a systematic exposition of the same, for N. Hardy’s (1665) scarcely comes under that category. Yet this portion of
God’s Word is equally necessary, important, and valuable for His children as are all the others, though what they are likely
to get out of it will largely depend upon their acquaintance with all preceding books and with the constancy and intimacy of
their communion with the Triune God.
A brief word concerning its writer. So far as we are aware, no evangelical of any weight has ever denied that this epistle
was written by the same person of blessed memory as the one to whom the fourth Gospel is unanimously attributed. There
is clear and conclusive evidence, both external and internal, of this. As Barnes stated of the epistle: “It is referred to by Polycarp at the beginning of the second century, it is quoted by Papias and also by Ireneus.” It is found in the old Syriac version,
which was probably made very early in the second century. Internally the evidence is strong that the same hand wrote this
epistle as penned the fourth Gospel. The resemblances are many and striking, the modes of expression sufficient to identify
the one employing them. The similarity of the opening verse of each is too close, yet the variations too marked, to have been



made by an imposter. The reference to the “new commandment” (never mentioned by the other apostles) in 2:8 (and see
3:11) finds its source in 13:34 of John’s Gospel. The reader may also compare 3:1 with John 1:12; 3:2 with John 17:24; 3:8
with John 8:44; 3:13 with John 15:20; 4:9 with John 3:16, etc.
To whom it was written
It is correctly designated one of the “General Epistles,” for it is not addressed to any particular individual or local assembly. Obviously it is designed for the whole family of God. Yet, as one reads it through, one gets a clear impression that John
was intimately acquainted with those who first read his letter, that the majority of them were the seals of his own ministry,
as his repeated “my little children” seems to indicate. As we shall yet have occasion to show it was Jewish Christians who
were immediately concerned; 5:13 makes it evident that John wrote to believers, and by linking that verse with 2:3-5, we
perceive that it was his design to aid them in the important task of self-examination, that they might be more fully assured
of their interest in Christ. From 2:18-26, we learn that the original recipients of this epistle were being assailed by false
teachers, and it was John’s object to counteract (not refute seriatim!) their error, and confirm the same in their most holy
faith.
Though there is nothing in the epistle to tell us the date when it was written, yet we may approximate it pretty closely.
That it was penned much later than Paul’s epistles appears from the fact that with John “the world” and “the whole world”
(5:19) comprise all that is outside Christianity. Not so with Paul: in his time there were two distinct camps hostile to Christianity—Judaism and heathendom. But the ancient kingdom of God had now passed away. The temple of Jerusalem was
destroyed. After A.D. 70 the Jews had no power to persecute Christians. It was manifestly written after his Gospel, for such
statements as 2:17 and 5:6 are unintelligible unless the reader has a knowledge of his Gospel—not only in general, but in its
detailed expressions. The entire absence of such terms as affliction, suffering, tribulation, intimates that this letter was
composed when external opposition to Christianity had largely subsided, when outward hostility was giving place to the
corruption of the truth from within. Thus it must have first seen the light very near the close of the first century.
In this epistle the enemies of the saints are neither Jews nor Gentiles as such, but “Antichrists,” counterfeit Christians.
Just as Satan himself is presented to us in the Scriptures under two outstanding characters—as the lion and as the serpent,
as adversary and as seducer—so are his emissaries and his children. There are two distinct classes by which the truth of God
is dishonoured: by those who oppose and corrupt it in doctrine, and by those who misrepresent and malign it in practice—
cf. the Sadducees (Act 23:8) and the Pharisees (Mat 23:3). Heretics, who pervert the Scriptures or openly contradict the fundamentals of the Faith, are the more easily recognized: against them the apostle warns in 2:18, 26; 3:7; 4:1-3. But numerous
formalists and hypocrites shelter behind an empty profession, and are not so readily identified, for they hold the letter of the
truth, acknowledging it with their lips, though they walk not in it nor are their lives transformed by it. Concerning these
John has much to say. Right from the beginning he distinguishes sharply between the real Christian and the nominal one
(1:6-7) and continues doing so (2:3-5, etc.).
The several aims of the apostle are easily perceived: in general it was to make a practical application of his Gospel, as appears from a comparison of 5:13, with John 20:31, and as 2:7, confirms. John sought that his beloved children should have
just views of their divine Saviour, an intelligent faith in Him, and that they might adorn their profession by a holy and consistent walk—2:1. It is evident from his “I have not written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it”
(2:21) that he was not addressing himself to those who were uninstructed, but rather to those who were well indoctrinated—compare also 2:20, 27. Thus his purpose was not so much to inform as to edify, not to tell them something new, but to
confirm them in what they had already heard. This was the more necessary because some of their original number had
apostatized (2:19) and false teachers were seeking to corrupt them. Let not their faith be shaken by the former, and let them
heed his warnings and then they would not be drawn away by the wiles of the latter.
A careful reading of the epistle makes it plain that another important end which the apostle had before him was to confute those who taught that because salvation is by grace God’s people are not “under the Law” or required to keep the divine
commandments. Antinomianism had raised its hideous head even in his day, and it devolved upon John to counteract the
same. This it is which explains his frequent reference to “the commandments” (2:4, etc.) which, in its singular or plural
form, occurs no less than thirteen times in this epistle. As students of ecclesiastical history are aware, those known as “The
Libertines” had attained unto considerable prominence by the end of the first century. Their very name is sufficient to indicate their character. Peter, in his second epistle, described their forerunners as “false prophets” who, “while they promise
them liberty, they themselves are the servants of corruption” (2:1, 19), and Jude had spoken of them as “ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness,” in this way, “denying the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ” (verse 4).
John denounces them as “Antichrists.”
There is little indication that John wrote according to a preconceived and definite plan, yet his thoughts are orderly.
While the epistle is far from being a systematic doctrinal treatise, nevertheless, for its understanding, a close acquaintance
with the distinctively doctrinal epistles preceding it is requisite. One expositor thereon said, “I am deeply convinced, after
years of thought about it, that it can be studied aright exegetically only when it is studied theologically...no one is competent to deal in detail with this wonderful book who is not familiar with the evangelical system as a whole, and able therefore
to appreciate the bearing of John’s line of thought in connection with it” (R. Candlish, 1866). That remark is, in our judg-



ment, borne out by the position his epistle occupies in the Sacred Canon. Yet another and higher qualification is needed,
namely that spiritual-mindedness which is the fruit of mature Christian experience. But the most difficult part of the expositor’s task here is to trace the connection of the apostle’s successive lines of thought. Our main endeavour will be to bring
out the general scope and tenor of his teaching as simply as we can.
“The true knowledge of Christ is the one only key by which all the treasures contained in this epistle can be opened, for
it contains a spiritual treatise on communion with Christ, and with the Father in Him, through the indwelling of the Holy
Spirit in us. We can have no communion with the Three in Jehovah but as we have a distinct scriptural knowledge of the
revelation given concerning Them in the sacred record. No man can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Spirit. This epistle...sets forth the real fellowship which the apostles and saints in that age had with the Holy Trinity, and what all the saints
in all succeeding ages are to expect and enjoy, in their measure and degree, until the same is consummated with the Eternal
Three in the state of everlasting glory. As this epistle begins with this most sublime subject, so it is pursued throughout the
whole of it: in showing the fruits and effects which the true knowledge of and communion with the Lord produce in the
minds, lives and conversations of such as know Him, and have free and frequent access to Him” (S. E. Pierce, 1817).
What has just been quoted gives much the best summary and coincides most closely with our own concept of anything
we have seen on the subject. It intimates that its grand theme is fellowship with God in and through Christ. Where that is
enjoyed by individual saints, it necessarily leads to fellowship one with another. As usual, the key is hung upon the door, for
in 1:3 the apostle states that the design before him is “that you also may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is
with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ.” This fellowship is the quintessence of blessedness, but only the regenerate
enter into it. It is “in the light,” with the Holy One, and therefore impossible for those who are dead in trespasses and sins
(1:5, 7). Yet the Christian’s infirmities, be they what they may, are not to be considered as hindrances to his communion
with the Lord, since full provision has been made for him in the all-sufficient antidote of Christ’s blood (1:7) and advocacy
(2:1). Later, John goes on to show that this fellowship is in righteousness and in love; but we will not further anticipate.
Among the many peculiarities of style which mark John in this epistle, we may mention that, negatively, there is almost
an entire absence of that logical reasoning that is so prominent in Paul’s epistles—which is just what might be expected
from a simple fisherman in contradistinction from a scholar. There is no “according as” or “for this cause.” “Wherefore”
occurs but once (3:12), and there it is a question “why?” “Therefore” is found in 2:24; 3:1, and 4:5; yet in neither instance as
a conclusion drawn from a preceding train of thought. Instead of the argumentative method, John is all for direct and positive assertions. Paul lays down a premise as a foundation on which he builds what follows; John simply affirms the truth in
simple form. And so it is in connection with the ministry of the Word. Some of God’s servants deal with their subjects prin1
cipally in a doctrinal way, others in a solemn method of pointed averment, yet both are used by the Spirit of God, and are
best suited to different types of Christians. The Lord is pleased to bestow a variety of gifts on His servants for the good of His
people at large.
John indeed has a style all his own, differing noticeably from all other New Testament writers. This epistle contains no
salutation, yet it breathes a spirit of warmth unto those addressed. No reference is made to either of the ordinances. No
prayer is recorded in it, though definite encouragement and instruction are given to praying souls. There are no predictions
in it, no delineation of the future as in the epistles of all his fellow apostles. Instead of describing the conditions which
should characterize “the last days,” he declares “it is the last time” (2:18). Instead of foretelling the appearing of a future
Antichrist, John refers to the Antichrists who were then upon the stage (2:18, and 4:3).
Turning to the positive side, one who attentively reads through the epistle at a sitting will at once be struck by the fact
that it possesses and combines certain definite qualities which at first sight seem quite opposed to each other. Its style of
expression is simple and unadorned. It abounds in words of one syllable and contains few that a child would have difficulty
in pronouncing. Its sense is clear and patent. Nevertheless, there is no lack of dignity in its language, and its matter is elevated and sublime. Its tone warms our hearts, yet the truth it expresses causes us to stand in awe. In it profoundest mysteries are touched upon and depths are sounded which no finite mind can fathom; still, its speech is plain, and the terms used
are non-technical. “He writes at once with the most commanding authority and most loving tenderness; with the profoundest wisdom and the most touching simplicity; the most searching knowledge of the heart, its difficulties and frailties, and
the most elevating and bracing courage and confidence; the gentlest affection, and the most pitiless and sternest condemnation of willful departure from the truth in practice or opinion” (Ellicott).
Much is said about love, and nowhere is a spirit of charity more admirably and forcibly inculcated. But there are also a
bold outspokenness and sternness which make us shrink. The love enjoined is far from being a sickly sentiment or effeminate weakness, being a holy grace, which instead of preventing faithful rebuke and severe denunciation promotes them. In
such verses as 1:5; 2:22; 3:8, 10, 15; 4:20; 5:10, we hear the voice of “the son of thunder” (Mar 3:17), vehement against every
insult to the majesty of the Lord. It is ostensibly written to promote assurance in the saints (5:13), yet nowhere else in the
Word are we so often called upon to close self-examination and unsparing testing of ourselves. This epistle might well be
termed a touchstone by which we may discern between the genuine gold and the counterfeit. It frequently utters the lan-


averment – assertion as a fact.



guage of confidence, yet as often uses that which is discriminating. As Spurgeon well said, “The apostle mingles caution
with caress, and qualifies the most soothing consolations with such stern warning that in well-nigh every sentence he constrains us to deep searching of heart.”
In our opening paragraph we mentioned the abstract (and absolute) character of many of John’s statements. It is most
important that the reader should understand this and bear it in mind. Failure to do so will lead to a serious misapprehension of many verses. In 1:3, he says “truly our fellowship is with the Father”—not “ought to be”; he speaks characteristically, taking no notice of the things which hinder it. To the “young men” he says, “You have overcome the wicked one” (2:13),
making no mention of their failures. “He that loves his brother abides in the light” (2:10)—nothing is said about the degree
of love, it is simply contrasted with “hatred” (ver. 11). “For whosoever is born of God overcomes the world” (5:4)—no account is there taken of the presence of the flesh with its unbelief and self-will. John abounds in brief factual statements. “We
know all things...you need not that any man teach you” (2:20, 27) is left unqualified. To John there are only two postures of
heart: for or against—the points of transition from the one to the other are ignored. Contrasts are put in their sharpest
form: light and darkness—no intermediate twilight; life and death—nothing which answers to mere existence.
Throughout the epistle there rings loudly the note of certainty. The two Greek words used for “know” occur no less than
thirty-six times in its five chapters, examples of which are: “We know that we have passed from death unto life...hereby we
know that we are of the truth” (3:14, 19). “Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us...And we have known and
believed the love that God hath to us” (4:13, 16). The epistle closes with another threefold “we know” (5:18-20). Again and
again the apostle describes simple but definite marks by which the child of God may be identified, and distinguish himself
from self-deceivers and hypocrites. Thus, it was not addressed to those who resided in “Doubting Castle,” and any who
dwell in its dismal dungeons should find here that which, by the divine blessing, will deliver him from there. Nor was it only
a small and particularly favoured class which shared the apostle’s own assurance, or only mature Christians, as his “I write
unto you, little children, because ye have known the Father” (2:13) shows.
That his epistle is an intensely practical one is evinced in many ways. For example, not once is the word “knowledge”
found in the form of a noun, but always as a verb. The same is true of “faith”; he almost invariably uses the verbal form.
With John doctrine is not mere dogma, but faith in action. Truth is not merely a theory, but an energy, which lives and
moves in the new life. There is scarcely any strictly “doctrinal” teaching, and very few direct exhortations. It is mainly the
vital and experimental side of things, and thus it is that the line of demarcation and separation is so sharply and often drawn
between genuine and graceless professors—not to discourage believers, but to inform and safeguard them against being
deceived and imposed upon. John did far more than deal with forms of error which were local and ephemeral, refuting those
of his day in a manner by which he enunciated principles of universal importance and of almost illimitable application—
equally suited to the exposure of error in every age.
It is remarkable how many different topics are introduced into this brief letter, so that we are almost justified in saying
with J. Morgan, “The whole realm of evangelical truth is traversed by the apostle.” Blessed it is to see how the balance of
truth is preserved there. No one would regard it as a theological treatise, yet most of the fundamentals of our faith are briefly set forth in it. The divine incarnation (1:1-3), the nature of God (1:5; 4:8), the atonement and advocacy of Christ (2:1-2),
the person and work of the Holy Spirit (3:24), regeneration (2:29), the Trinity (5:7), etc. The epistle is far from being an appeal to emotionalism, yet it bids believers, “Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us” (3:1), and while
affording no encouragement to rest upon feelings (as its repeated dogmatic “we know” shows), yet it is written that “our joy
may be full.” While it is not a discourse on humanitarianism, it stresses practical altruism (3:17-18). Though not a discussion of eschatology, yet the return of Christ (2:28) and, “the day of judgment” (4:17) are mentioned. Thus this epistle supplies an admirable corrective to one-sided views of the Christian life.


Charles H. Spurgeon (1834-1892): Influential English Baptist. History’s most widely read preacher (apart from those found in Scripture). Today,
there is available more material written by Spurgeon than by any other Christian author, living or dead. Born at Kelvedon, Essex, England.
Doubting Castle – the place in John Bunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress (1678) where Christian and Faithful were tormented by Giant Despair after
leaving the commanded narrow way for an easier way to the Celestial City.




The Humanity of Christ
1 John 1:1
“That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked
upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life”
This epistle bears no superscription as do all others (save Hebrews), including John’s own second and third ones, and
makes no reference to any particular class of persons by which we may ascertain to whom it was first addressed. We know
from Galatians 2:9, that John was one of the apostles who ministered to the circumcision, and such expressions as “from the
beginning” in 2:7, “you have known him” in 2:13, and “you have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many
antichrists...they went out from us” (2:18-19) intimate that it was primarily Jewish Christians to whom John wrote. Yet
mention of “the world” in 4:14, and the “whole world” in 2:2, and the admonition “keep yourselves from idols” in 5:21, are
more than hints that it was designed for Gentile believers too. The epistle is remarkable for the absence of any local coloring
or personal references. While enunciating vital truths and combating fundamental errors, the names of no places or persons
are mentioned. Thus it contains nothing which is merely ephemeral or provincial, but that only which is suited to all God’s
children till the end of time.
It is, then, a general epistle: not to any particular assembly, but for the whole family of God. In accordance with that fact
we find no reference is here made to elders or deacons. The privileges described and the duties enjoined pertain alike to the
entire Household of Faith. John deals with vital and basic principles, and does not (like the other apostles) point out how
they are to be applied to the various relationships of life. Though he treats in some detail of both righteousness and love, he
gives no specific instances of how they are to be exercised between husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and
servants, subjects and kings. He even avoids the term “saints” preferring to address his readers by the more familiar “brethren” (2:7) and “my brethren” (3:13), though more frequently employing the endearing expression “little children” and “my
little children” which no other apostle did (unless Galatians 4:19, be the sole exception). This has led the thoughtful to conclude that John must have been of a great age—certainly there would be no propriety in one of fewer years so addressing
even the “fathers” (2:12-13).
Since the apostle was about to write on fellowship, his design and scope in the opening verses appear to be twofold. First,
he intimates that the initial requirement for communion with God is the possession of divine life in the soul, and that this
life is found in the incarnate Son, here designated “the Word of life” and “that Eternal Life.” Calvin came very near the
mark when he opened his commentary on this epistle by saying, “He shows first that life has been exhibited to us in Christ;
which, as it is an incomparable good, ought to rouse and inflame all our powers with a marvelous desire for it and with the
love of it. It is said, indeed, in a few plain words, that life is manifested; but if we consider how miserable and horrible a condition death is, and what is the kingdom of glory and immortality, we shall perceive that there is something here more
magnificent than can be expressed in any words.” It is ever the Spirit’s object to magnify that blessed One who is despised
and rejected of men, and here He does so by presenting Him as the Source and Fount of life.
The second obvious aim of the apostle in his introductory sentence was to confirm the assurance of God’s children, and
show what a firm foundation has been laid for their fellowship with the Father and with His Son. “These words ‘which we
have heard, which we have seen with our eyes,’ etc. serve to strengthen our faith in the Gospel. Nor does he, indeed, without
reason, make so many asseverations; for since our salvation depends upon the Gospel, its certainty is in the highest degree
necessary. And how difficult it is to believe, every one of us knows too well by his own experience. To believe is not lightly to
form an opinion, or to assent only to what is said, but is a firm, undoubting conviction, so that we may dare to subscribe to
the truth as fully proved. It is for this reason that the apostle here heaps together so many things in confirmation of the
Gospel” (Calvin). The Gospel is no spurious invention of men, but is the annunciation of reliable witnesses who personally
consorted with Christ Himself (Luk 1:1-4).
The absence of John’s name from the opening verses of this epistle is in full harmony with the fact that in his Gospel he
never referred unto himself except when the occasion required him to do so, and then only by such a circumlocution as
“that other disciple” (Joh 20:3-4), or “that disciple whom Jesus loved” (21:7, 20)—not, it is observed, the boastful “that dis4

John Calvin (1509-1564) – the father of Reformed and Presbyterian theology. During the course of his ministry in Geneva, lasting nearly twenty-five
years, Calvin lectured to theological students and preached an average of five sermons a week in addition to writing a commentary on nearly every
book of the Bible as well as numerous treatises on theological topics. His correspondence fills eleven volumes. Born in Noyon, Picardie, France.



ciple who loved Jesus”! As there, so here, the writer retires into the background, unwilling to speak of himself, resembling
in this his namesake, who, when asked, “What sayest thou of thyself??” answered, “I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness” (Joh 1:22-23)—heard, but not seen. It may also be noted that John’s silence about himself is in beautiful accord
with his theme, for real fellowship so engages the heart with its Object as to lose sight of self. Yet, because his task required
it, he gives plain indication that he stood in the nearest possible relation to the One he adored, just as in his Gospel he was
wont to do so under similar circumstances.
“That which was from the beginning, which we have heard...of the word of life.” A superficial reading of this verse has
led many to conclude that John begins his epistle in the same way as he had his Gospel—by affirming that eternality of the
Son—but a more careful examination of its language should correct that impression. There are indeed several resemblances
between the two verses, yet there are notable differences. Each opens at once by presenting the person of Christ: without
any preliminaries, the Lord Jesus is immediately set before the reader. Both Gospel and epistle commence by referring to
Him under the title of “the Logos.” In each mention is made of “the beginning.” The contrasts are equally marked. In John
1:1, Christ is viewed absolutely, in His Godhead; here, relatively, as incarnate: in the former, His deity is contemplated; in
the latter, His humanity. There it is “in the beginning,” here “from the beginning,” which express entirely distinct concepts.
Quite another “beginning” is treated of: in the former, before time and creation began; in the latter, the opening of this
Christian era.
Two different interpretations have been given to the clause “that which was from the beginning.” First, that it refers to
Christ’s pre-incarnate and eternal existence, declaring what He was before He appeared on earth. Second, that it described
what characterized Christ from the time of His incarnation, after He became “manifest” on earth. That all things were created by our Lord we firmly believe; of His eternal preexistence we have not a shadow of doubt; but we do not think that is in
view here. Before anyone assumes that “in the beginning” and “from the beginning” are identical expressions, he should go
to the trouble of very carefully examining every instance in the New Testament where the latter is found and ascertain how
it is used. As he does so, he will discover it occurs in widely different connections and is employed in various senses. In 2
Thessalonians 2:13 (and probably there alone) it certainly has the force of eternity. In Matthew 19:8, “from the beginning”
signifies the commencement of human history. But in John 8:25; 15:27; 16:4, it clearly means from the start of our Lord’s
public ministry.
The words “from the beginning” in our opening verse are found six times more in this epistle, and in none of them do
they import eternity! “Brothers, I write no new commandment unto you, but an old commandment which you had from the
beginning. The old commandment is the word which you have heard from the beginning” (2:7)—from the lips of Christ.
“You have known him from the beginning” (2:13)—when He was first made manifest to you. The same is meant in 2:24, and
3:11. “The devil sins from the beginning” (3:8)—of human history, for “murderer” in John 8:44 is literally “manslayer.” In
the opening verse of John’s Gospel Christ is depicted in His eternal relation to the Godhead, but here in a time state, as incarnate, as the clauses which follow make clearly evident, for their obvious design is to demonstrate the reality of His man5
hood. The Son’s assumption of flesh and blood opened a new era, changing as it did the world’s calendar from A.M. to A.D.
Christ’s descent to this earth inaugurated a fresh “beginning,” when there was to be a “new covenant.” Now began to be
brought in the substance of all the Levitical shadows; now began the Messianic prophecies to receive their fulfillment.
Quotations from several orthodox expositors of the highest repute could be given to show that in what we have said
above no “strange doctrine” has been advanced. Let the following one suffice. The translator and annotator upon Calvin’s
commentary on this epistle said in his footnote to verse one, “It is more consistent with the passage to take ‘from the beginning’ here as from the beginning of the Gospel, from the beginning of the ministry of our Saviour, because what had
been from the beginning was what the apostles had heard and seen. That another view has been taken of those words has
been owing to an over-anxiety on the part of many, especially of the fathers, to establish the deity of our Saviour; but that is
what is sufficiently evident from the second verse.” It is the human nature of our Lord that verse one treats of, and most
assuredly that had an historical “beginning.”
Most of the commentators have had considerable difficulty with the prefatory “That which was from the beginning” and
varied have been the speculations as to why the neuter gender was used rather than “He who was.” Obviously, the words are
to be explained by the clauses which immediately follow: yet some deem even them to be too indefinite to enable us to arrive at any certainty. On the face of it, it appears incongruous to refer to a divine person as “that which”: on the other side,
one can scarcely speak of seeing and handling with our hands a “Message.” But no difficulty remains if we take the whole
verse to be treated of our Lord’s manhood. The humanity of Christ was not a person, but a thing which He condescended to
assume and take into union with His person. Proof of this is found in the words of the Angel to Mary, “that holy thing which
shall be born of you shall be called the Son of God” (Luk 1:35)—just as a woman is given the name of her husband as soon


A.M. to A.D. – Before A.D. (Latin Anno Domini, “the year of our Lord”) was generally adopted in the dating of documents, various other systems
were employed at different periods and in different countries. The reign of the Roman emperor Diocletian is usually called the “Era of the Martyrs,” and its abbreviation is A.M. (for Latin anno-martyrdum). The “Era of the Martyrs” is also called the “Diocletian Era” because it is dated from
284, the year this bitterly anti-Christian emperor began to reign. This is in recognition of the severe persecution of Christian churches under his
reign.



as she is wed to him. The Word’s becoming flesh and tabernacling among men marked a new beginning in the world’s history.
“That which was from the beginning.” Those words, when taken by themselves, are admittedly indefinite and mysterious; yet men have greatly added to their difficulty by making “from the beginning” synonymous with “in the beginning,” i.e.
without beginning. If “from the beginning” has the force of from eternity, then no satisfactory explanation can be given of
the neuter and abstract “that which,” for the allusion could not be to anything created, since matter is not from everlasting;
and so far as we have observed, none who take that view have made any real attempt to grapple with the difficulty. If “from
the beginning” signifies from eternity, then it must be a divine person that is in view, and in such case “He who was” would
be required. On the other hand, if the reference is to the divine incarnation, and more specifically still to the human nature
which the Son of God took unto Himself, all difficulty vanishes.
In our introductory remarks, reference was made to the fact that those whom John immediately addressed were being
assailed by heretical teachers (2:26). Many conjectures have been made as to the precise nature of their errors, and the
names of those who propagated them. Most probably they were a branch of the Gnostics, Ebion and Cerentheus being the
leaders; but this cannot be determined for sure. What we may be certain about them is, (1) that those who were then seeking to seduce John’s converts had themselves once been professing Christians, but later apostatized (2:19); and (2) that they
denied the reality of our Lord’s humanity (4:3). It is, then, with the design of counteracting that error that John here lays so
much emphasis upon the evidences which the incarnate Word had presented to the very senses of His apostles. The “Christian[?] Gnostics” taught that Christ’s body was but a phantasm, a mere temporary appearance assumed for the benefit of the
world.
“That which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled, of the Word of life”—the “that which was from the beginning” is repeated (identically in the Greek) in each of
the three clauses, in this way explaining it! In those words, John intimates (as the following verse more explicitly states) his
intention of describing an experience and knowledge of Christ with which he and his fellow apostles have been favoured. It
was far more than a message about life which had been delivered by word of mouth, more than a perfect but abstract ideal of
life, which he would treat of, namely that Life which had appeared in personal and human form in Jesus of Nazareth, the
promised Messiah, the incarnate Son, who had exhibited a life which was eternal and indestructible, even the very life of
God. John’s adding of one clause to another, in progressive and climacteric order, was designed not simply to show that he
was speaking about Jesus Christ and none other, but rather to declare that that which was to be announced concerning Him
was an absolute certainty and exhibited truth—not only the truth about Him, but what John himself had actually heard,
seen, and handled of Him.
Immediately after his opening clause, John proceeded to give proofs that Christ was really and verily man, bone of our
bone, flesh of our flesh: that “in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren” (Heb 2:17). His body was a palpable one—visible, audible, tangible. By it the Saviour made full demonstration to each sense of their bodies that His was as
real as were those of His apostles. The genuineness of Christ’s humanity—denied by the Gnostics and by those now calling
themselves Christian Scientists—is a cardinal doctrine of the faith once delivered to the saints, and for which we are bidden
to “contend earnestly.” In that body which God prepared Him (Heb 10:5)—which the Holy Spirit supernaturally produced
from the substance of His mother—He lived, died, rose again, ascended to heaven, where He is now beheld in its glorified
state; and in which He will yet come again (Act 1:11). At the divine incarnation the Son of God became what He was not
before—“being found in fashion as a man” (Phi 2:8). Our nature was taken into union with His divine person. Thus, the first
verse of our epistle is parallel with John 1:14, rather than with the opening verse of his Gospel.
John commences his epistle by setting before us God manifest in flesh, because He is the grand Subject of the Gospel,
the Object of our faith, the Foundation of our hope, the One who brings us to and unites us in fellowship with the Father.
The Gospel is no mere abstraction, but is inseparably connected with the Lord Jesus. As Levi Palmer (1902) so beautifully
expressed it, “As the ray of light depends upon the sun, and a wave of sea upon the ocean, so Gospel truth is but the acts,
and words, and glory of Christ.” As it is impossible to know and receive Christ apart from the Gospel, so we cannot receive
the Gospel except from Him. It was John’s design to make known what sure and firm ground our faith in the Gospel rests
upon. He relates not that which he had received second-hand, nor even what he had beheld in a vision, but rather that of
which he had first-hand and ocular acquaintance. What he was advancing was real and true, in contrast with all that is
merely imaginary, speculative, or dreamed about. His four verbs in verse one not only mark a progress from the more general to the more particular, but breathe a greater intensity as he proceeds.
“That which we have heard.” John was with Christ throughout the whole of His ministry, and chronicled more of what
He said than did any of his fellows. This is given the first place because the utterances of Christ are of more importance than
His miracles; so in his Gospel John recorded a greater number of His discourses than did the other evangelists. This indicates the reverential esteem in which he held the Lord’s teaching, as well as supplies guarantee of the accuracy of his report.
“Heard” includes more than the actual sound of His voice, namely all the gracious words which issued from His mouth, and
also possibly having a special allusion to John 13-16. “We have heard” goes deeper than the words of Christ falling upon
their ears: it signifies that their souls had felt the power of what He said—“Did not our heart burn within us, while he talked
with us by the way?” (Luk 24:32). If the enemies of Christ acknowledged, “Never man spake like this man,” what must the



regenerated apostles have felt? The Lord Jesus wrote nothing, but He spoke much, and we have great cause for thankfulness
that God moved the apostles to record so much of what He said, that we too may hear Him (via the printed page) for ourselves.
“That which we have seen.” This is by no means to be restricted to His miracles of healing and other supernatural works,
but understood as including the perfections displayed by His character and conduct as He, untiringly, “went about doing
good.” Seen, “with our eyes” is added for the purpose of emphasis, to show the verity and corporeality of Christ, that it is an
historical entity which is here in view. Here too the reference is not limited to the mere sight of their bodily eyes, but im6
plies also their spiritual perception of His peerless excellency. “That which we have looked upon.” This is no tautology, but
expresses a closer and more deliberate inspection, for which John (as one of the three in the innermost circle) had peculiar
opportunities. “Looked upon” is the same Greek word as “we beheld his glory” in John 1:14, and means to gaze at with desire and delight. “And our hands have handled” probably has both a special reference to His resurrection body and a more
general one to the closeness of their contact with Him during the days of His flesh; such precluding all possibility of any
optical illusion.
The physical experience of the favoured apostles, as set forth by the four verbs in verse 1, is duplicated in the spiritual
history of each Christian, and in the same progressive order. At first, his knowledge of Christ is limited to what he hears of
Him in the Gospel. Then, when the miracle of grace has been wrought within him, he sees Christ with the eyes of faith—
loving and giving Himself for him. Later, as he grows in grace, and becomes more and more enamoured of Him, he looks
upon Him more steadfastly and closely with the eyes of love and adoration; the result of all being that, in a spiritual way, he
handles Christ. He has become a bright, living, experiential reality to him. The matchless charms and superlative glories of
the Saviour make everything else appear mean and contemptible to him. The soul now has before it a heavenly Object, infinitely excelling all the perishing things of earth. It is an inestimable privilege if reader and writer are among those who can
say “we see Jesus” (Heb 2:9). Happy day, blessed hour, when our eyes were first opened to behold Him as the Redeemer of
our souls. Oh, to behold Him more distinctly and devotedly. The more we contemplate His peerless person, amazing love,
and perfect work, the sooner will sin lose its hold over us, the world its charms, and death be robbed of all terror.
For the young preacher we would suggest the following outline, “The Divine Incarnation”:
(1) The new era which it inaugurated, (Gal 4:4).
(2) Proofs of the reality of His humanity, (Joh 20:30-31).
(3) The witnesses of it, the apostles, (Luk 1:2, 4).
(4) The title here accorded Christ: “The Word of life”, (Act 3:15).
(5) The bearing of this verse on the theme of the epistle.
Under these heads may be arranged most of the material in this article.
