PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 24 of 51
Wisdom's Self-Praise

---

CHAPTER 24

Verse 1. Wisdom shall praise herself, and shall glory in the midst of her people.

Verse 2. In the congregation of the Most High shall she open her mouth, and triumph before His power.

Verse 3. I came out of the mouth of the Most High, and covered the earth as a cloud.

Verse 4. I dwelt in high places, and my throne is in a cloudy pillar.

Verse 5. I alone compassed the circuit of heaven, and walked in the bottom of the deep.

Verse 6. In the waves of the sea, and in all the earth, and in every people and nation, I got a possession.

Verse 7. With all these I sought rest, and in whose inheritance shall I abide?

Verse 8. So the Creator of all things gave me a commandment, and He that made me caused my tabernacle to rest, and said, Let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel.

Verse 9. He created me from the beginning before the world, and I shall never fail.

Verse 10. In the holy tabernacle I served before Him, and so was I established in Sion.

Verse 11. Likewise in the beloved city He gave me rest, and in Jerusalem was my power.

Verse 12. And I took root in an honorable people, even in the portion of the Lord's inheritance.

Verse 13. I was exalted like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypress tree upon the mountains of Hermon.

Verse 14. I was exalted like a palm tree in Engaddi, and as a rose plant in Jericho, as a fair olive tree in a pleasant field, and grew up as a plane tree by the water.

Verse 15. I gave a sweet smell like cinnamon and aspalathus, and I yielded a pleasant odor like the best myrrh, as galbanum, and onyx, and sweet storax, and as the fume of frankincense in the tabernacle.

Verse 16. As the turpentine tree I stretched out my branches, and my branches are the branches of honor and grace.

Verse 17. As the vine brought I forth pleasant savor, and my flowers are the fruit of honor and riches.

Verse 18. I am the mother of fair love, and fear, and knowledge, and holy hope. I therefore, being eternal, am given to all my children which are named of Him.

Verse 19. Come unto me, all ye that be desirous of me, and fill yourselves with my fruits.

Verse 20. For my memorial is sweeter than honey, and mine inheritance than the honeycomb.

Verse 21. They that eat me shall yet be hungry, and they that drink me shall yet be thirsty.

Verse 22. He that obeyeth me shall never be confounded, and they that work by me shall not do amiss.

Verse 23. All these things are the book of the covenant of the Most High God, even the law which Moses commanded for an heritage unto the congregations of Jacob.

Verse 24. Faint not to be strong in the Lord, that He may confirm you; cleave unto Him. For the Lord Almighty is God alone, and beside Him there is no other Savior.

Verse 25. He filleth all things with His wisdom, as Phison and as Tigris in the time of the new fruits.

Verse 26. He maketh the understanding to abound like Euphrates, and as Jordan in the time of the harvest.

Verse 27. He maketh the doctrine of knowledge appear as the light, and as Geon in the time of vintage.

Verse 28. The first man knew her not perfectly; no more shall the last find her out.

Verse 29. For her thoughts are more than the sea, and her counsels profounder than the great deep.

Verse 30. I also came out as a brook from a river, and as a conduit into a garden.

Verse 31. I said, I will water my best garden, and will water abundantly my garden bed; and lo, my brook became a river, and my river became a sea.

Verse 32. I will yet make doctrine to shine as the morning, and will send forth her light afar off.

Verse 33. I will yet pour out doctrine as prophecy, and leave it to all ages forever.

Verse 34. Behold that I have not labored for myself only, but for all them that seek wisdom.