PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 9 of 18
The Israel of God

---

1. THE ISRAEL OF GOD.
We have now reached an aspect of our subject which the greatest confusion prevails today in many
quarters. So one-sided is the teaching which has been given out about the “Jews” and “Israel,” so
dogmatic have been the assertions made by Dispensationalists, and so firmly have many grasped
them as the very Truth of God, that the minds of thousands are strongly prejudiced against
anything which challenges the “new light” which it is claimed God gave to certain men two or
three generations ago. The use of this “light” has made the Bible “a new book” to those who have
received this novel method of interpreting and applying the Sacred Scriptures. When we say
“novel,” we mean that which differs radically from the principles of exegesis employed by the
servants of God in all previous ages. While it is a fact that all the Truth was not recovered at the
Reformation, and that the godly Puritan teachers are not to be regarded as infallible, yet prudence
requires us to make doubly sure of our ground, before we take up a position which opposes much
of the teaching of God’s servants during that most highly favored period.
God has plainly bid us, “do not believe every spirit, but test the spirits whether they are of God”
(1Joh 4.1): “test” them by His unerring Word. Nor is this something which can be accomplished
in a few moments, not even by those who are well-versed in Holy Writ; and still less by those
having only a mere smattering of its contents. No, we need to emulate the Bereans, who “searched
the scriptures daily, whether those things were so” (Act 17.11). Nor is this all that is required. It is
written, “The meek will He guide in judgment: and the meek will He teach His way” (Psa 25.9).
There must be a willingness to unlearn, if we have unconsciously imbibed error, there must be the
realization that none of us know anything yet as we ought to know (1Cor 8.2); and therefore there
must be a humbling of ourselves before God, an acknowledgment of our great ignorance, and a
prayerful waiting upon Him for the guidance and help of His Spirit. Only thus shall we be enabled
to “prove all things; hold fast that which is good” (1The 5.21).
While it is true that the Word of God is inexhaustible,23 and that the Holy Spirit is constantly
granting further openings of its contents to the saints, so that fresh beams are ever shining forth
from the Sun of Truth — nevertheless, the Spirit never contradicts Himself. Though what He
grants to one may augment what He gave to other teachers of the Word, yet these varied
revelations never oppose each other. In view of this fact, the children of God are supplied with a
sure rule by which they may measure the teachings of all who claim to be the servants of Christ.
There is an “Analogy of Faith” (see the Greek of Rom 12.6, last clause),24 to which all sound
teaching must necessarily conform; anything which conflicts with its basic principles, is at once
proven to be erroneous. So too, there are “the footsteps of the flock” (Song 1.8), the imprints of
those who have gone before; and thereby we may know that any guide today who seeks to direct
us along another and contrary path, will only lead us away from the highway of Truth. 25

23 That is, we will never fully plumb its depths.
24 Rom 12:6 Having then gifts differing according to the grace that is given to us, let us use them: if prophecy, let us

prophesy in proportion to our faith. The word for “prophesying” does not mean foretelling the future; it means
soberly explicating the text of God’s word (Rom 12.3), not going beyond what Scripture says (1Cor 4.6). Simply put, the
analogy of faith requires that Scripture be the best interpreter of Scripture. JOHN GILL in his 18th c. commentary on
this verse put it this way: “By the proportion, or analogy of faith, may be meant a scheme of Gospel truths, a form of
sound words, a set of principles based upon the plan of the Scriptures, deduced from them, and agreeable to them; and
these are all of a piece, and consistent with themselves, from which the prophesier or preacher should never swerve.
The Scriptures themselves are the sure word of prophecy, the rule and standard of faith and practice. The scope of the
text is to be attended to, i.e., its connection with the preceding or following verses, or both; and it is to be compared
with other passages of Scripture, and explained accordingly. This is the rule we are directed to follow. – WHG
25 Gal 1:9 if anyone preaches any other gospel to you than what you have received, let him be accursed.

35

In his earlier years, the writer of these articles was considerably influenced by men who loudly
insisted that in the Scriptures “Jew” meant “Jew” and not a Christian, that “Israel” meant “Israel”
and not the Church. These more recent Dispensationalists were only carrying to their logical
conclusions the principles which regulated the earlier Plymouth Brethren in their “prophetic”
writings. For instance, Mr. J.N. Darby declares again and again in his “Synopsis” that, “We must
ever bear in mind that Israel was an earthly people.” But in later years he was made increasingly
suspicious by the source from which these strange teachings emanated (for it is our settled
conviction today that the Plymouth Brethren are radically unsound and unscriptural on many
fundamental doctrines). We have thus prayerfully endeavoured to test these assertions. And as
we laid them in the balances of the Sanctuary, we discovered that they were “found wanting.” We
do not ask the reader to accept our verdict, but to carefully weigh what follows and form a
judgment of his own.
First of all let us examine this supposedly illuminating declaration that “Israel was an earthly
people.” To say the least, it is a very silly and senseless statement. Of course they were an “earthly
people,” for no one supposed they were a “lunar” people, inhabiting the moon, nor a “marine”
people, living in the sea. The Egyptians, the Babylonians, and every other nation, was equally an
“earthly” people; even the writer and all Christian readers are also an “earthly” people, for neither
our bodies nor our souls have yet been removed to Heaven! Probably it will be replied that what
Mr. Darby and others meant was, Israel’s inheritance was an “earthly” one. Very well, but even
that statement is almost as unsatisfactory and misleading, unless it is explained and amplified.
Was the inheritance of the Patriarchs an “earthly” one? Heb 11.14-16 plainly shows otherwise. Was
Moses’ inheritance an “earthly” one? Heb 11.26 clearly answers, No. Was David’s? If so, how could
he speak of himself as “a stranger in the earth” (Psa 39.12; 119.19)?
Second, we now charge the Dispensationalists with gross carelessness in failing to distinguish
between things that differ. The remarkable fact is that the very men who boast so loudly of their
skill to “rightly divide the word of the truth,” have wretchedly failed to differentiate between one
who is a Jew outwardly and one who is a Jew inwardly, between carnal Israel and spiritual
Israel. Some of the originators of the weird and erroneous scheme we are now rebutting, who were
better read than their modern disciples, were acquainted with the distinction we have just named.
It was a distinction which was observed by all godly teachers from the days of the Apostles until
the early part of the nineteenth century. But apparently they had an insatiable lust for originality,
and wishing to be looked up to as men who had taken a tremendous step forward in the
understanding of God’s Word, they disdained the “old paths” (Jer 6.16), and hewed out a new one
for themselves and their credulous admirers.
In substantiation of the simple but important distinction named above, let us now direct the
careful attention of the reader to the Scriptures. “Truly God is good to Israel, even to those who
are of a clean heart” (Psa 73.1). Who are the ones referred to under the name “Israel” in this verse?
The nation of Israel? All the fleshly descendants of David who were alive when Asaph penned that
Psalm? Obviously not, for it most certainly could not be said of the far greater part of them that
they had “clean hearts”; see Psalm 12.1! A “clean heart” is not natural to men, either Jews or
Gentiles, for by descent from Adam, all are born into this world with hearts which are foul and
desperately wicked. A “clean heart” is one which has been cleansed by the sanctifying operations
of Divine grace (Titus 3.5), through the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus on the conscience (Heb
10.22), and by a God-communicated faith (Act 15.9). Thus, the second clause of Psalm 73.1 obliges
us to understand the “Israel” of the first clause as spiritual Israel — God’s chosen, redeemed, and
regenerated people — and just as obviously, it excludes carnal Israelites.
Again, when the Lord Jesus exclaimed concerning Nathanael, “Behold an Israelite indeed, in
whom there is no guile!” (Joh 1.47), exactly what did He mean? Was nothing more signified than,
“Behold a fleshly descendant of Jacob?” Assuredly it was not. Christ’s language here was

36

discriminating — as discriminating as when He said, “If you continue in My word, then you are
My disciples indeed” (Joh 8.31). When the Saviour said they were “disciples indeed,” He intimated
they were such not only in name, but in fact; not only by profession, but in reality. And in like
manner, when He affirmed that Nathanael was “an Israelite indeed,” He meant that he was a
genuine son of Israel, a man of faith and prayer, honest and upright. The added description “in
whom there is no guile” supplies still further confirmation that a saved and spiritual character is
in view there. Compare, “Blessed is the man to whom the LORD does not impute iniquity, and in
whose spirit there is no guile” (Psa 32.2).
“Behold Israel after the flesh” (1Cor 10.18). Here again, discriminating language is used. Why
speak of “Israel after the flesh” unless it is for the express purpose of distinguishing them from
Israel after the Spirit — that is, the regenerated and spiritual Israel? Israel “after the flesh,” were
the natural descendants of Abraham; but spiritual “Israel,” whether from Jews or Gentiles, are
those who are born again and who worship God in spirit and in truth. Surely it must now be plain
to every unbiased reader, that the term “Israel” is used in the Scriptures in more senses than one,
and that it is only by noting the qualifying terms which are added, that we are able to identify
which “Israel” is in view in any given passage. It should be equally clear now, that to talk of Israel
being an “earthly people,” is very loose and misleading language, and it badly needs modifying
and defining.
Nothing but confusion can prevail if we fail to observe that many words and phrases are employed
in Holy Writ with varying significations. Indeed, false doctrine will be taught by those who insist
that each term used by the Holy Spirit has but one uniform meaning. Many, many examples could
be furnished in illustration of this. How many have erred through making the word “flesh” always
refer to the physical body. What dishonouring views of the Atonement have been fostered by those
who interpret “the world” of John 3.16 and 1John 2.2 to mean the whole human race. What
shallow views are encouraged by those who see no difference between the “repentance” of Judas
(Mat 27.3) and that repentance which is “unto salvation” (2Cor 7.10). How much of the terrible
superficiality of modern “evangelism” is due to failure in distinguishing between the intellectual
“believing” of John 12.42, 43 and Act 8.13, and the heart “believing” of Rom 10:10. In the same
way, untold damage has been wrought by those ignoring (or denying) the scriptural distinction
between carnal “Israel” and spiritual “Israel,” between the natural seed of Abraham and his
mystical children.
“Know, therefore, that those who are of faith, these are the children of Abraham” (Gal 3.7). The
“children of Abraham” are of two kinds, physical and spiritual — those who are his by nature, and
those who are connected with him by grace.
“To be the children of a person in a figurative sense, is equivalent ‘to resemble him, and to be
involved in his fate, good or bad.’ The idea is of similarity both in character and circumstances.
To be ‘the children of God,’ is to be like God; and also, as the apostle states it to be, ‘heirs of
God.’ To be ‘the children of Abraham’ is to resemble Abraham, to imitate his conduct, and to
share his blessedness.” — John Brown 26
To this we may add, to be “the children of the Wicked” (Mat 13.38), is to be conformed to his vile
image, both in character and conduct (Joh 8.44), and to share his dreadful portion (Mat 25.41).
The carnal Jews of Christ’s day boasted, “Abraham is our father,” to which He answered, “If you
were Abraham’s children, you would do the works of Abraham” (Joh 8.39). Ah, the spiritual
children of Abraham “walk in the steps of that faith” which Abraham had (Rom 4.12). Those who
are his spiritual children are “blessed with faithful Abraham” (Gal 3.9). The Apostle was there
26 John Brown D.D. (1784-1858) — a Scottish minister and theologian, known for his exegesis as a preacher; he was the

grandson of John Brown of Haddington (1722-1787). This is from his commentary on Gal. 3.7.

37

combating the error which the Judaizers were seeking to foist upon the Gentiles, namely, that
none but Jews, or Gentiles proselytized by circumcision, were the “children of Abraham,” and that
none but those could be partakers of his blessing. But so far from that being the case, all
unbelieving Jews shut Heaven against themselves, while all who believed from the heart, being
united to Christ — who is “the Son of Abraham” (Mat 1.1) — enter into all the blessings which God
covenanted unto Abraham.
The double significance pertaining to the expression “children” or “seed” of Abraham was very
plainly intimated at the beginning, when Jehovah said to the Patriarch, “In blessing I will bless
you, and in multiplying I will multiply your seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which
is on the seashore” (Gen 22.17). What anointed eye can fail to see in the likening of Abraham’s
seed to the “stars of heaven” a reference to his spiritual children, who are partakers of the heavenly
calling (Heb 3.1); and in likening his seed to the “sand which is on the seashore” a reference to his
natural descendants, who occupied the land of Palestine! The same principle may be seen
receiving exemplification again in the person of Abraham’s grandson, who was the immediate
progenitor of the heads of the twelve tribes. He had a dual name, first being designated “Jacob,”
which was his name according to nature, and then “Israel” (Gen 32.28) which was his name
according to grace. How very striking to find that the first time the name “Israel” occurs in
Scripture it was given to a man who now had a double name!
“It is not as though the word of God has taken no effect. For they are not all Israel, who are of
Israel” (Rom 9.6). In this verse, the Apostle begins his discussion of the rejection of the Jews and
the calling of the Gentiles, and shows that God had predetermined to cast off the Nation as such,
and extend the Gospel call to all men indiscriminately. He does this by showing God was free to
act this way (vv. 6-24), and that He had announced through His prophets that He would do so
(vv. 25-33). This was a particularly sore point with the Jew, who erroneously imagined that the
promises which God had made to Abraham and his seed, included all his natural descendants;
that those promises were sealed to all those by the rite of circumcision; and that they inherited all
the patriarchal blessings. Hence their claim, “We have Abraham to our father” (Mat 3.9). It was
to refute this error, common among the Jews (and now revived by the Dispensationalists), that
the Apostle writes here.
First, he affirms that God’s Word was not being nullified by his teaching (v. 6, first clause), no
indeed. His doctrine did not contravene the Divine promises, for they had never been given to
men in the flesh, but rather to men in the spirit — regenerate. Second, he insisted on an important
distinction (v. 6, second clause), which we are now seeking to explain and press upon our readers.
He points out there are two kinds of “Israelites”: those who are such only by carnal descent from
Jacob, and others who are Israelites spiritually, these latter ones alone being the “children of the
promise” (v. 8) — cf. Gal 4.23, where “born after the flesh” is opposed to born “by promise”! God’s
promises were made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, AS BELIEVERS, and they are the spiritual food
and property of none but believers: Rom 4.13, 16. Until this fact is clearly grasped, we will be all
at sea in understanding scores of the Old Testament promises.
When the Apostle here affirms that “they are not all Israel, which are of Israel” (Rom 9.6), he
means that, not all the lineal descendants of Jacob belonged to “the Israel of God” (Gal 6.16), those
who were God’s people in the highest sense. So far from that being the case, many of the Jews
were not God’s children at all (see John 8.42, 44); while many who were Gentiles by nature, have
(by grace) been made “fellow citizens with the (Old Testament) saints” (Eph 2.19) and “blessed
with faithful Abraham” (Gal 3.9). Thus the Apostle’s language in the second clause of Rom 9.6 has
the force of this: Not all who are members of the (ancient) visible Church are members of the true
Church. The same thought is repeated in Rom 9.7, “Neither are they all children, because they are
the (natural) seed of Abraham” — that is the “children (or inheritors) of the promise,” as verse 7
explains — ”but, in Isaac (the line of God’s election and sovereign grace) your (true and spiritual)

38

seed shall be called.” God’s promises were made to the spiritual seed of Abraham, and not to his
natural descendants as such.