PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 28 of 51
Quarreling and Forgiveness

CHAPTER 28

Verse 1. He that seeketh vengeance shall find vengeance from the Lord, and He will surely keep his sins in remembrance.

Verse 2. Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he hath done unto thee, and then thy sins shall be pardoned when thou prayest.

Verse 3. One man beareth hatred against another, and doth he seek pardon from the Lord?

Verse 4. He showeth no mercy to a man which is like himself, and doth he ask forgiveness of his own sins?

Verse 5. If he that is but flesh nourish hatred, who will entreat for pardon of his sins?

Verse 6. Remember thy last end, and let enmity cease. Remember corruption and death, and abide in the commandments.

Verse 7. Remember the commandments, and bear no malice to thy neighbor. Remember the covenant of the Most High, and overlook ignorance.

Verse 8. Abstain from strife, and thou shalt diminish thy sins; for a wrathful man will kindle strife.

Verse 9. A sinful man troubleth friends, and casteth debate among them that be at peace.

Verse 10. As the fuel of the fire is, so shall the burning be; and as a man's strength is, so shall his wrath be; and according to his riches his anger shall rise.

Verse 11. A hasty contention kindleth a fire, and a hasty quarrel sheddeth blood, and a tongue that beareth witness bringeth death.

Verse 12. If thou blow upon a spark, it shall burn; if thou spit upon it, it shall be quenched; and both these come out of thy mouth.

Verse 13. Curse the whisperer and the double-tongued, for such have destroyed many that were at peace.

Verse 14. A backbiting tongue hath disquieted many, and driven them from nation to nation; strong cities hath it pulled down, and overthrown the houses of great men.

Verse 15. A backbiting tongue hath cast out virtuous women, and deprived them of their labors.

Verse 16. Whoso hearkeneth unto it shall never find rest, and shall never dwell quietly.

Verse 17. The stroke of the whip maketh marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the tongue breaketh the bones.

Verse 18. Many have fallen by the edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by the tongue.

Verse 19. Well is he that is defended from it, and hath not passed through the venom thereof; who hath not drawn the yoke thereof, nor been bound in her bands.

Verse 20. For the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the bands thereof are bands of brass.

Verse 21. The death thereof is an evil death, and the grave were better than it.

Verse 22. It shall not have rule over them that fear God, neither shall they be burned with the flame thereof.

Verse 23. Such as forsake the Lord shall fall into it, and it shall burn in them and not be quenched; it shall be sent upon them as a lion, and shall devour them as a leopard.

Verse 24. Look that thou hedge thy possession about with thorns, and bind up thy silver and gold.

Verse 25. And weigh thy words in a balance, and make a door and bar for thy mouth.

Verse 26. Beware thou slide not by it, lest thou fall before him that lieth in wait.
