PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 40 of 51
Miseries of Life


CHAPTER 40

Verse 1. Great travail is created for every man, and a heavy yoke is upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of their mother's womb, till the day that they return to the mother of all things.

Verse 2. Their imagination of things to come, and the day of death, trouble their thoughts and cause fear of heart.

Verse 3. From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, unto him that is humbled in earth and ashes;

Verse 4. From him that weareth purple and a crown, unto him that is clothed with a linen frock:

Verse 5. Wrath and envy, trouble and unquietness, fear of death and anger and strife, and in the time of rest upon his bed his night sleep doth change his knowledge.

Verse 6. A little or nothing is his rest, and afterward he is in his sleep as in a day of keeping watch, troubled in the vision of his heart, as if he were escaped out of a battle.

Verse 7. When all is safe, he awaketh and marvelleth that the fear was nothing.

Verse 8. Such things happen unto all flesh, both man and beast, and that is sevenfold more upon sinners:

Verse 9. Death and bloodshed, strife and sword, calamities, famine, tribulation, and the scourge.

Verse 10. These things are created for the wicked, and for their sakes came the flood.

Verse 11. All things that are of the earth shall turn to the earth again, and that which is of the waters doth return into the sea.

Verse 12. All bribery and injustice shall be blotted out, but true dealing shall endure forever.

Verse 13. The goods of the unjust shall be dried up like a river, and shall vanish with noise, like a great thunder in rain.

Verse 14. While he openeth his hand he shall rejoice; so shall transgressors come to nought.

Verse 15. The children of the ungodly shall not bring forth many branches, but are as unclean roots upon a hard rock.

Verse 16. The weed growing upon every water and bank of a river shall be pulled up before all grass.

Verse 17. Bountifulness is as a most fruitful garden, and mercifulness endureth forever.

Verse 18. To labor and to be content with that a man hath is a sweet life; but he that findeth a treasure is above them both.

Verse 19. Children and the building of a city continue a man's name, but a blameless wife is counted above them both.

Verse 20. Wine and music rejoice the heart, but the love of wisdom is above them both.

Verse 21. The pipe and the psaltery make sweet melody, but a pleasant tongue is above them both.

Verse 22. Thine eye desireth favor and beauty, but more than both, corn while it is green.

Verse 23. A friend and companion never meet amiss, but above both is a wife with her husband.

Verse 24. Brethren and help are against time of trouble, but alms shall deliver more than them both.

Verse 25. Gold and silver make the foot stand sure, but counsel is esteemed above them both.

Verse 26. Riches and strength lift up the heart, but the fear of the Lord is above them both. There is no want in the fear of the Lord, and it needeth not to seek help.

Verse 27. The fear of the Lord is a fruitful garden, and covereth him above all glory.

Verse 28. My son, lead not a beggar's life, for better it is to die than to beg.

Verse 29. The life of him that dependeth on another man's table is not to be counted for a life, for he polluteth himself with other men's meat; but a wise man well nurtured will beware thereof.

Verse 30. Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless, but in his belly there shall burn a fire.
