PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 11 of 18
The Zion of God


THE ZION OF GOD.
“I have been brought up, since my conversion, under dispensational teaching — pre-millennial.
Now, just where does the kingdom, as they teach it, come in? Does the Word of God teach a
literal kingdom? It seems to, at least in the Prophets and the Revelation. I realize that there is
too much sensational preaching, and not enough practical godliness being taught or lived.”
Our main purpose in giving this extract from a letter recently come to hand, is because it supplies
an illustration of a mistake which is commonly made today. There is a certain class of preachers
whose boast is that they understand and interpret the Bible literally, and their hearers are made
to believe that this is one of the principal tests of orthodoxy. It is greatly to be feared that such
men unwittingly condemn themselves; for in their ignorance they use a term concerning which
few of them seem to know its meaning.
The best dictionaries tell us the word “literal” signifies, “according to the letter.” Now, in the New
Testament there are a number of verses which present some pungent contrasts between the
“letter” and the “spirit.” In Rom 2.27 the Holy Spirit asks, “Will not uncircumcision, which is by
nature, if it fulfills the law, judge you who, by the letter and circumcision, transgress the law?”
The Jews supposed that a literal compliance with the law of circumcision fully met God’s
requirement — overlooking Deu 10.16; 30.6.30 Hence he is told, “But he is a Jew who is one
inwardly; and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter” (Rom 2.29). The
phrase, “that of the heart, in the spirit” signifies that which penetrates to the roots of the soul, that
which is inwardly efficacious; “not in the letter” means not what was merely outward, according
to the literal commandment.
Again, in 2Cor 3.6 Paul said of Christ’s servants, “Who also has made us able ministers of the new
testament; not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the letter kills, but the spirit gives life.”
“These words therefore concisely express the characteristic difference between the Law and the
Gospel. The one was external, the other spiritual; the one was an outward precept, the other an
inward power. In the one case, the law was written on stone; in the other on the heart. The one,
therefore, was letter, the other spirit.” — Charles Hodge
The Pharisees of Christ’s day were “literalists,” and quite incapable of perceiving the mystery (like
a kernel inside the shell) contained beneath the letter. Alas! That so much of modern
“Christianity” is little better than a revival of the principles of Judaism. Alas! that
Dispensationalists are as blind to the spiritual purport of Scripture as the Pharisees were when
Christ said, “Where I go, you cannot come,” and they answered, “Will he kill himself? because He
says, Where I go, you cannot come” (Joh 8.21, 22)!
Infidels have often alleged the Bible is full of contradictions — a charge which the well-meaning
friends of the Bible have promptly denied. It is true that there are not, and cannot be, any real
contradictions in God’s Word; yet it is also a fact that there are numbers of verbal contradictions.
For example, we are told in 1Sam 28.6, “Saul inquired of the LORD;” whereas in 1Chr 10.13, 14, we
read that Saul died because he “did not inquire of the Lord.” Again, in Pro 15.29 we are told “The
LORD is far from the wicked;” whereas in Act 17.27, we read that the Lord is “not far from every
one of us.” Again, in Rom 10.13 we are told, “For whoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall
be saved;” whereas in Pro 1.28 we read, “Then they shall call upon Me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek Me early, but they shall not find Me.” Again, in Mat 5.8 we read “Blessed are the pure
30 Deu 10:16 "Therefore circumcise the foreskin of your heart, and be stiff-necked no longer. Deu 30:6 "And the LORD

your God will circumcise your heart and the heart of your descendants, to love the LORD your God with all your heart
and with all your soul, that you may live.

43

in heart: for they shall see God;” whereas in 1Tim 6.16 it is said of God, “whom no man has seen,
nor can see.” Our purpose in citing these passages is not to stumble the faith of the weak, but to
stain the pride of those who are wise in their own conceits.
The passages referred to above should make it plain to every candid mind, that something more
than a slavish adherence to the letter of the Scriptures is required if we are to understand them
aright. Those who confine themselves to the principle of literalism will find it a hopeless task to
reconcile such verses; but those who are not misled by the mere sound of words and their apparent
surface meaning, should have no difficulty with them. Saul’s inquiry of the Lord was a hypocritical
one; and therefore it is not regarded by Him as a real inquiry at all. The wicked are far from God
in a moral and spiritual sense, though as the Preserver of their beings, His hand daily holds their
souls in life (Psa 66.9). It is only calling upon the Lord from a penitent and contrite heart which
brings salvation. The glorified will “see” or apprehend God to a far greater degree than they do
now; but the finite creature will never be able to fully comprehend the Infinite.
In view of all that has been said above, it is scarcely surprising that the “literalists” of our day, the
carnal Dispensationalists, are completely at sea as to what the Scriptures have to say about “Zion”
— for they see in it nothing more than a mountain located in Palestine. And thus one of the most
blessed subjects addressed in the pages of Holy Writ, is virtually reduced to an absurdity by these
gross materialists. Nor does the writer have any hope that he can convert them from their errors.
It requires just as truly a miracle of grace to deliver one who has been caught fast in this snare, as
it does to deliver a victim of Romanism. For the former is just as certain that he is “rightly dividing
the Word of truth,” as the latter is sure he belongs to “the only real church of Christ on earth.” But
we trust it will please God to use these articles to purge from some of His own people, the poison
they have unconsciously imbibed from present-day leaders.
“But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which He loved” (Psa 78.68). “And of Zion it shall
be said, This and that man was born in her. And the Highest Himself shall establish her” (Psa
87.5). “you shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yes, the set time, has
come” (Psa 102.13). Now, is it not apparent to any spiritual mind, that insisting “Zion” in these
verses refers to some material mountain in Palestine, reduces the Word of God to a meaningless
absurdity? How pitiable such a gross and carnal concept is, may further be seen by this passage:
“For the LORD has chosen Zion; He has desired it for His habitation. This is My rest forever: here
I will dwell; for I have desired it” (Psa 132.13, 14).
Now there are a number of plain passages in the Old Testament which show that “Zion” is another
name for the people of God. For example, “Remember your congregation, which you have
purchased of old; the rod of your inheritance, which you have redeemed; this mount Zion in which
you have dwelt” (Psa 74.2). “Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced
because of your judgments, O LORD” (Psa 97.8). “O Zion, that bring good tidings, get up into the
high mountain; O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings, lift up your voice with strength; lift it up, do
not be afraid; say to the cities of Judah, Behold your God!” (Isa 40.9). “And I have put My words
in your mouth, and I have covered you in the shadow of Mine hand, that I may plant the heavens,
and lay the foundations of the earth, and say to Zion, you are My people” (Isa 51.16).
The key to our present subject, though, is found in the New Testament; namely, Heb 12.22-23,
“But you have come to mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and
to an innumerable company of angels, To the general assembly and church of the Firstborn.” Let
us look closely at this. First of all, let us note attentively the particular Epistle in which this blessed
declaration is made. It is found in the Epistle to the Hebrews, being addressed to “holy brethren,
partakers of the heavenly calling” (3.1). The great theme of that Epistle is, The immeasurable
superiority of Christianity over Judaism. That theme is unfolded in several chapters; it comes out
prominently in the 12th. Let the interested reader turn to ponder carefully Heb 12.18-24, where
Sinai is the symbol of Judaism, and Zion is the symbol of Christianity.

44

It will be observed that the above passage abounds in striking and solemn contrasts; other
antitheses not specified there are equally noteworthy. Everything is in sharp opposition between
them. Sinai is located in one of the driest and dreariest places on earth, in a “howling desert.” It
fitly represents the Law, which can afford neither succour nor refreshment. Mount Zion was
situated in the midst of that land which “flowed with milk and honey,” a fit emblem of the Gospel.
Sinai means “cliff,” an object which is forbidding, barren, desolate. Zion signifies “sunny or shined
upon,” as when facing south, ever basking in the warm rays of the sun. God came down on Sinai
for only a brief season; He dwells in Zion forever. On the one, He appeared in terrible majesty; in
the other He is manifested in grace and blessing. At Sinai the typical mediator trembled, saying,
“I exceedingly fear and quake”; on Zion, Christ is crowned with glory and honour. The former we
have “not come to” (Heb 12.18); the latter we have “come to” (Heb 12.22).
It may be pointed out that the material mount Zion, figure of the spiritual Zion, was one of the
mountains belonging to the range of Hermon (Deu 4.48). The interested reader will find it
profitable to look up the references to “Hermon,” and ponder their spiritual significance. It lay to
the southwest of Jerusalem, being the oldest and highest part of that ancient city. It was outside
the city itself and separate from it, though frequently identified with it. Mount Zion had two heads
or peaks: Moriah, on which the temple was built, the seat of the worship of God; and the other on
which the palace of David was built, the royal residence of the kings of Judah. It is a striking figure
of the priestly and kingly offices of Christ, owned by the Church! Thus, Zion was situated in the
best part of the world — Canaan, the land which flowed with milk and honey; in the best part of
that land — in Judah’s portion; in the best part of his heritage — Jerusalem; and in the best part
of the metropolis — the city of David, 2Sam 6.12.
It is deeply interesting and instructive to trace the history of mount Zion. Originally it was the
habitation of the Jebusites, a company of the idolatrous and cursed Canaanites: “the Jebusites the
inhabitants of Jerusalem” (Jos 15.63). How that reminds us of, “Remember that you, in time past
were Gentiles in the flesh... without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenants of promise” (Eph 2.11, 12). David was the one who wrested it from
them: “And the king and his men went to Jerusalem, to the Jebusites... Nevertheless, David took
the stronghold of Zion; that is, the city of David” (2Sam 5.6, 7); so Christ secured His elect by His
victory over Satan. David fortified Zion for his own use, 1Chr 11.7-9. Thus we see how suited it was
to be the figure of the Church of God. Many other Scriptures bear this out.
1. Zion was the object of God’s choice: “For the LORD has chosen Zion” (Psa 132.13).
2. It was the place of His habitation: “Sing praises to the LORD, who dwells in Zion” (Psa 9.11).
Compare 1Tim 3.15; 2Cor 6.16.
3. It was a mighty fortress: “Those who trust in the LORD shall be as mount Zion, which cannot
be removed, but abides forever” (Psa 125.1). Compare, “the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it” (Mat 16.18).
4. It was the most excellent of all cities: “Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is
Mount Zion on the sides of the north, the city of the great King” (Psa 48.2), “Out of Zion, the
perfection of beauty, God has shined” (Psa 50.2).
5. It was the special object of God’s love: “The LORD loves the gates of Zion more than all the
dwellings of Jacob” (Psa 87.2). Compare Eph 5.25.
6. It was the place where God’s elect are born: “And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man
was born in her” (Psa 87.5).
7. It was the place of salvation: “Oh that the salvation of Israel would come out of Zion! When
the LORD brings back the captivity of his people,” that is, when He grants them a revival (Psa
14.7).

45

8. It was the place of Divine blessing; “The LORD shall bless you out of Zion” (Psa 128.5); yes, it
was the place of eternal life: “As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion: for there the LORD commanded the blessing, even life forevermore” (Psa
133.3).
9. It was the object of Divine promises: “Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts
with righteousness” (Isa 1.27); “The Redeemer shall come to Zion” (Isa 59.20); “To appoint to
those who mourn in Zion, to give them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the planting
of the LORD, that He might be glorified” (Isa 61.3).
10. It was the place of His throne: “The LORD shall reign over them in mount Zion from
henceforth, even forever” (Mic 4.7).
Thus, “Zion” was very frequently a name given by God to His true Church in Old Testament times;
and therefore it was also a blessed type of His Church in New Testament times. As Heb 12.22
declares, we “have come to mount Zion,” which means that Christians are interested in (have a
title to) all the privileges which God made to her. Now it is obvious that we have not come to any
earthly or material “Zion;” rather, we have come to those spiritual realities and blessings of which
she was the emblem. How unspeakably solemn, that this is the very thing which the
Dispensationalists so emphatically deny; indeed, hold up to ridicule. In their blindness, they see
nothing more in all those Old Testament passages than something which is Jewish: 1Pet 2.5, 6
plainly bursts their empty bubble: “You also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. This is why it is also
contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, elect, precious — and he that
believes on Him shall not be confounded.”
Before passing from Heb 12.22, 23, let it be pointed out that “Mount Zion,” the “city of the living
God” and “the heavenly Jerusalem,” are three names for the same thing. In Psa 46.4 we read,
“There is a river, the streams of which shall make glad the city of God, the holy place of the
tabernacles of the Most High,” and Psa 48.1, 2 identifies “the city of God” with “Zion”: “Great is
the LORD, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in the mountain of His holiness.
Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion”; so also does Psa 87.2, 3, “The
LORD loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of
you, O city of God.” This figure of the “city” is also contrasted with Israel at Sinai in the wilderness,
where they had neither rest nor refuge. In a city there is order, defense, safety.
The Church is called the “City of God,” first, because He is its Builder. Second, because He indwells
it. Third, because it is under His sovereign rule. It is there that He disposes His children into a
spiritual society. Carefully note how this same figure is used in Eph 2.19, “Now therefore you are
no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints.” The Church is called the
“Heavenly Jerusalem,” first, because its concerns are not of this world. Second, because most of
its inhabitants are already there. Third, because our citizenship (Phi 3.20) and inheritance is
there. Let the reader firmly grasp this fact that, whatever is spoken of the “city of God” or of
“Jerusalem” in the Old Testament, it is spiritual. It contains in it the love and free favour of God;
it is all made OURS; and it is for faith to appropriate and enjoy.

46

Part VI
