PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 3 of 18
The Purpose of God

---

1. THE PURPOSE OF GOD.
“Study to show yourself approved unto God, a workman that does not need to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of truth” (2Tim. 2.15). An elaborate system of error has been built upon an
erroneous exegesis of this verse. It has been assumed that the servants of God are bid there to
section the Scriptures, marking out the boundaries of that which pertained to each dispensation,
and allocating to different companies various parts of the Word of God. It has been supposed that
the ability of a man to open up the Living Oracles is to be determined mainly by his skill to erect
arbitrary hedges, and shut out the sheep of Christ from the larger portion of the green pastures
which God has given them to feed in. Some have carried this pernicious method further than
others, but it is generally agreed that practically all of the Old Testament and the four Gospels are
“not for us,” pertaining only to those who lived in previous dispensations.
Now if the context of 2Timothy 2.15 be examined, it will be found that that verse has no more to
do with drawing lines between the “dispensations,” than it has with distinguishing between stars
of varying magnitude. There is absolutely nothing in the entire context which, to the slightest
degree, favors the strange meaning which has been given to that verse. The plain significance of
2Timothy 2.15 is interpreted for us by Luke 12.42, 43, “Who then is that faithful and wise steward,
whom his Lord shall make ruler over His household, to give them their portion of food in due
season? Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when He comes shall find so doing.” We cannot
do better than quote here from one of the Puritans — a company of God’s servants who were
endowed with far more spirituality, wisdom, and ability to feed Christ’s sheep, than we are in this
decadent age:
“Ministers are stewards in the house of God and dispensers of its mysteries. And therefore, it is
required of them, that they give to all the servants that are in the house, or belong to it, a fit
portion, according to their wants, occasions, and services, suitable to the will and wisdom of
their Lord and Master. This giving of provision, and a portion of food to the household of Christ,
consists principally in the right dividing and distribution of the Word of Truth. It is taking out
from it those great stores in the Scripture and, as it were, cutting off a portion suitable for the
various conditions of those in the family. In this consists the principal skill of a servant furnished
for the kingdom of Christ, with the wisdom described before. And without this, a common
course of dispensing or preaching the Word, without differentiating persons and truths —
however gilded over it may be with a flow of words and oratory — is shameful work in the house
of God.
“Now, sundry things are required for this skill. (1.) A sound judgment in general concerning the
state and condition of those to whom anyone is so dispensing the Word: it is the duty of a
shepherd to know the state of his flock. (2.) An acquaintance with the ways and methods of the
work of God’s grace on the minds and hearts of men, that he may pursue and comply with its
design in the ministry of the Word. (3.) An acquaintance with the nature of temptation, with the
especial hindrances of faith and obedience which may befall those to whom the Word is
dispensed. (4.) A right understanding of the nature of spiritual diseases, distempers, and
sicknesses, with their proper cures and remedies belonging to them. For the lack of this, the
hearts of the wicked are oftentimes made glad in the preaching of the Word; and those of the
righteous are filled with sorrow; the hands of sinners are strengthened, and those who are
looking towards God are discouraged or turned out of the way.” — John Owen
To our dear Brethren in the ministry, especially the younger ones, we would respectfully urge the
prayerful pondering of the above quotation. It is in attending to such vital considerations, that the
preacher may best be guided in the selection of his themes and the material for his sermons. If he
is to “speak a word in season to him that is weary” (Isa 50.4) — weary of the incessant conflict

11

between the flesh and the Spirit, weary of resisting the continual assaults of Satan, weary of so
often confessing to God his repeated failures and falls (tempted to give up in despair); it is to these
spiritual problems he had best direct his attention. Ah, my Brethren, you will bring more joy to
the heart of the great Shepherd, and be of far more real help to His people, by seeking from Him
messages suited to their hearts, than by taxing your ingenuity to allot one part of Matthew’s
Gospel to the people of Christ’s day, another to the “Jewish remnant” in the Tribulation period,
and still another to “the millennium.”
It is true that making a practical application of all parts of God’s Word to the varied cases of
different souls, is not the whole work to which the minister of the Gospel is called. Nevertheless,
if that is neglected, he is most certainly a “physician of no value” (Job 13.4). It is also true that the
interpretation of Holy Writ forms an essential part of a minister’s labor, and that an intelligent
grasp of God’s purpose and plan is of prime importance for this. Yet here too, there is great danger
of erring. Many have erred, and erred grievously, for their starting point is wrong! No man can
obtain a correct view of God’s “program” by taking his stand in the Garden of Eden; to start with
“the Adamic dispensation” can lead to nothing but confusion. It is an ominous fact that the great
majority of “Dispensationalists,” the men who boast of their ability to “rightly divide the Word of
Truth,” take the creation of man as the commencement of their scheme or system. This at once
betrays a woeful ignorance, and brands them as incompetent guides.
The key to all of God’s works and ways is the Everlasting Covenant. Long before Adam was made,
indeed, before Heaven and earth were created, the Triune God formed His great “purpose” and
“plan.” The Center of all the Divine counsels is Christ, the God-man Mediator. He is “the
Brightness (or Effulgence) of God’s glory” (Heb 1.3). A revenue of infinite honor and praise was
to accrue to God by the wondrous work which the Redeemer would undertake. In eternity past, a
people were given to Him, predestined to be conformed to His image (Rom 8.29). And in eternity
to come, He will “show the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness” toward them “through
Christ Jesus” (Eph 2.7). This is the “eternal purpose which He purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord”
(Eph 3.11). And the stupendous part which Christ was to play in bringing this to pass, was all
determined and fixed in that “everlasting covenant, ordered in all things and sure” (2Sam 23.5).
Now all of God’s works have this one end in view: namely, the glory of Christ in the redemption
of His chosen people — not only in actually purchasing redemption, but in all that was preparatory
to that purchase, and also in securing its success. So too, all that Christ does in the discharge of
His Mediatorship, in His threefold office of Prophet, Priest, and King — either before He became
incarnate during the days of His flesh, or since; and also all that the Father or the Holy Spirit has
done before or since the Cross — unite in this grand design: every act of God in creation,
providence, or grace, has been wrought in view of the ultimate execution of the Eternal Covenant
of Redemption. The various works or dispensations belonging to it, are but parts of one grand
whole. It is a single design that was formed, to which all the offices of Christ directly tend, and in
which all the Persons of the Trinity cooperate.
The Persons of the Trinity confederated in the great design of redemption. A covenant was entered
into between Them. In that covenant, the Father appointed the Son, the Son undertaking to work
(all things in that work being stipulated and agreed upon), and the Holy Spirit pledging Himself
to effectually apply the same to its predestined beneficiaries. This is what supplies the key to, or
throws light upon and explains, all the consequent Divine actions. The world itself was created for
this; for the world was to be the platform or theater on which the great work of redemption was
to be wrought (1Cor 4.9).
The work of creation was for the work of providence, just as the building of a house or the making
of a machine, is for the use that is to be made of it. And the center of all God’s providential
workings is the glorification of the Mediator, in the eternal redemption of that people which was
given to Him before the foundation of the world.

12

The creation of Heaven was for the work of redemption, for it was to be the habitation of the
redeemed: “Come you blessed of My Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world” (Mat 25.34). The angels, too, were created to be employed in this work;
and therefore we are told that they are “all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for those who
shall be heirs of salvation” (Heb 1.14). Moreover, it is by means of the wondrous work of
redemption that the heavenly hierarchies are being taught the wondrous ways of God: “To the
intent that now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known by the church to the
principalities and powers in heavenly places” (Eph 3.10).
The entrance of sin was for the work of redemption. Just as the darkness of night is required to
display the stars shining in the firmament, so sin was needed as a black background to bring out
into plainer relief the surpassing love of God for His own people. Just as weakness is a foil for
strength, and ignorance for wisdom, so the Fall of the creature has demonstrated that man’s
extremity is God’s opportunity. The more desperate the case of the patient, the better occasion the
competent physician has to exhibit his skill. The more wretched and unworthy the object, the
more the favor shown to him is enhanced. How can mercy be exercised where there is no
transgression? Is not power most clearly seen when formidable obstacles have to be overcome? It
was the Divine permission of sin to enter the world, which provided opportunity for God to more
grandly reveal His wondrous attributes.
The government of this world has in view the great work of redemption. God is making all things
“work together for good to those who love Him, who are the called according to His purpose”
(Rom 8.28). Take the building of a large house: what a number of workmen are employed, what
a variety of materials are used. If we view their actions singly and separately, there seems to be no
relation between their labors. One group is engaged in the forest felling trees, another in the kiln
making bricks, another in the shop making glass, another in the laboratory mixing paint, another
in the plant manufacturing telephone wires, etc., etc. But each is needed, each makes his own
essential contribution — all combine to produce the finished house.
Let us give another illustration. Take the publishing of this little magazine. Its design is to provide
spiritual food for some of Christ’s scattered sheep. Consider, then, a few of the wondrous workings
and providences of God which make this possible. Trees grew for years, so that they might be cut
down, reduced to pulp, and made into paper. Steel was manufactured and then turned into
machines to print, to cut, to fold. Ink, too, is needed. Railway trains (with all the complicated
systems which are necessary to maintain them) must run in a hundred directions to carry these
magazines to the varied points of distribution. Indeed, many ships must cross thousands of miles
of ocean to transfer them to the forty foreign countries to which we send them. Little do the
captain and crew of that ship, journeying to a remote island, think that God is employing them to
carry His messages to one or two of His elect stationed there! Yet, so it is!
In all the providential dealings of God there is “as it were, a wheel in the middle of a wheel” (Eze
1.16). As we said above, the great Center of all God’s counsels and workings, is the glorification of
Christ, and that is in the saving of His people. In the execution of His purpose, many subsidiary
acts are performed, and many subservient ends are accomplished; but all move forward to the
same grand goal. To make this yet clearer to the reader, consider the Lord’s delivering of the
Children of Israel from Egypt. The magnifying of His own great Name in the redemption of His
people was the chief design before Him. But observe the various factors which entered into it.
Jacob and his family must emigrate from the land of Canaan and become sojourners in Egypt —
and that was brought about by a mighty famine. There they must be oppressed and enslaved. To
that end, God raised up Pharaoh to be the merciless persecutor of them.
We must carefully distinguish between the various features of redemption itself and the parts of
that work by which the redemption is wrought. There is an obvious difference between the
benefits procured and bestowed, and the operations of God by which those benefits are procured

13

and bestowed. Thus, in the case last cited, the difference was marked between the benefit which
Israel received, and the parts of God’s work by which it was wrought. The benefit which Israel
received consisted of their deliverance from Egyptian bondage and misery, and their being
brought into a happier state as the servants of God and heirs of Canaan. But in order for that,
there was the calling of Moses, his mission to Pharaoh, the king’s obstinacy, the signs and wonders
which were wrought before him, with all of God’s terrible judgments on his land and people.
Let us now mention some of the principal things which the Triune God designed to be
accomplished by the Mediator’s work of redemption. First, it was to subdue all God’s enemies; for
He has decreed that the triumph of His goodness over evil shall finally appear: “For this purpose
was the Son of God manifested, that He might destroy the works of the Devil” (1Joh 3.8), and “He
must reign till He has put all enemies under His feet” (1Cor 15.25). Second, to restore all the effects
of the Fall, so far as it concerned the elect part of mankind. Originally, man was created in the
likeness of God; but the Fall ruined his soul, corrupted his nature, and sank him into spiritual
death. Now, when the work of redemption is completed, the people of God shall be perfectly
conformed to the image of His Son in spirit, and soul, and body. Third, to gather together in one,
all of God’s elect angels and men, Eph 1.10. 4
During the interval of time between the Fall and the incarnation of Christ, the works of God were
so many forerunners and earnests of the Mediator’s advent, and preparatory to the work of
redemption. There were many great changes and revolutions in the world, yet they were all the
turnings of the wheels of Providence in order for the coming of Christ into the world. The saints
who were saved during those early ages were so many pledges of the future harvest. God wrought
many lesser deliverances for them, and these were so many types and foreshadowings of the great
salvation which the Redeemer was to work out. God was pleased to reveal Himself to one and
another, from time to time, and communicate revelations of light to them. Yet that light was more
like that of the moon and stars at night, in comparison to the rising of the Sun of righteousness
(Mal. 4.2).