PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 15 of 18
The Law of God (Continued, Part 2)


3. THE LAW OF GOD (CONTINUED).
The moral law is the eternal rule of righteousness which God has given to men, requiring them to
love Him with all their hearts, and their neighbors as themselves. In the very nature of the case,
such a law can neither be repealed nor modified. The grand reason why the great Governor of the
world gave such a law, was because it was infinitely fitting that we should love Him with all our
hearts; nothing less was due Him. For us to suppose that God should ever annul or alter this law
when the grounds and reasons for His first making it remain as forcible as ever — when what it
requires is as right as ever, when what it becomes Him as the moral Ruler of His creatures to
require it from them as much as ever — is to suppose that such a thing constitutes the highest
reproach upon all God’s moral perfections. It would suppose Him releasing His creatures from
doing right, and giving them license to do wrong. So far from man being benefited by having such
a law abrogated or altered, it would be one of the greatest and sorest calamities that could happen.
How sad it is, then, to think that the mind of fallen man is enmity against the Law-Giver! And how
humbling it is, when the Christian realizes that there is still within him that which is opposed to
such a holy, such a righteous, such a spiritual law! And why is it that fallen man hates the law?
Because it condemns him. But let the Christian place the blame where it truly belongs: within and
not without him. The law condemns none whose heart and life are in conformity with it. Sin is the
cause of the condemnation. We have none but ourselves to blame when the holy law denounces
our wrong-doing. Instead of looking askance at the law, the Christian should eye it with profound
gratitude, for it is the very instrument which the Holy Spirit uses to convince him of his self-will
and self-love; for “by the law is the knowledge of sin” (Rom 3.20).
How sad and serious, then, is the error that Christ came here in order to make an end of the law.
Instead, it was foretold centuries beforehand, “He will magnify the law, and make it honourable”
(Isa 42.21). To suppose that the Son of God became incarnate, suffered and died in order that the
law might be repealed, would be to suppose that He had become the enemy of God, enemy to His
holiness and justice, to Christ’s claims and His government, and that He had gone over to the side
of His Father’s rebellious subjects. The law was, indeed, in the way of the sinner’s salvation; and
this was the ground of the necessity for His incarnation, obedience, and death. Yet this was so far
from being designed to set the law aside, that it was done for the express purpose of fulfilling it.

58

It was to obey its precepts and endure its penalty on behalf of His people, so that the law was as
much honoured as though His people had themselves obeyed it, or suffered its curse.
So far from the law having been repealed, every Christless sinner is as much under the law today
as much under its demands, its condemnation, and its curse for his failure to meet those demands,
as if Christ had never come into the world, as if there were no Mediator between God and men.
Whoever does not believe in and surrender to the lordship of Christ — whoever is not united to
Him by the Spirit, so that Christ’s merits and righteousness are properly imputed to his account
(which consist in what He did and suffered to maintain and honour the law) — is under the
condemnation and wrath of God (i.e., the curse of His Law); as if there had been no Saviour at all.
In proof of this, we ask the reader to carefully ponder John 3.18-20; Rom 1.18; 2The 1.7-9.35
So far from the Christian being released from the requirements of the law, he is as much under
the law as a rule, as he ever was; and he is under as great an obligation to perfect conformity to it
in heart and life, as the non-Christian is. And everything in him or of him which comes short of
perfect holiness, or of full obedience to the law considered in its utmost spirituality and strictness,
is perfectly inexcusable. It is as criminal (or evil) in him as if he were not a believer in Christ —
indeed, much more so. For the superior light, discernment, and advantages he has, and the special
favors and privileges bestowed on him, vastly increase his obligations to perfect obedience. And
therefore, they render every degree of opposition or lack of conformity to the infinitely excellent
Law of God, immensely more heinous than it would be in others.
The law, considered in all its unmodified strictness, requiring perfect holiness of character and
conduct, is as much a rule for Christians to walk by now, as it ever was. Christ never designed to
deliver His people from their full obligations to the law; but instead, he greatly increased their
obligations by what He has done for them. He has indeed made full atonement for all their sins
against the law. And so he has delivered them from the curse of the law, Himself being made a
curse for them so that they are, in this sense, “not under the law, but under grace” (Rom 6.14).
They are no longer subject to the infinitely dreadful punishment which it pronounces upon the
transgressor, for they have been completely delivered from this by a free pardon. But that has not
canceled their obligation to obey the law. The design of Christ’s blessed work was to deliver His
people from all sin, and bring them to a full conformity to the law, and eventually, this shall be
fully realized.
To say that Christ came here to purchase a cancellation of the law, would be procuring lawless
liberty for rebellious subjects. No, He did not magnify the law and make it honorourable, so that
His disciples might despise and violate it; rather, that they should be delivered from its
condemnation and brought to delight in and obey its precepts. An unequivocal proof that the law
was not set aside is seen in the fact that one of its commandments came in power to the conscience
of Saul some years after the Cross. He distinctly says, “I would not have known sin, except by the
law. For I would not have known lust, unless the law had said, you shall not covet” (Rom 7.7).
Most certainly, the Holy Spirit would never have applied an abrogated and superseded statute. If
the moral law had been canceled, the Spirit would no more have revived it than He would have
restored the Levitical sacrifices.

35 Joh 3:18 "He who believes in Him is not condemned; but he who does not believe is condemned already, because

he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. 19 "And this is the condemnation, that the light has
come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. 20 "For everyone
practicing evil hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his deeds should be exposed. Rom 1:18 For the wrath
of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth in
unrighteousness; 1The 1:7 so that you became examples to all in Macedonia and Achaia who believe. 8 For from you
the word of the Lord has sounded forth, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place. Your faith toward
God has gone out, so that we do not need to say anything. 9 For they themselves declare concerning us what manner of
entry we had to you, and how you turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God.

59

“And the LORD said to Moses, Hew out two tablets of stone like the first: and I will write upon
these tablets the words that were in the first tablets which you broke” (Exo. 34.1).
“The treaty that was the footing between God and Israel, being broken off abruptly by their
worshipping the golden calf, when peace was made, all must begin anew — not where they left
off, but from the beginning. Thus backsliders must ‘repent, and do the first works’ (Rev. 2.5).
Before, God Himself provided the tablets and wrote on them; now, Moses must hew out the
tablets, and God would only write upon them. Thus, in the first writing of the law upon the heart
of man in innocence, both the tablets and the writing were the work of God. But when those
were broken and defaced by sin, and the Divine Law was to be preserved in the Scriptures, God
made use of the ministry of man in this, and Moses first. But the prophets and Apostles only
hewed the tablets, as it were; the writing was still God’s — for ‘all Scripture is given by inspiration
of God.’ Observe, when God was reconciled to them, He ordered the tablets to be renewed, and
wrote His Law in them, which plainly intimates to us:
“First, that even under the Gospel of peace and reconciliation by Christ (of which the
intercession of Moses was typical), the moral law should continue to oblige believers. Though
Christ has redeemed us from the ‘curse of the Law,’ yet it is not from the command of it; rather,
we are still under the law to Christ. When our Saviour, in His Sermon on the Mount explained
the moral law, and vindicated it from the corrupt glosses with which the scribes and Pharisees
had broken it (Mat 5.19), He in effect renewed the tablets, and made them like the first — that
is, He reduced the law to its primitive sense and intention. Secondly, the best evidence of the
pardon of sin — peace with God — is the writing of the law in the heart. The first token God gave
of His reconciliation to Israel, was the renewing of the tablets of the law. Thus, the first article
of the new covenant is, ‘I will write My laws in their hearts’: Heb 8.10.” — Matthew Henry
The great blessing of the Gospel is that it is the appointed channel through which God gives grace
to keep the law. Ponder Jer 31.33, Eze 36.27, Eph 4.24. 36
“None enter into the Gospel state but those who readily and entirely give themselves up to the
will of God; and therefore, none can have benefited in the sin-offering and sacrifice of Christ but
those who consent to return to their duty of the law, and live in obedience to God. Surely God
never pardons any while they are in rebellion and live under the full power and dominion of sin.
No, they must consent to forsake sin and return to the allegiance due to their proper Lord,”
—— T. Manton, 1660.
Repentance (which is sorrow for and repudiation of rebellion against God) precedes “the
remission (forgiveness) of sins” (Mark 1.5). We must be “converted,” turned round and brought
into subjection to God, in order that our “sins may be blotted out” (Act 3.19).
The law does not and cannot change; its requirements are not modified, nor its penalty relieved,
by the Cross of Christ. But the Christian’s relation to the law has been changed: he has been placed
on a new footing in regard to it. Christ having substituted His obedience for ours in the matter of
justification, and endured in His own Person the law’s condemnation, we are forever freed from
its penalty, having in Him died to its curse. What, then, is the relation between the Christian and
the law, which conversion and faith establishes? Answer: it is now our Rule of Life as it is held (so
far as Christians are concerned, not in the hands of God as “Judge,” but) in the hands of the
Mediator, 1Cor 9.21. The Christian’s new relation to the law is that of Christ Himself: His feelings
toward the law ought to be ours. He declared, “I delight to do your will, O my God: yes, Your law
36 Jer 31:33 "But this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the LORD: I will

put My law in their minds, and write it on their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people. Eze 36:27
"I will put My Spirit within you and cause you to walk in My statutes, and you will keep My judgments and do them.
Eph 4:24 ...put on the new man which was created according to God, in true righteousness and holiness.

60

is within My heart,” the seat of the affections (Psa 40.8). And the Christian having been made a
partaker of His nature, also “delights in the Law of God after the inward man” (Rom 7.22); and
the more he mortifies the flesh and walks in the Spirit, the greater is his love for the law, and the
closer and fuller his conformity to it.
“Some speak as if the servant were greater than the Master, and the disciple above his Lord; as
if the Lord Jesus honoured the law, and His people were to set it aside; as if He fulfilled it for
us, that we might not need to fulfill it; as if He kept it, not that we might keep it, but that we
might not keep it, and keep something else in its stead, though they know not what. The plain
truth is, we must either keep it or break it. Which of these things men should do, let those answer
who speak of the believer as having nothing more to do with the law. There is no midway. If it
is not a saint’s duty to keep the law, then he may break it at his pleasure, and go on sinning
because grace abounds. Rom 6.1
“The word duty is objected to as inconsistent with the liberty of forgiveness and sonship. Foolish
and idle cavil! What is duty? It is a thing due by me to God — that line of conduct which I owe
to God. And do these objectors mean to say that because God has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, we therefore owe Him nothing— we now have no duty to Him? Has not redemption
rather made us doubly debtors? We owe Him more than ever, and we owe His Holy Law more
than ever — more honour, more obedience. Duty has been doubled, not canceled, by our being
delivered from the law. Whoever says that duty has ceased because deliverance had come, knows
nothing of duty, law, or deliverance. The greatest of all debtors in the universe is the redeemed
man. What a strange sense of gratitude these men must have who say that, because love has
canceled the penalty of the law, and turned away its wrath, that reverence and obedience to that
law are therefore no longer due. Is terror in their estimation the only foundation of duty? And
when love comes in and terror ceases, does duty become a bondage?
They may say, “No, but there is something higher than duty: there is privilege; that is what we
contend for.” I answer, the privilege of what? Of obeying the law? They cannot do with that, for
they are no longer under the law, but under grace. What privilege, then? Of imitating Christ?
Let it be so. But can we imitate Him whose life was one great fulfilling of the law, without keeping
the law ourselves? Again we ask, What privilege? Has our free forgiveness released us from the
privilege of conformity to the revealed will of God?
“But what do they mean by thus rejecting the word duty, and contending for that of privilege?
Privilege is not something distinct from duty, nor at variance with duty; but it is duty and
something more! It is duty influenced by higher motives; duty uncompelled by terror or
suspense. In privilege, the duty is all there; but there is something superadded in the shape of
motive and relationship, which exalts and ennobles duty. It is my duty to obey government; it
is my privilege to obey my parents. But in the latter case, is duty gone because privilege has
come in? Or instead, has the loving relationship between parent and child only intensified the
duty by superadding the privilege, and sweetening obedience by mutual love? ‘The Love of
Christ constrains us.’ There is something more than both duty and privilege added.”
— Andrew Bonar, 1860.
Many object that the Ten Commandments are insufficient as a rule of duty for the Christian
because they do not contain the whole of it. But in Mat 22.37-39, Christ Himself reduced them to
two — for love to God and to our neighbour comprehends every act of duty that can possibly be
performed. He who loves God supremely, willingly obeys Him in whatever forms He prescribes.
The new commandment of love to the brethren is comprehended in the old commandment (1Joh
2.7, 8), for he that loves God cannot help but love His image wherever it is seen: Gal 5.13-15; Rom
13.8-10. God’s commandment is “exceedingly broad” (Psa 119.96); and though the whole of
Christian obedience is not formally expressed in the Ten Commandments, it is virtually. When

61

Christ said, “On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets” (Mat 22.40), He
made known the fact that all the exhortations and admonitions contained in the entire Scriptures
are but an exposition and enforcing of the Law. Few perceive the extent or scope of the Ten
Commandments — what each one includes, implies, and involves. The Ten Commandments are
the main root from which all other trunks and branches of duty are drawn.
Yet, notwithstanding, many imagine that the whole of all that has now been pointed out in these
articles, is practically set aside or refuted by the words, “Love is the fulfilling of the law” (Rom
13.10). Of course it is! And we have not written a single sentence which in the slightest degree,
contradicts or clashes with that Divine statement. From the moment of Adam’s creation till now,
love has always been the “fulfilling” of the law. Where love is absent, no matter how carefully our
actions are attended to, there is no real and acceptable fulfilling or keeping of the law. For the Law
itself enjoins and requires love to God and to our neighbour. The trouble is that the objector
confounds the principle or spring of obedience 37 (love) with the rule itself (the law).
The law tells me what to do; love urges me to do it. Rom 13.10 does not say, “love is a substitute
for the law,” but “love is the fulfilling of the law.” To make love and law synonymous would be like
confounding the railroad track on which the engine must run, with the power which pulls the
train.
“To make the rule of obedience that which is the moving cause of it, is the same as a son saying
to his father, ‘Sir, I will do what you desire me when I feel inclined to do so, but I will not be
commanded.’ Whatever may be argued against the authority of God, I believe there are few if
any parents who would put up with such language from their own children.” — A. Fuller, 1814.
