PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 51
The Origin of Wisdom


We begin the Book of Sirach, also called Ecclesiasticus, with the Prologue of the translator, the grandson of Yeshua Ben Sira, followed by the opening chapters on the nature of wisdom, the fear of God, patience through trials, honor toward parents, and the virtue of humility.

THE PROLOGUE OF YESHUA BEN SIRA

Many and great things have been delivered unto us by the law and the prophets, and by others that have followed in their steps, for which things Israel ought to be commended for learning and wisdom. And not only ought the readers themselves to become skillful, but also those that are disposed to learn should be able to profit those who are without, both by speaking and by writing.

My grandfather Yeshua, when he had much given himself to the reading of the law and the prophets and other books of our fathers, and had gotten therein good judgment, was drawn on also himself to write something pertaining to learning and wisdom, so that those who are desirous to learn, and are addicted to these things, might profit much more in living according to the law.

Wherefore let me entreat you to read it with favor and attention, and to pardon us wherein we may seem to come short of some words which we have labored to interpret. For the same things uttered in Hebrew and translated into another tongue have not the same force in them. And not only these things, but the law itself, and the prophets, and the rest of the books, have no small difference when they are spoken in their own language.

For in the eight and thirtieth year, coming into Egypt when Euergetes was king, and continuing there some time, I found a book of no small learning. Therefore I thought it most necessary for me to bestow some diligence and travail to interpret it. Using great watchfulness and skill in that space, I brought the book to an end, and set it forth for them also which in a strange country are willing to learn, being prepared before in manners to live after the law.

CHAPTER 1

Verse 1. All wisdom cometh from the Lord, and is with Him forever.

Verse 2. Who can number the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain, and the days of eternity?

Verse 3. Who can find out the height of heaven, and the breadth of the earth, and the deep, and wisdom?

Verse 4. Wisdom hath been created before all things, and the understanding of prudence from everlasting.

Verse 5. The word of God Most High is the fountain of wisdom, and her ways are everlasting commandments.

Verse 6. To whom hath the root of wisdom been revealed? Or who hath known her wise counsels?

Verse 7. Unto whom hath the knowledge of wisdom been made manifest? And who hath understood her great experience?

Verse 8. There is one wise and greatly to be feared, the Lord sitting upon His throne.

Verse 9. He created her, and saw her, and numbered her, and poured her out upon all His works.

Verse 10. She is with all flesh according to His gift, and He hath given her to them that love Him.

Verse 11. The fear of the Lord is honor, and glory, and gladness, and a crown of rejoicing.

Verse 12. The fear of the Lord maketh a merry heart, and giveth joy, and gladness, and a long life.

Verse 13. Whoso feareth the Lord, it shall go well with him at the last, and he shall find favor in the day of his death.

Verse 14. To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and it was created with the faithful in the womb.

Verse 15. She hath built an everlasting foundation with men, and she shall be trusted among their seed.

Verse 16. To fear the Lord is the fullness of wisdom, and filleth men with her fruits.

Verse 17. She filleth all their house with things desirable, and their garners with her increase.

Verse 18. The fear of the Lord is a crown of wisdom, making peace and perfect health to flourish.

Verse 19. Wisdom raineth down skill and knowledge of understanding, and exalteth them to honor that hold her fast.

Verse 20. The root of wisdom is to fear the Lord, and the branches thereof are long life.

Verse 21. The fear of the Lord driveth away sins, and where it is present, it turneth away wrath.

Verse 22. A furious man cannot be justified, for the sway of his fury shall be his destruction.

Verse 23. A patient man will bear for a time, and afterward joy shall spring up unto him.

Verse 24. He will hide his words for a time, and the lips of many shall declare his wisdom.

Verse 25. The parables of knowledge are in the treasures of wisdom, but godliness is an abomination to a sinner.

Verse 26. If thou desire wisdom, keep the commandments, and the Lord shall give her unto thee.

Verse 27. For the fear of the Lord is wisdom and instruction, and faith and meekness are His delight.

Verse 28. Distrust not the fear of the Lord when thou art poor, and come not unto Him with a double heart.

Verse 29. Be not a hypocrite in the sight of men, and take good heed what thou speakest.

Verse 30. Exalt not thyself, lest thou fall and bring dishonor upon thy soul, and so God discover thy secrets and cast thee down in the midst of the congregation, because thou camest not in truth to the fear of the Lord, but thy heart was full of deceit.
