PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 4 of 18 The Purpose of God (Continued)

2. THE PURPOSE OF GOD (CONTINUED) “Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in the heavenly places in Christ: just as He has chosen us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love” (Eph 1.3, 4). As we stated in the first section of this article (March issue) it is a great mistake to approach the study of God’s purpose and plan (His program for this world) by making the creation of Adam our starting point; that commences in the middle instead of the beginning. No, we must rather take as the foundation of all God’s dealings with the earth, what is affirmed in Eph 1.3, 4. Nor must the terms of those verses be restricted to the New Testament saints. Instead, they speak of the entire ELECTION OF GRACE, the sum of that people which God gave to Christ to be redeemed by Him. Probably it will at once be objected to what has just been said, that the Old Testament saints were not “Blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenlies in Christ,” but rather, they were blessed with temporal blessings on earth in Abraham. So it may appear from much of the letter of the Old Testament Scriptures. But if we allow the New Testament to open the mystery contained in them, we are forced to come to an entirely different conclusion. As this is a vital point of interpretation, and one which is now so little understood, we feel obliged to labour it at some length. Of course, carnal men can only perceive the external meaning of God’s Word; but inasmuch as some of God’s

4 Eph 1:10 that in the dispensation of the fullness of the times He might gather together in one all things in Christ,

both which are in heaven and which are on earth-- in Him.

14

own children have been “carried away” by their fleshly reasonings, we trust that our efforts may be used by the Lord in dispelling the mists of error from the minds of some of His own people. The Apostle Paul, in the 3rd chapter of Galatians, when treating the blessings of Abraham (that is, the things God promised to Abraham, and in him to all nations, vv. 8, 9) clearly explains in the 14th verse, that “blessing” is a spiritual one, affirming “that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.” The words “that we might receive the promise of the Spirit” are a manifest exegesis of, “that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles.” Now, the promise and gift of the Spirit is the substance and sum of all spiritual blessings, for He is the root and fountain of them. To say that we have the Spirit given to us, is the same as declaring that we have all spiritual blessings conveyed to us. This is clear from a comparison of Luke 11.13 with Mat 7.11: what Christ, in the former, calls the Father giving “the Holy Spirit to those who ask Him,” in the latter, He terms “give good things to those who ask Him” — that is, the things which are truly “good,” which the Spirit brings with Him. As Calvin long ago pointed out in his commentary on that Epistle, the above interpretation is established and fixed by two expressions in that verse. First, the Apostle did not say, “The Spirit of promise,” which would have thrown the emphasis on the Person of the Blesser; but he said, “the promise of the Spirit,” which is a Hebraism for spiritual blessings, in opposition to outward and material things. Second, the confirming words “by faith” — that is, those blessings of which faith is sensible and appropriate — receiving and taking in spiritual things, being a Divinely implanted principle suited to the reception of just such things. Thus, it is one and the same “blessing” which comes upon the Gentiles (who did not have the promise of a literal Canaan) and upon God’s elect among the Jews — which is the Apostle’s theme and scope in Galatians 3. The things promised to Abraham consisted in spiritual things, and therefore the Gentiles as well as the Jews were capable of them. In further proof of this, we would appeal to an incident which has greatly puzzled those of our moderns who have given any serious thought to it. We refer to Jacob being blessed by Isaac, in which, both in God’s intention and Isaac’s apprehension, such a vast and great difference was put between Jacob’s portion and Esau’s. Yet, if the whole of Genesis 27 is carefully read, no such difference is perceivable; for the whole legacy of blessings bequeathed to Jacob was but outward and earthly in the letter of it: “Therefore, God give you of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: Let people serve you, and nations bow down to you. Be lord over your brethren, and let your mother’s sons bow down to you. Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be the one who blesses you” (Gen 27.28, 29). Now compare with this, the blessing upon Esau: “Behold, your dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above; And by your sword you shall live, and shall serve your brother; and it shall come to pass when you have the dominion, that you shall break his yoke from off your neck” (Gen 27.39, 40). From the point of earthly blessings, was that not nearly as full a portion as what was promised Jacob? Why then should Isaac be so sorrowful (v. 33) that Jacob, rather than his favourite son Esau, was the recipient of such an immeasurably greater blessing, if there was no deeper and grander content in the promises made to him, than the outward letter of them denoted? And why should Esau’s hatred be so stirred up against Jacob (v. 41), unless his own portion was greatly inferior to his brother’s? This could not have been so, if Jacob’s had consisted merely of “corn and wine” (v. 37)! But the difficulty which so many have felt in connection with the above, disappears at once when we discern the mystery contained in the language of that Divine blessing which Isaac pronounced

15

upon Jacob. Once it is clearly recognized that (oftentimes) in the Old Testament, heavenly things were referred to in earthly terms, and that spiritual blessings were set forth under the figure of material things, then many a passage at once becomes luminous. This is no forced or arbitrary interpretation of ours, as seen from Heb 12.17, where the Holy Spirit Himself has forever settled the meaning of the terms used in Genesis 27. Unless the spiritual blessings promised to God’s elect in Christ had been typically signified and mystically intended under those earthly things for Jacob, the Apostle would never have been moved to say that Jacob inherited “the blessing” and that Esau was “rejected;” for Esau did inherit all such earthly blessings in common with Jacob. Is it not plain, then, dear reader, that there was another sort of “blessings,” which were latent and hidden, even a substantial though invisible and spiritual kind of blessings forevermore? The “corn and wine” promised to Jacob were but shadows of it; and it was this which made the tremendous and vital difference between the temporal things granted to Esau. That is why Jacob’s portion is called “the blessing” (Heb 12.17). Observe, too, the emphasis made by Isaac in Gen 27.33, “I have blessed him, yes, and he shall be blessed,” which imports that the same spiritual blessing God promised to Abraham, was now made over by him to Jacob. For Jehovah had employed the same language when blessing the father of all believers, saying, “In blessing I will bless you” (Gen 22.17). Still further evidence of the identity of Abraham’s and Jacob’s portion is seen in the last words of Isaac concerning him: “Cursed be everyone who curses you, and blessed be the one who blesses you” (Gen 27.29). This is omitted in what he said to Esau — being part of the very words God originally used to Abraham: see Gen 12.2, 3. How low and mean are the thoughts which are now entertained by so many of the portion which God gave to His people in the earlier ages of the world. What gross ignorance is betrayed by those who suppose that being blessed “in basket and in store” was the best that the spiritual in Israel received from God. Even the Old Testament itself contains much which condemns so gross a conception. Take the Psalms. There we read again and again of the “Blessed” man. Who is he? One possessing much land and great flocks and herds? No indeed, if you read David’s description of him, says Paul. Here it is: “Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin” (Rom 4.7, 8). In the New Testament dispensation, the mystery hidden beneath the letter of the Old Testament — which was always known to the spiritual, but which was hidden from the natural man — is plainly expounded. Examples of this fact have been given above, and they might easily be multiplied; but we will add one more. At the beginning of this dispensation, Peter said (addressing his brethren after the flesh from the temple porch), “you are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, And in your seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed” (Act 3.25). To Peter’s hearers, those words signified little or nothing more than they do to the literalists of our day, understanding them as simply referring to Canaan and temporal things. Therefore, Peter expounds and says, “To you first, God, having raised up (by incarnation) His Son Jesus, sent Him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from your iniquities” (Act 3.26). In their gross carnality, the Jews, whose eyes were veiled by the outward letter of earthly promises, looked for a Messiah who was to usher in an earthly kingdom, vested with material pomp and glory. But Peter announces something infinitely more blessed than if God were to make all of His hearers mundane kings and emperors — namely, deliverance from the penalty and power of sin. He mentions that one blessing for all the rest, to show what sort they all are; and also because the one he specifies is the first and forerunner of all the others. In this, the Apostle was but following in the steps of his Master. For almost at the beginning of His ministry, Christ had announced that the “blessed” were not the holders of high earthly offices, or the possessors of much silver and gold, but the “poor in spirit,” the “meek,” the “pure in heart,” etc. (Mat 5).

16

“Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in the heavenly places in Christ” (1Pet 1.3). The phrase, “in heavenly places” or “in the heavenlies,” in addition to “all spiritual blessings,” calls for close attention. It is evident that this is not a synonymous addition, as expressing God’s blessings by two words that signify one and the same thing — because it is not said, “spiritual” and “heavenly,” nor “spiritual” or “heavenly.” All those blessings are spiritual, and all were in the heavenlies in Christ. What, then, is the further and separate thought included by the phrase, “in the heavenly places”? The Dispensationalists say it is in contrast to the earthly blessings which pertained to the nation of Israel. But that is a mistake. The key which opens the answer to our question is found in the final words: “in the heavenly places in Christ.” Now when “in Christ” is used contrastingly, it is always antithetical to “in Adam,” and never to Israel or the earth. All the race was seminally in Adam’s loins. Moreover, Adam was placed in Eden as the federal head and legal representative of his posterity. We were all created in Adam, and we were all blessed in Adam: “and God blessed them, and said,” etc. (Gen 1.28). Adam being made in God’s image after his likeness (Gen 1.26) was, in that respect, a spiritual man, for such is the image of God: see Col 3.10.5 Adam’s being made in God’s image was the foundation of that charter of blessing to him and his posterity. His graces were all spiritual, and his life and communion with God was spiritual; and so it may be truly said of him, that he was “blessed with spiritual blessings,” as well as things which were earthly (“you have dominion, etc.) — yet, only as “flesh and blood” can be capable of, in an earthly condition. And since all of us were then “in Adam,” we too were all blessed with spiritual blessings. Nevertheless, Adam in his unfallen condition was but “flesh and blood” and an earthly man, and could not enjoy God as He is to be seen and enjoyed in Heaven. Hence the distinction drawn in 1Cor 15.47: “The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven.” And as that earthly man was, we who are of him would have remained, if he had not fallen, never advancing higher: 1Cor 15.48.6 But Christ being the Lord from Heaven, a heavenly Man, and we being “blessed” in Him and together with Him, are blessed in heavenly things, or with heavenly blessings, and are raised up to heavenly places with Him (Eph 2.6). For as in the heavenly Man, Christ, such are those in Him (in status and state). Heaven is Christ’s native country, He is the Lord of it, and we, being united to Him by covenant relationship and joined to Him in one spirit, must share His inheritance. Therefore He has affirmed “that where I am, there you may be also” (Joh 14.3). Thus God’s favoured people are blessed in Christ with all heavenly blessings, and not spiritual only, which Adam (and the race in him) was, in his primitive condition. Now, the sum and substance of the spiritual and heavenly blessings with which the entire ELECTION OF GRACE were blessed in Christ, are described in the verses which immediately follow. “Just as He has chosen us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love. Having predestined us to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will; To the praise of the glory of His grace, in which he has made us accepted in the Beloved.” (Eph 1.4-6) In verse 3, praise is rendered to God for His eternal act of “blessing” His people. In verses 4-6 we are shown how all blessings depend upon God’s election in eternity past; and likewise, how all depends upon Jesus Christ. A parallel passage is found in 2Tim 1.9, “Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before the world began” — all the “blessings” of Eph 1.3 are expressed here in the single term “grace.” 5 Col 3:10 and have put on the new man who is renewed in knowledge according to the image of Him who created him; 6 1Cor 15:48 As was the man of dust, so also are those who are made of dust; and as is the heavenly Man, so also are

those who are heavenly.

17

How the blessings of Eph 1.3 are communicated to God’s elect in a time-state, or in other words, how “the eternal purpose which God purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord (Eph 3.11) is wrought in human history, is revealed in Eph 1.7-14.7 As will be seen in a glance at those verses, everything else is wrapped up in the first thing mentioned there, namely “redemption” through the blood of Christ. The consideration of this must be held over (D. V.) for the closing section of this article. Meanwhile we would urge the interested reader to prayerfully read and re-read what has already been said, and to “Prove all things; hold fast that which is good” (1The 5.21).
