PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 42 of 51
Daughters and the Glory of God

---

CHAPTER 42

Verse 1. Of these things be not thou ashamed, and accept no person to sin thereby:

Verse 2. Of the law of the Most High, and His covenant; and of judgment to justify the ungodly;

Verse 3. Of reckoning with thy partners and travelers; or of the gift of the heritage of friends;

Verse 4. Of exactness of balance and weights; or of getting much or little;

Verse 5. And of merchants' indifferent selling; or of much correction of children; and to make the side of an evil servant to bleed.

Verse 6. Sure keeping is good, where an evil wife is; and shut up, where many hands are.

Verse 7. Deliver all things in number and weight, and put all in writing that thou givest out or receivest in.

Verse 8. Be not ashamed to inform the unwise and foolish, and the extreme aged that contendeth with those that are young; thus shalt thou be truly learned, and approved of all men living.

Verse 9. The father waketh for the daughter when no man knoweth, and the care for her taketh away sleep; when she is young, lest she pass away the flower of her age; and being married, lest she should be hated;

Verse 10. In her virginity, lest she should be defiled and gotten with child in her father's house; and having a husband, lest she should misbehave herself; and when she is married, lest she should be barren.

Verse 11. Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter, lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, and a byword in the city, and a reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude.

Verse 12. Behold not every body's beauty, and sit not in the midst of women.

Verse 13. For from garments cometh a moth, and from women wickedness.

Verse 14. Better is the churlishness of a man than a courteous woman which bringeth shame and reproach.

Verse 15. I will now remember the works of the Lord, and declare the things that I have seen. In the words of the Lord are His works.

Verse 16. The sun that giveth light looketh upon all things, and the work of the Lord is full of His glory.

Verse 17. The Lord hath not given power to the saints to declare all His marvelous works, which the Almighty Lord firmly settled, that whatsoever is might be established for His glory.

Verse 18. He seeketh out the deep and the heart, and considereth their crafty devices; for the Lord knoweth all that may be known, and He beholdeth the signs of the world.

Verse 19. He declareth the things that are past and for to come, and revealeth the steps of hidden things.

Verse 20. No thought escapeth Him, neither any word is hidden from Him.

Verse 21. He hath garnished the excellent works of His wisdom, and He is from everlasting to everlasting; unto Him may nothing be added, neither can He be diminished, and He hath no need of any counselor.

Verse 22. Oh how desirable are all His works! And that a man may see even to a spark.

Verse 23. All these things live and remain forever for all uses, and they are all obedient.

Verse 24. All things are double one against another, and He hath made nothing imperfect.

Verse 25. One thing establisheth the good of another; and who shall be filled with beholding His glory?

This concludes Part 8 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 37 through 42. In our next reading, we shall hear of the glory of God in His creation and the praise of the famous men of Israel.

We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach. In these chapters, Ben Sira sings of the glory of God in creation — the sun, the moon, the stars, the rainbow, the snow — and then begins his great hymn in praise of the famous men of Israel, from Enoch and Noah through Abraham, Moses, Joshua, and David.