PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 12 of 18
The Grace of God

---

THE GRACE OF GOD.
“The character of God, and the great principles of His moral government, the revelation of which
has been one great object of His dealings with men, have of course, been at all times the same
in themselves, though the knowledge of them has been communicated to men at sundry times
and in diverse manners. The way in which fallen men were to be saved has been at all times the
same, as it was necessarily and unchangeably determined in its substance, or its fundamental
provisions and arrangements, by the attributes of God and the principles of His moral
government. Of course, God’s great designs with respect to the fallen race of man have been at
all times the same, conducted on the same principles and directed to the same object. The chief
differences observable in God’s successive dispensations toward the human race, are to be found
in the fullness and completeness of the revelation which, at different times, He gave of His
character and plans, and especially of the method of salvation, and in the more temporary
objects which at different periods He combined with His one grand terminating purpose”
— William Cunningham, 1870.
Since the Fall, God’s dealings with men have been under three distinct economies: the Patriarchal,
the Mosaic, and the Christian. In each of them, “the God of all grace” (1Pet 5.10) has both exercised
and manifested His sovereign benignity. It is a serious mistake to suppose that Divine grace is
peculiar to this Christian era; it is a fundamental error to affirm that in Old Testament times,
God’s people were saved on some other principle than grace. Yet, through a wrong understanding
of John 1.17 and Eph 3.2,31 it has been widely held that the Mosaic economy was one of unrelieved
law, and that not until after the day of Pentecost was the grace of God made known to poor sinners.
In the note appended to Mat 28.19 the Scofield Bible says, “With the death and resurrection of
Jesus Christ begins the dispensation of the grace of God (Eph 3.2), which is defined as ‘His
kindness toward us through Christ Jesus’; and ‘the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should
boast’ (Eph 2.7-9). Under grace (which Mr. S. contrasts with “under law,” or the Mosaic economy)
God freely gives eternal life to the believing sinner (Rom 6.23); accounts a perfect righteousness
to him (Rom 3.21, 22; 4.4, 5), and accords him a perfect position.” But God gave precisely the
same blessings to penitent and believing sinners from Abel onwards!
“But Noah found grace in the eyes of the LORD” (Gen 6.8). To appreciate the force of this, attention
must be paid to the verses which precede and follow. The wickedness of man was great in the
earth, so that the Lord regretted that He had made man. The earth was filled with violence for “all
flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth” (Gen 6.12). Nevertheless, even in those terrible times
(far, far worse than now!), there was “a remnant according to the election of grace” (Rom 11.5).
God had reserved for Himself one family from being swallowed up in the general apostasy. The
sovereign grace of God had singled out Noah, and wrought in him a saving faith, which was
evidenced by works of obedience and righteousness. It was not for anything in him, for God
permitted it to appear that he was a man of like passions with us (Gen 9.21); but it was due alone
to the free favour and will of God that Noah was delivered from the flood.
That the patriarchs were saved by grace is made abundantly clear from the 4th Chapter of
Romans. There we are told, “For if Abraham were justified by works, he has something of which
to glory; but not before God. For what does the Scripture say? Abraham believed God, and it was
counted to him for (unto) righteousness” (vv. 2, 3). Then in verse 16 we read, “Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be by grace; to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not only to
that which is of the law, but also to that which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us
31 Joh 1:17 For the law was given through Moses, but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ. Eph 3:2 if indeed

you have heard of the dispensation of the grace of God, which was given to me for you;

47

all.” Nor was this blessed truth withheld from them and only made known in New Testament
times. In Gen 19:19, we read that Lot said, “Behold now, your servant has found grace in your
sight, and you have magnified your mercy, which you have shown me in saving my life.” How clear
his apprehension was of the unmerited favour of God. In Gen 43.29, we find Joseph saying to
Benjamin, “God be gracious to you.” This is clear proof that he was Divinely taught this precious
truth.
How gloriously God demonstrated His grace in delivering the descendants of Abraham from “the
iron furnace.” Nowhere is His sovereign favour more blessedly displayed than in the difference
He put between the Hebrews and the Egyptians, and the wonderful way in which He emancipated
them from the house of bondage. No clearer type of redemption is to be met with in all the
Scriptures. Sending Moses to an oppressed and groaning people, the protection they were
afforded from the Angel of Death under the blood of the paschal lamb, and their deliverance at
the Red Sea, unmistakably and plainly foreshadowed the Christian’s deliverance from the
servitude of sin and Satan, and his security from the wrath to come. He owes this deliverance and
security entirely to the grace of God manifested in the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. So too,
it was grace, wondrous grace, which provided the murmuring Israelites with manna from on high,
and with water out of the struck rock.
What has been said in the last paragraph is generally acknowledged; but it is now supposed that
all is changed when we reach Exodus 19 and 20. To use an expression which is commonly
employed in some circles, “At Sinai, Israel placed themselves under law” — as though they were
not “under Law” previously. See Exo 16.27, 28! 32 It was then that “the Dispensation of Law”
began, a dispensation which (it is insisted) was radically different from this Christian era, in its
fundamental essentials. As a sample of what we now refer to, we transcribe a few sentences from
I. M. Haldeman’s “How to Study the Bible.” There the writer affirms, “The distinctive value of
dispensational truth may be seen by contrasting the dispensation of the Holy Ghost with the
Mosaic dispensation.” Among the points of difference, Mr. H. gives the following,
“In the Mosaic dispensation, God dealt according to man’s work. In the Holy Ghost’s
dispensation, He deals according to Christ’s work. In the Mosaic dispensation, God dealt on the
basis of Law. In the Holy Ghost dispensation, He deals on the basis of Grace. In the Mosaic
dispensation, God said, ‘Do, and live.’ In the Holy Ghost dispensation, He says: ‘Live and do’.”
Now we have no hesitation in saying that such brief and bald statements as these are most
misleading and mischievous. The first of the above contrasts ignores the fact that the redemptive
work of Christ was retroactive in its efficacy and value, and that from Abel onwards God has
always dealt with His spiritual elect on the ground of Christ’s atonement. See Rom 3.24-25 and
1Pet 1.19-20. 33 The second contrast drawn needs considerable amplification. God is dealing with
all those who are out of Christ “on the basis of Law,” as much today as He did with Israel in the
time of Moses — as they will yet discover to their eternal undoing, Rom 3.19.34 And as will be
shown in the paragraphs which follow, God acted in grace with Israel during the Mosaic economy,
as truly as He is acting in grace now. If by the term “life” in the third contrast, Mr. Haldeman

32 Exo 16:27 Now it happened that some of the people went out on the seventh day to gather, but they found none. 28

And the LORD said to Moses, "How long do you refuse to keep My commandments and My laws?
33 Rom 3:24-25 being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, 25 whom God set
forth as a propitiation by His blood, through faith, to demonstrate His righteousness, because in His forbearance God
had passed over the sins that were previously committed; 1Pet 1:19-20 but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish and without spot. 20 He indeed was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was
manifest in these last times for you.
34 Rom 3:19 Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.

48

means spiritual and eternal life (as the second member of it seems to clearly denote), then his
statement is positively horrible — false doctrine of the worst kind.
In considering the constitution which God gave to Israel at Sinai, most of our moderns appear to
fix their whole attention on the moral law, and utterly ignore the ceremonial: the two ought to be
regarded together, for they formed one complete whole. They presented the two sides of God’s
character and nature, as “light” (1Joh 1.5) and “love” (1Joh 4.8). The moral law exhibited the
righteousness and holiness of God; the ceremonial law reflected His love and grace. The one was
given to reveal and convict of sin; the other was given to point to the blessed provision which the
free favour of God has made for blotting out sin. The one was to show man his ruin; the other
made known the remedy for that ruin. The ceremonial law, with its sin-offerings, its priesthood,
its blessed provisions, proclaimed in no uncertain terms the grace of God. And it is ignorance of
the worst kind to refer to the Mosaic economy as a stern regime of unrelieved justice, unmodified
by the gracious provisions for failure which were found in the Levitical institutions.
It is so plain that God dealt in grace with the nation of Israel after they received the Law from His
mouth at Sinai, that only the blind can fail to see it. And yet, as this is now so little perceived, we
feel that we must labour the point. A most noteworthy proof of it is found in the very next incident
which occurred after Jehovah first announced the Ten Words. When Moses returned to the
mount, Aaron made a golden calf, and the nation worshipped it. A more flagrant violation of their
covenant with the Lord could scarcely be imagined. Though God chastened them for their offense,
as Jer 31.2 declares, “The people who survived the sword found grace in the wilderness.” Blessed
it is, to behold the typical mediator pleading on behalf of his erring brethren, and averting the
Divine Wrath from them.
When Moses returned again to the mount, carrying with him the two hewn tablets for God to write
the Ten Commandments upon, we are told that, “The LORD descended in the cloud, and stood
with him there, and proclaimed the name of the LORD. And the LORD passed by before him, and
proclaimed, The LORD, The LORD God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth, Keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin,
and that will by no means clear the guilty” (Exo. 34.5-7). What a blessed mingling this was of grace
and law, of sovereign benignity and righteousness, of compassion and holiness! Let those who so
loudly insist that “law and grace will no more mingle than oil and water,” seriously ponder the
above passage and revise their foolish and one-sided conception of things. It is blessed to see how
Hezekiah (2Chr 30.9), Nehemiah (9.17) and Jonah (4.2), each rested upon this precious word in
Exodus 34.6.
“And the LORD spoke to Moses, saying, Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, In this way you
shall bless the children of Israel, saying to them, The LORD bless you, and keep you: The LORD
make his face shine upon you, and be gracious to you: The LORD lift up his countenance upon
you, and give you peace” (Num. 6.22-26).
How can such a passage as this be fitted into the narrow conception of the Mosaic economy which
is being propagated so ardently by the Dispensationalists? It cannot. One almost wonders whether
many of them know there is such a passage in the Pentateuch! Those verses record the benediction
which the high priest pronounced upon Israel. What greater and grander blessing can be prayed
for today?
The principle of grace was prominently exhibited in the civil law which the Lord gave to His
people. In this Israel was taught to be gracious in their conduct. Many examples might be given,
but we must content ourselves here with a few, leaving the reader to follow up the subject for
himself. In Exodus 21.2, we find that God gave orders, “If you buy a Hebrew servant, he shall serve
six years: and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.” “If you lend money to any of My
people that is poor by you, you shall not be as a usurer to him, nor shall you lay usury upon him.

49

If you at all take your neighbour’s raiment in pledge, you shall deliver it to him before the sun goes
down. For that is his only covering; it is his raiment for his skin: in what shall he sleep? And it
shall come to pass, when he cries out to me, that I will hear; for I am gracious” (Exo. 22.25-27).
“You shall not defraud your neighbour, nor rob him: the wages of him that is hired shall not abide
with you all night until the morning” (Lev 19.13). This is in order that the labourer might have
money with which to purchase food for his evening meal. “If a bird’s nest chances to be before you
in the way in any tree, or on the ground, whether they are young ones, or eggs, and the dam sitting
on the young, or on the eggs, you shall not take the dam with the young” (Deu 22.6). “When you
build a new house, you shall make a battlement for your roof, so that you do not bring blood upon
your house, if any man falls from there” (Deu 22.8). Who can fail to see the principle of grace
shining forth in these precepts? God thereby taught His people to be considerate of others, to be
compassionate and merciful.
“You have heard it said, you shall love your neighbour, and hate your enemy. But I say to you,
Love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you” (Mat 5.43, 44).
These verses are often appealed to as a proof of the radical difference which obtains between the
Mosaic and Christian dispensations; but such an appeal betrays deplorable ignorance. Christ was
refuting there the wicked errors of the Pharisees. The Old Testament inculcated the same gracious
treatment of “enemies” as Christ insisted on. “If you meet your enemy’s ox or his ass going astray,
you shall surely bring it back to him again” (Exo. 23.4). “you shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge
against the children of your people, but you shall love your neighbour as yourself: I am the LORD”
(Lev 19.18). “Do not rejoice when your enemy falls” (Pro 24.17). “If your enemy is hungry, give
him bread to eat; and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink” (Pro 25.21). One wonders if presentday Dispensationalists read their Bibles at all, or if they are content to merely echo what their
predecessors have said.
Notwithstanding their waywardness and continued backsliding, God dealt in grace with Israel all
through their long and checkered history. Read through the book of Judges, and see how often He
raised up deliverers for them. Read through the Kings and the Chronicles, and note His longsuffering benignity in sending them Prophet after Prophet. After Israel had fallen to the low level
they did in the reign of Ahab, what grace was displayed in the ministry of Elijah and Elisha. Read
carefully Isaiah 1.2-15, and then ponder that amazing invitation in 1.18, “Come now, and let us
reason together, says the LORD: though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow;
though they are red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” Where in all the New Testament is there
a word which, for pure grace, exceeds this of Isaiah 1.18?
Right down to the end of the Old Testament we find God dealing in grace with Israel. In the days
of Hezekiah “the LORD was gracious to them, and had compassion on them, and had respect to
them, because of His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, nor
did He as yet cast them from His presence” (2Kng 13.23). In the days of Hosea they were invited
to, “Take words with you, and turn to the LORD: say to Him, Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously” (14.2). As late as Malachi we find the Prophet saying, “And now, I pray you, beseech
God that He will be gracious to us” (1.9).
The godly in Israel, during the Mosaic economy, had a vastly different conception of God than our
Dispensationalists have. Hear the Psalmist as he declares, “Gracious is the LORD, and righteous;
yes, our God is merciful” (116.5). Hear him again as he bursts out in adoring praise, “Bless the
LORD, O my soul, and forget not all His benefits: Who forgives all your iniquities; who heals all
your diseases.... He has not dealt with us according to our sins; nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities” (Psa 103.2, 3, 10) — Can Christians say more? “If You, LORD, should mark iniquities,
O Lord, who shall stand?” (Psa 13.3)! What, then, is the great distinction between the Mosaic and
the Christian dispensation? This: God’s grace was confined to one nation then; now it flows forth
to all nations!

50

Part VII