PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 17 of 51
God's Creation of Humanity


CHAPTER 17

Verse 1. The Lord created man of the earth, and turned him into it again.

Verse 2. He gave them few days, and a short time, and power also over the things therein.

Verse 3. He endued them with strength by themselves, and made them according to His image.

Verse 4. And put the fear of man upon all flesh, and gave him dominion over beasts and fowls.

Verse 5. They received the use of the five operations of the Lord, and in the sixth place He imparted them understanding, and in the seventh, speech, an interpreter of the cogitations thereof.

Verse 6. Counsel, and a tongue, and eyes, ears, and a heart, gave He them to understand.

Verse 7. Withal He filled them with the knowledge of understanding, and showed them good and evil.

Verse 8. He set His eye upon their hearts, that He might show them the greatness of His works.

Verse 9. He gave them to glory in His marvelous acts forever, that they might declare His works with understanding.

Verse 10. And the elect shall praise His holy name.

Verse 11. Beside this He gave them knowledge, and the law of life for an heritage.

Verse 12. He made an everlasting covenant with them, and showed them His judgments.

Verse 13. Their eyes saw the majesty of His glory, and their ears heard His glorious voice.

Verse 14. And He said unto them, Beware of all unrighteousness; and He gave every man commandment concerning his neighbor.

Verse 15. Their ways are ever before Him, and shall not be hid from His eyes.

Verse 16. Every man from his youth is given to evil, neither could they make to themselves fleshy hearts for stony.

Verse 17. For in the division of the nations of the whole earth He set a ruler over every people; but Israel is the Lord's portion.

Verse 18. Whom, being His firstborn, He nourisheth with discipline, and giving him the light of His love doth not forsake him.

Verse 19. Therefore all their works are as the sun before Him, and His eyes are continually upon their ways.

Verse 20. None of their unrighteous deeds are hid from Him, but all their sins are before the Lord.

Verse 21. But the Lord being gracious, and knowing His workmanship, neither left nor forsook them, but spared them.

Verse 22. The alms of a man is as a signet with Him, and He will keep the good deeds of man as the apple of the eye, and give repentance to His sons and daughters.

Verse 23. Afterward He will rise up and reward them, and render their recompense upon their heads.

Verse 24. But unto them that repent, He granted them return, and comforted those that fail in patience.

Verse 25. Return unto the Lord, and forsake thy sins; make thy prayer before His face, and offend less.

Verse 26. Turn again to the Most High, and turn away from iniquity; for He will lead thee out of darkness into the light of health, and hate thou abomination vehemently.

Verse 27. Who shall praise the Most High in the grave, instead of them which live and give thanks?

Verse 28. Thanksgiving perisheth from the dead, as from one that is not; the living and sound in heart shall praise the Lord.

Verse 29. How great is the lovingkindness of the Lord our God, and His compassion unto such as turn unto Him in holiness!

Verse 30. For all things cannot be in men, because the son of man is not immortal.

Verse 31. What is brighter than the sun? Yet the light thereof faileth. And flesh and blood will imagine evil.

Verse 32. He vieweth the power of the height of heaven, and all men are but earth and ashes.
