PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 10 of 51
The Rulers of Nations

---

CHAPTER 10

Verse 1. A wise judge will instruct his people, and the government of a prudent man is well ordered.

Verse 2. As the judge of the people is himself, so are his officers; and what manner of man the ruler of the city is, such are all they that dwell therein.

Verse 3. An unwise king destroyeth his people, but through the prudence of them which are in authority the city shall be inhabited.

Verse 4. The power of the earth is in the hand of the Lord, and in due time He will set over it one that is profitable.

Verse 5. In the hand of God is the prosperity of man, and upon the person of the scribe shall He lay His honor.

Verse 6. Bear not hatred to thy neighbor for every wrong, and do nothing at all by injurious practices.

Verse 7. Pride is hateful before God and man, and by both doth one commit iniquity.

Verse 8. Because of unrighteous dealings, injuries, and riches got by deceit, the kingdom is translated from one people to another.

Verse 9. Why is earth and ashes proud? There is not a more wicked thing than a covetous man; for such an one setteth his own soul to sale, because while he liveth he casteth away his bowels.

Verse 10. The physician cutteth off a long disease, and he that is today a king tomorrow shall die.

Verse 11. For when a man is dead, he shall inherit creeping things, beasts, and worms.

Verse 12. The beginning of pride is when one departeth from God, and his heart is turned away from his Maker.

Verse 13. For pride is the beginning of sin, and he that hath it shall pour out abomination; and therefore the Lord brought upon them strange calamities, and overthrew them utterly.

Verse 14. The Lord hath cast down the thrones of proud princes, and set up the meek in their stead.

Verse 15. The Lord hath plucked up the roots of the proud nations, and planted the lowly in their place.

Verse 16. The Lord overthrew countries of the heathen, and destroyed them to the foundations of the earth.

Verse 17. He took some of them away, and destroyed them, and hath made their memorial to cease from the earth.

Verse 18. Pride was not made for men, nor furious anger for them that are born of a woman.

Verse 19. They that fear the Lord are a sure seed, and they that love Him an honorable plant. They that regard not the law are a dishonorable seed; they that transgress the commandments are a deceivable seed.

Verse 20. Among brethren he that is chief is honorable, so are they that fear the Lord in His eyes.

Verse 21. The fear of the Lord goeth before the obtaining of authority, but roughness and pride is the losing thereof.

Verse 22. Whether he be rich, noble, or poor, their glory is the fear of the Lord.

Verse 23. It is not meet to despise the poor man that hath understanding, neither is it convenient to magnify a sinful man.

Verse 24. Great men, and judges, and potentates shall be honored, yet is there none of them greater than he that feareth the Lord.

Verse 25. Unto the servant that is wise shall they that are free do service, and he that hath knowledge will not grudge when he is reformed.

Verse 26. Be not overwise in doing thy business, and boast not thyself in the time of thy distress.

Verse 27. Better is he that laboreth and aboundeth in all things, than he that boasteth himself and wanteth bread.

Verse 28. My son, glorify thy soul in meekness, and give it honor according to the dignity thereof.

Verse 29. Who will justify him that sinneth against his own soul? And who will honor him that dishonoreth his own life?

Verse 30. The poor man is honored for his skill, and the rich man is honored for his riches.

Verse 31. He that is honored in poverty, how much more shall he be in riches? And he that is dishonorable in riches, how much more shall he be in poverty?

---

This concludes Part 2 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 11 through Chapter 15, covering humility and appearances, caution with associates, true generosity, the fear of God, and the gift of free will.

These chapters continue the wisdom of Ben Sira, covering lessons on humility and deceptive appearances, the need for caution when choosing associates, the nature of true generosity, the blessings that attend those who fear God, and the great gift of free will given to every man.