PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 17 of 18
The Word of God

---

1. THE WORD OF GOD.
A Divine revelation, though it consists of many parts and is given through numerous instruments,
must be PERFECTLY CONSISTENT and harmonious throughout; to say that the God of Truth
contradicts Himself is to be guilty of uttering blasphemy. The Holy Scriptures have but ONE
AUTHOR; though He employed many mouthpieces, yet “holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost” (2Pet 1.21). The Divine Author of the Scriptures is IMMUTABLE; though
He “at various times and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the fathers by the prophets”
and “has in these last days spoken to us by his Son” (Heb 1.1, 2), nevertheless, there is absolute
agreement between them. Therefore, the Word of Truth sets forth one system of doctrine, one way
of salvation, one rule of faith. We never read of the “doctrines of God,” but always of “the doctrine”
(see Deu 32.2, Pro 4.2, Mat 7.28, John 7.17, Rom 16.17, 1Tim 1.10; 4.16; 6.3, Tit 2.10; contrast with
Mar 7.7, Col 2.22, 1Tim 4.1, Heb 13.9) — because it is one single, intricate, organic whole.
Though the Scriptures were penned by forty different writers, of every variety of culture and
condition, during the space of sixteen centuries — i.e., through about fifty successive generations
of mankind — yet without collusion, there is perfect agreement between them. Though those forty
writers lived in different ages of the world, and were men of vastly varied interests and capacities,
yet they were of ONE SENTIMENT; they all spoke in substance the SAME THINGS; they all delivered
the SAME DOCTRINE; they all enjoined the SAME MORAL DUTIES. There are no contradictions in their
several productions, no jarring discords between the notes they sounded; all is of a piece. They
concur in their statements, and exactly coincide in the Truth they taught. All were of the SAME
JUDGMENT; all sought to enforce the SAME PRINCIPLES; all applied them to the SAME PRACTICAL
PURPOSE.
The character of their writings varied as much as the men who composed them. There is history
and poetry, law and lyrics, prophecy and ritual — and yet, amid all this diversity, there is an
underlying unity, which is not so much one of mechanism as one of organism. One part depends
upon another, both for its interpretation and its completion. Links of connection run throughout
the whole, like the nerves of the body uniting its varied members. There is an essential agreement
between all parts of the Bible. Certain conspicuous concepts pervade its whole, like golden cords
on which all else is strung — such as the Messiah-Mediator and the kingdom of God, sin and
salvation, law and grace, sacrifice and priesthood, duty and privilege. There is also a marvelous
progress of doctrine to be observed throughout, where one writer leaves a theme, another picks
it up and carries it forward.
Though separated by four hundred years, there is an unmistakable connection between the Old
Testament and the New: what was latent in the former, is patent in the latter; what is concealed
in the one, is revealed in the other. Only one explanation for the above phenomena is adequate or
possible: one Controlling Mind spanned the centuries from Moses to John, superintending and
directing each instrument. It is like an orchestra, the members of which take up their different
parts, playing what was previously composed for them, and all uniting in one grand harmony. Or,
we may compare it to the building of one of the great cathedrals which took centuries to complete:
scores of workmen, of different calibre — all being engaged on it, and yet all executing the plan of
the one architect. The unmistakable and perfect unity of the Scriptures plainly manifests their one
Divine Author.
The Scriptures as a whole constitute an organism, instinct [permeated] with the life of God — a
whole consisting of many parts, exquisitely correlated and vitally interdependent upon each other.
God so controlled all the agents whom He employed, and has so coordinated their efforts, as to
produce one single living Book. Within this organic unity there is great variety, but no discord.
Man’s body is but one, though it is made up of many members; it is diverse in size, character, and

67

operation. The rainbow is but one; though it distinctly reflects the seven prismatic rays, yet they
are harmoniously blended together. So it is with the Bible. Its unity appears in the perfect accord
of doctrine taught throughout — the oneness yet trinity of God, the Deity and humanity of Christ
united in one Person, the Everlasting Covenant which secures the salvation of the entire ELECTION
OF GRACE, the justification of the ungodly by faith alone, the highway of holiness as the only path
leading to Heaven — all are plainly revealed in Old and New Testament alike.
The question may be raised, If the Holy Scriptures are a strict unit, then why has God Himself
divided them into two Testaments? That is an interesting question which we cannot here fully
investigate. It may help us a little to ask, Why has God appointed two principal heavenly bodies
to illumine the earth, the moon and the sun? Why, too, is the human frame duplex: having two
legs and arms, two ears and eyes, two lungs and kidneys? Is not the answer the same in each case:
to augment and supplement each other? But returning to our first inquiry, four replies may be
suggested.
First, to more distinctly set forth the two covenants, which are the basis of all God’s dealings with
mankind: the Covenant of Works and the Covenant of Grace.
Second, to show more plainly the two separate companies which are united in that one Body
which constitutes the Church, redeemed Jews and redeemed Gentiles.
Third, to demonstrate more plainly the providence of God: for many centuries using the Jews as
the custodians of the OLD TESTAMENT, which condemns them for their rejection of Christ; and
employing the Papists through the “dark ages,” to preserve the NEW TESTAMENT, which denounces
their idolatry.
Fourth, that one might confirm the other: type in antitype, prophecy in fulfillment.
“The mutual relations of the two testaments. These two main divisions resemble the dual
structure of the human body, where the two eyes and ears, hands and feet correspond to and
complement one another. There is not only a general, but a special mutual fitness. Therefore,
they need to be studied together, side by side, to be compared even in lesser details — for in
nothing are they independent of each other; and the closer the inspection, the more minute the
adaptations appear, and the more intimate the association.... The two Testaments are like the
two cherubim of the mercy seat, facing in opposite directions, yet facing each other, and
foreshadowing with glory, the one mercy seat. Or again, they are like the human body bound
together by joints and bands and ligaments, by one brain and one heart, one pair of lungs, one
system of respiration, circulation, digestion, sensory and motor nerves, where division is
destruction.” — A.T. Pierson, from “Knowing the Scriptures.”
But what has all the above to do with the subject we are now investigating? Much, very much. The
central design of “Dispensationalism” is not to make manifest the accord of Scripture, but the
discord between what pertained to the “dispensation of law,” and what obtains under the
“dispensation of grace.” Studied efforts are made to pit passage against passage; and all sound
principles of exegesis are thrown to the winds in order to accomplish this purpose. As a sample of
what we refer to: Exodus 21.24 is cited, “eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,”
and then against this is quoted Mat 5.39, “But I say to you, That you not resist evil: but whoever
strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also.” Then it is triumphantly asserted that
these two passages can only be “reconciled” by allocating them to different people in different
ages — and with such superficial handling of the sacred Scriptures, thousands of gullible people
are deceived. Why, if such were the case, not only would large sections of God’s Word no longer
be “profitable” for us (2Tim. 3.16, 17), but most of the Old Testament would be of no more value
than an obsolete almanac!
Those possessing a “Scofield Bible” may turn to Exodus 21.24, and they will see that in the margin
opposite to it the editor refers to “Lev 24.20, Deu 19.21; cf. Mat 5.38-44, 1Pet 2.19-21,” upon which

68

this brief comment is made, “The provision in Exodus is law, and righteous; the New Testament
passages, grace and merciful.” How far Mr. Scofield was consistent with himself may be seen by
a reference to what he states on page 989, at the beginning of the New Testament under “The Four
Gospels,” where he expressly affirms, “The sermon on the mount is law, not grace” (italics ours);
truly, “the legs of the lame are not equal.” In his marginal note to Exodus 21.24, Mr. Scofield cites
Mat 5.38-44 as “grace”; in his Introduction to the Four Gospels, he declares that Matthew 5-7 is
“law, and not grace.” Which of these assertions did he wish his readers to believe?
Still the question may be asked, How are you going to reconcile Exo 21.24 with Mat 5.38-44? Our
answer is, There is nothing between them to “reconcile;” there is nothing in them which clashes.
Exo 21.24 contains statutes for public magistrates to enforce; Mat 5.38-44 lays down rules for
private individuals to live by! Why do these “Rightly Dividers” not rightly “divide” the Scriptures
and distinguish between what belongs to different classes? That Exo 21.24 does contain statutes
for “public magistrates” to enforce, is clearly established by comparing Scripture with Scripture.
In Deu 19.21, the same “statute” is again recorded; if the reader will but turn back to Deu 19.18,
he will read there, “And the judges shall make diligent inquisition” etc.! It would be real mercy to
the public if our judges thus dealt with conscienceless criminals today!
Before leaving what has been before us in the last three paragraphs, let it be pointed out that when
our blessed Lord added to Mat 5.38 “But I say to you, Love your enemies, bless those who curse
you, do good to those who hate you” (v. 44), He was not advancing a sentiment which had never
been previously revealed. No, the same gracious principle of conduct had been enforced in the
Old Testament! In Exo 23.4, 5 Moses had commanded, “If you meet your enemy’s ox or his ass
going astray, you shall surely bring it back to him again. If you see the ass of someone who hates
you lying under its burden, and would refrain from helping it, you shall surely help with it.” Again,
in Pro 25.21 we read, “If your enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he is thirsty, give him
water to drink”!
God bids us, “Recompense no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of all men. If it
is possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all men. Dearly beloved, do not avenge
yourselves, but rather give way to [God’s] wrath” (Rom 12.17-19). The same God also commanded
His people in Old Testament times, “you shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the
children of your people; but you shall love your neighbour as yourself: I am the LORD” (Lev 19.18).
And therefore, David was grateful to Abigail for dissuading him from taking vengeance on Nabal:
“Blessed be you who have kept me this day from coming to shed blood, and from avenging myself
with my own hand” (1Sam 25.33). So far was the Old Testament from allowing any spirit of
bitterness, malice, or revenge, that it expressly declared, “Do not say, I will recompense evil; but
wait on the LORD, and He shall save you” (Pro 20.22). Again, “Do not rejoice when your enemy
falls, and do not let your heart be glad when he stumbles” (Pro 24.17). And again, “Do not say, I
will do to him what he has done to me: I will render to the man according to his work” (Pro 24.29)!
As another example of the fearful confusion which now prevails, take the following from page 18
of Mr. I.M. Haldeman’s, “How to Study the Bible.” Under “Classification of Dispensational Truth,”
he states,
“It is not only necessary to know the Dispensations, but eminently important to keep truth in
its proper dispensational relation. To put the truth applicable to one dispensation into another,
is to risk confusion, and not only theological, but spiritual death. Take, for example, the
imprecatory psalms, as indicated in Psalms 58.10; 137.8, 9. These scriptures are full of
imprecation and breathe the spirit not of forgiveness, but of vengeance on the enemy. This spirit
seems such a contradiction to the age in which we live, such a contradiction to the attitude of
love, grace, and forgiveness occupied by the church, that many efforts have been made by good
Christians to reconcile them with the teachings of Christianity; others finding the attempt
useless, have been led to expurgate them altogether from their Bibles.”

69

Yes, Mr. Haldeman, these Scriptures do breathe the spirit of “vengeance on the enemy,” but whose
“enemy”? Why not rightly “divide” the Word on these passages? Was David thirsting for
“vengeance” on his personal enemies? Read his history and ponder his magnanimous treatment
of Saul! Let Scripture interpret Scripture and there will be no difficulty. Hear him saying, “The
enemies of the LORD shall be as the fat of lambs: they shall consume into smoke; they shall
consume away” (Psa 37.20); “Let God arise, let His enemies be scattered: let those also who hate
Him flee before Him” (Psa 68.1); “For, lo, your enemies, O LORD, for, lo, your enemies shall
perish” (Psa 92.9). It is true that in many Psalms, David speaks of “my enemies;” in some he refers
to his spiritual foes — his lusts and sins; in others, it is the Spirit of prophecy speaking through
him messianically, as in Psalm 110.1, 2; in yet others, he so identifies himself with God, that the
Lord’s enemies are his!
But it is asserted that these imprecations of the Psalmist against enemies, is quite at variance with
the benign and gracious spirit which characterizes the present “dispensation of grace.” We reply
that such an objector errs grievously, “not knowing the Scriptures.” Why, the New Testament
“breathes” identically the same “spirit” as the Old. Did not Peter say to one who was deceiving the
people and who sought to purchase the miraculous power of the Holy Spirit, “your money perish
with you” (Act 8.20)? Did not the Apostle Paul write, “If any man does not love the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema; Maranatha” (1Cor 16.22)? Did he not also affirm “But even if we, or
an angel from heaven, preaches any other gospel to you than that which we have preached to you,
let him be accursed. As we said before, so now I say again, If any man preaches any other gospel
to you than what you have received, let him be accursed” (Gal 1.8, 9). The resistance of the human
heart to such an imprecation required this repetition. Did he not also write to the Galatians, “I
would that they were even cut off, who trouble you” (5.12)? Did he not say, “Alexander the
coppersmith did me much evil: may the Lord reward him according to his works” (2Tim. 4.14)!
One really wonders how much these Dispensationalists really read their Bibles!
We are well aware that what has been pointed out in the last paragraph will not be at all palatable
to those who are filled with the sickly sentimentality of this degenerate age; nevertheless, it is the
Word of God! They who want to see capital punishment abolished, and are in favour of turning
penitentiaries into social clubs, where the prisoners are coddled and pampered — given tobacco,
regaled with the radio, and provided with dining rooms superior to a hotel — are not likely to
welcome such expressions of holy hatred of that which is dishonouring to God. For his own part,
the writer desires grace to emulate the Psalmist when he said, “Surely you will slay the wicked, O
God: depart from me therefore, you bloody men. For they speak against you wickedly, and your
enemies take your name in vain. Do I not hate those, O LORD, who hate you? And am I not grieved
with those who rise up against you? I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them my enemies”
(Psa 139.19, 22).
As one more sample of the excuseless ignorance betrayed by these “Dispensationalists,” we quote
from E.W. Bullinger’s “How to Enjoy the Bible.” On pages 108, 110 he says,
“Law and Grace. To those who lived under the Law, it could rightly and truly be said: ‘It shall
be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these commandments before the LORD our God, as
He has commanded us’ (Deu 6.25). But to those who live in this present Dispensation of grace,
it is as truly declared, ‘By the deeds of the Law, no flesh shall be justified in his sight’ (Rom 3.20).
But this is the very opposite of Deu 6.25! What then are we to say, or to do? Which of these two
statements is true, and which is false? The answer is that neither is false. But both are true if we
rightly divide the Word of truth as to its Dispensational truth and teaching.... Two words
distinguish the two dispensations. ‘Do’ distinguishes the former; ‘Done’ the latter. Then,
salvation depended on what man was to do; now it depends upon what Christ has done.”
It is by such statements as these, that “unstable souls” are “beguiled.”

70

Think of a man with such a reputation for academic learning, pitting Deu 6.25 against Rom 3.20.
He as well might argue that fire is “the very opposite of water” — nevertheless, each has its use in
its right place: the one to cook by, the other for refreshment and cleansing. Think of someone who
posed as a teacher of preachers, being so culpably ignorant as to affirm that under the old
dispensation, “Salvation depended on what man was to do.” Salvation has never been procured
by human merits, on the ground of any human performances. Read Gen 4.4; 15.6; Exo 12.13; Lev
17.11, Psa 51.17, etc., and the error of such a statement is at once apparent. Deu 6.25 is paralleled
by such verses as Mat 5.20, Jas 2.20-26, and 1Joh 2.29. Deuteronomy 6.25 is speaking of practical
“righteousness” in the daily walk of God’s people; Romans 3.20 is affirming the impossibility of
acceptance with God on the ground of creature-doings — this has been true in all ages!