PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 6 of 18
The Purpose of God (Summarized)

---

4. THE PURPOSE OF GOD (SUMMARIZED).
We are not unmindful of the fact that this magazine is read by two widely different classes of
people. First, it is being sent to a goodly number of preachers, and others who are fitted for the
deeper things of God. Second, the greater number who receive it have not enjoyed the privileges
of the former, and so they are heavily handicapped when they take up such articles as in this
present series on “Dispensationalism.” Thus the happy task before us of seeking to minister to
those whose needs are similar, yet whose capacities to receive and digest food is so varied, is not
without its difficulties. On the one hand, we wish (by God’s grace) to maintain the level indicated
by the title of our little paper, “Studies in the Scriptures.” Yet on the other hand, we desire wisdom
from above so that we may minister in such a way that (if they will but take prayerful pains) even
the babes of Christ may be edified. It has therefore occurred to us that if we give a summary of the
last three articles (really one in three parts), some may be helped.
First, we pointed out (in the March issue) that the favourite text of the Dispensationalists —
“rightly dividing the Word of Truth” (2Tim. 2.15) — makes no reference whatever to the sectioning
of God’s Word, and limiting large portions of it to companies long since dead and gone. That
instead, 2Tim 2.15 bids the servant of God see to it that he ministers the Word suitably to the
various conditions and circumstances of his congregation. The members of his spiritual family are
in widely different states of soul — some are cold and sluggish and need rousing; some are sad
and need comforting; some are ignorant and need instructing; some are feeble and need
strengthening; some are flirting with the world and need admonishing. As a wise parent suits the
diet to the ages and health of his children, so will a well-instructed pastor.
Second, we pointed out how the great majority of the Dispensationalists begin at the wrong place.
Instead of starting with the “Adamic dispensation,” they need to go back to the Everlasting
Covenant, which God entered into with Christ on behalf of His elect, before the foundation of the
world; and that instead of commencing with Genesis 1, we need to make Ephesians 1.3-6 the
foundation of our study and thinking. It is there that we find the key which opens up to us God’s
“Program for the ages.” It is there that we discover the character and contents of God’s eternal
purpose — which purpose is slowly but surely being accomplished during the course of human
history. It is there that we learn that the grand center of God’s counsels is the glorifying of Himself
in and by Christ, through the redeeming of His favoured people.

22

In commenting on the language of Ephesians 1.3 we sought to repudiate a double error which the
Dispensationalists have made there: first, that the contents of that verse describe blessings which
only the saints of this Christian dispensation receive; and second that its terms are in designed
contrast to the material blessings which Israel enjoyed in Canaan. It is clear that verse 3 cannot
be restricted to Christians of this age from what follows in verse 4-6 — the connective “just as” at
the beginning of verse 4 shows that they speak of one and the same company. Now all of God’s
elect, from Abel onwards, were “chosen in Christ,” were “predestined to the adoption of children”
and were “accepted in the Beloved.” This should be abundantly clear to every spiritual reader who
will carefully ponder the terms of Joh 10.16, Eph 2.19-21, Heb 11.40. 11
In developing our refutation of the second error, we called attention to the fact that the Old
Testament saints, equally with the New Testament saints, were blessed with “all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ.” First, we pointed out how the language of Ephesians 1.3 is
in designed contrast to the spiritual “blessings” which we received in unfallen Adam. In Eph 4.18,
Christians are reminded that, in their unregenerate state, they were “alienated from the life of
God.” Now, such language would be meaningless if the saints had never enjoyed the life of God.
1Cor 15.22 tells us that “in Adam all die,” died spiritually; so all were once alive in Adam, alive
spiritually. But Adam, being a man of the earth (“of the earth, earthy”), though we were originally
blessed with spiritual blessings in him, yet it was only as in an earthly man. In blessed antithesis
to this, the entire ELECTION OF GRACE have been blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ, the heavenly Man. That is the contrast pointed by Eph 1.3.
Now these spiritual blessings in heavenly places were “inherited” in Christ by all of God’s elect
from Abel onwards. That the “blessing of Abraham” (i.e. the blessing Abraham received from
God), was of a spiritual and not of a material nature, is clear from Galatians 3.14; and that
Abraham was aware that the ultimate reception of it awaited him in Heaven, may be plainly seen
by a reference to Heb 11.11-16. Then we sought to show that the “blessing” which Jacob received
from Isaac was identical to the “blessing of Abraham,” though it was couched in the language of
earthly things. Once that phrase is seen as Scriptural, it should revolutionize our understanding
of much of the Old Testament Scriptures. Spiritual blessings there, are frequently referred to
under material figures — heavenly favours under earthly shadows. Just as we are told in
Revelation 11.8 that the city of Jerusalem is “spiritually called Sodom and Egypt,” so very many
of the places, objects, and things referred to in the Old Testament have a spiritual meaning.
In amplifying the above thought, we appealed to the Psalms. If they are read impartially, we
cannot help but see that the soul’s experiences of the spiritual in Israel was quite on a par with the
attainment of the most eminent saints of the New Testament. The very first Psalm strikes the
keynote, and describes at length the man who is truly “blessed.” It is obvious at a glance, that
figures of speech abound in that Book; and any attempt to interpret literally, only reduces them
to an absurdity. Take the well-known language of the 23rd psalm: who is so senseless as to
understand “green pastures” and “still waters” to signify only material food and drink? Then why
should those who insist on carnalizing the Sacred Oracles ridicule those who give a spiritual
interpretation to “Mount Zion,” the “cedars of Lebanon,” the “snows of Hermon,” etc., etc.?
It is tragic beyond words to find those who are now looked up to as the champions of orthodoxy,
perpetuating the great error into which the Jews of old fell. They had great reverence for the Holy
Scriptures; they had implicit confidence in their Divine authorship; yet in their gross carnality,
11 Joh 10:16 "And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they will hear My voice;

and there will be one flock and one shepherd. Eph 2:19 Now, therefore, you are no longer strangers and foreigners,
but fellow citizens with the saints and members of the household of God, 20 having been built on the foundation of the
apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone, 21 in whom the whole building, being joined
together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord; Heb 11:40 God having provided something better for us, that they
should not be made perfect apart from us.

23

they saw no deeper than the outward letter of the Word, literalizing everything and missing the
spiritual meaning and application of it. Even the Apostles were considerably tinctured by this
poison. When their Lord warned them against the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees, they
imagined He was rebuking them because they had “taken no bread” (Mat 16.7). When He said to
them, “I have meat to eat that you do not know of,” they asked each other “Has anyone brought
Him anything to eat?” (Joh 4.33). With such solemn examples before us, we are without excuse if
we do not take the warning to heart! Is it not obvious that spiritual things can only be “spiritually
discerned,” and that for this we are dependent on the teaching of the Holy Spirit?
“I the Lord keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day” (Isa
27.3). How blessed is such language as this when I discern here the promise of Christ to nourish
and preserve His Church on earth! “You shall not muzzle the ox when he treads out the corn” (Deu
25.4). How blessed to learn that that was written “altogether for our sakes,” that God’s servants
today might know that “he that plows should plow in hope; and he that threshes in hope should
partake of his hope” (1Cor 9.10)! Here the Holy Spirit Himself has placed a sure key in our hands
and shown us how to open the spiritual meaning of the Old Testament Scriptures: the “oxen”
were but figures of Christian evangelists.
In the next place, we sought to show that even during the Old Testament times, God was
administering the Everlasting Covenant, that under the legal economy of Moses grace was being
exercised toward all those who had been chosen in Christ before the foundation of the world. This
is admittedly the most difficult aspect of our subject, and at a later date we hope, God willing, to
devote a series of articles to a consideration and exposition of the covenants which God made with
Noah, Abraham, Israel, and David, giving particular attention to the Sinaitic. Yet, we trust that
sufficient has been said in our last article — particularly in the lengthy quotation made from
Samuel Hopkins — to throw some light on it. The Gospel as well as the Law was preached to Israel,
and preached largely (though not exclusively) through the whole ceremonial system and ritual
which was established under Moses.
In the purpose of God, the Lamb was “slain from the foundation of the world” (Rev. 13.8). And
therefore, each of His elect became (at their regeneration and conversion) interested in and
sharers of the benefits which Christ’s atoning sacrifice was to procure for them — namely, the
bestowing of the Holy Spirit, the gift of faith, the forgiveness of their sins, and the “exceeding great
and precious promises of God.” These were made over to them in the Covenant of Grace; or in
other words, they were revealed to them by the Gospel of God. The Covenant of Grace was
administered by God from the days of Abel onwards, or else none of Adam’s fallen race would ever
have been taken into the favour of God. True, that Covenant of Grace was administered in
different forms and by varied methods; and yet the substance of it was always the same. The
deliverance of Noah and his family from the flood, of Lot from Sodom, of Israel from Egypt, of
Daniel from the lion’s den, were all so many shadows of the redemptive deliverance which Christ
has wrought for His people.
Giving the moral law to Israel served a number of different purposes, and it needs to be considered
from a number of various angles. First, it announced the unchanging requirements of God’s
righteousness and holiness. Second, it revealed to fallen man his spiritual impotency, his utter
inability to meet the claims of his Maker and Governor. Third, it revealed the need for
substitutionary sacrifice, and served as a constant foil for the ceremonial law. Fourth, it also
furnished a rule of conduct for those who trusted in the sacrificial blood, and desired to please
Him who had made such gracious provision to meet their deep needs. Grace reigns through
righteousness (Rom 5.21) and not at the expense of it; and if all the details of the Sinaitic covenant
are carefully pondered, there will be found a blessed and wondrous mingling of justice and mercy,
grace and righteousness, Gospel and Law. But as we expect to devote a separate article to the
consideration of the Law in this present series, we will not further anticipate its contents here.

24

Few passages in the New Testament afford more help when pondering the varied character of the
Mosaic economy than Rom 10.5-9. There the Apostle quotes a Scripture from the Pentateuch,
which seems to have been completely lost sight of by our modern “Dispensationalists.” In
Deuteronomy 30.14, we find Jehovah saying through Moses, “The word is very near to you, in
your mouth, and in your heart, that you may do it” — see the whole passage, verses 11-15. The
Holy Spirit, by the pen of the Apostle, expressly declares this to be “the righteousness of faith” (i.e.
the Gospel) and then Paul adds, “that is, the Word of Faith which we preach.” Let the reader
attentively weigh the language of Deuteronomy 30.11-14, and then ponder the Apostle’s inspired
comment on it. Does not this one example furnish clear evidence that the language of the Old
Testament can only be understood in the light of the New?
But there is something more there in that Deuteronomy passage which we particularly wish the
reader to see clearly. The Apostle affirms in plain language, that the Gospel he preached was
proclaimed by Moses too, as he says again in Rom 3.21 “the righteousness of God” (that is, the
perfect obedience of Christ which is imputed to all who believe in Him, Rom 3.24). That which is
now manifested more fully and openly under this new covenant or testament, was “witnessed by
the law and the prophets.” Note well, that the Law and the Prophets not only “predicted” this
righteousness of God, but definitely “witnessed” to it. Further proof is furnished by the Apostle in
Romans 4, where he cites the cases of Abraham and David, as being justified by faith without the
deeds of the law.
How clear it is, then, that the Old and New Testaments possess a central unity; that God has had
only one way of saving from the beginning; and that the Covenant of Grace has been administered
by Him in every stage of human history. And how clear it is that modern Dispensationalists have
an entirely erroneous conception of the Mosaic economy! The teaching of the “Scofield Bible,” and
all who echo its misleading and mischievous novelties, is to be steadfastly resisted, no matter how
unpopular such resistance may render one among “Fundamentalists.” When a man makes the
studied statement that, “As a dispensation, grace begins with the death and resurrection of Christ,
the point of testing is no longer legal obedience as the condition of salvation, but accepting or
rejecting Christ” (as Mr. Scofield says in his notes on John 1.16), he at once exposes fundamental
ignorance both of “the Law” and “the Gospel,” and therefore he is not a safe teacher to follow for
lovers of the Truth.
In conclusion, may we suggest that those who have been able to follow this article, and have, under
God, been helped by it, turn back now and prayerfully study the three articles which preceded it.
We will greatly value the prayers of God’s people that we may be definitely guided by the Holy
Spirit in preparing the remaining articles of this series. The need for them is great. The difficulty
of receiving them is great too, for all of us have much to unlearn. And only Divine grace can enable
us to re-examine the whole subject impartially, be willing to relinquish errors which up to now we
thought were God’s Truth, and receive with meekness what God has for us.

25

Part III