PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 49 of 51
The Later Prophets


CHAPTER 49

Verse 1. The remembrance of Josiah is like the composition of the perfume that is made by the art of the apothecary; it is sweet as honey in all mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine.

Verse 2. He behaved himself uprightly in the conversion of the people, and took away the abominations of iniquity.

Verse 3. He directed his heart unto the Lord, and in the time of the ungodly he established the worship of God.

Verse 4. All, except David and Hezekiah and Josiah, were defective; for they forsook the law of the Most High, even the kings of Judah failed.

Verse 5. Therefore He gave their power unto others, and their glory to a strange nation.

Verse 6. They burnt the chosen city of the sanctuary, and made the streets desolate, according to the prophecy of Jeremiah.

Verse 7. For they entreated him evil, who nevertheless was a prophet, sanctified in his mother's womb, that he might root out and afflict and destroy, and that he might build up also and plant.

Verse 8. It was Ezekiel who saw the glorious vision, which was shown him upon the chariot of the cherubim.

Verse 9. For he made mention of the enemies under the figure of the rain, and directed them that went right.

Verse 10. And of the twelve prophets let the memorial be blessed, and let their bones flourish again out of their place; for they comforted Jacob, and delivered them by assured hope.

Verse 11. How shall we magnify Zerubbabel? Even he was as a signet on the right hand.

Verse 12. So was Joshua the son of Josedech; who in their time builded the house, and set up a holy temple to the Lord, which was prepared for everlasting glory.

Verse 13. And among the elect was Nehemiah, whose renown is great, who raised up for us the walls that were fallen, and set up the gates and the bars, and raised up our ruins again.

Verse 14. But upon the earth was no man created like Enoch, for he was taken from the earth.

Verse 15. Neither was there a man born like unto Joseph, a governor of his brethren, a stay of the people, whose bones were regarded of the Lord.

Verse 16. Shem and Seth were in great honor among men, and so was Adam above every living thing in the creation.
