PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 18 of 18 The Word of God (Concluded)

2. THE WORD OF GOD (CONCLUDED). “What does the Scripture say? Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness... David also describes the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes righteousness without works, Saying, Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin” (Rom 4.3, 6-8). In view of such a plain declaration who dares to affirm that the Patriarchs were strangers to the salvation of which we are made partakers? Christians are “heirs” of Abraham (Gal 3.18, 29), which means they possess (by faith) the identical blessings which God covenanted unto the father of all those who believe. We have the same Gospel which was preached to Abraham (Gal 3.8), indeed, which was preached to Israel in the wilderness after they received the law at Sinai (Heb 4.2). The Old Testament saints were participants in the same covenant blessings which we have (2Sam 23.5 compared with Heb 13.20). The Apostle makes the redeemed Israelites equal to us in the significance of the ordinances (or “sacraments”) — “since the Lord not only favored them with the same benefits, but illustrated His grace among them by the same symbols, 1Cor 10.1-11.” (John Calvin). They desired the same “Heavenly Country” which we do, and God “has prepared for them a City” (Heb 11.16), just as He has for us. Abraham “rejoiced to see My day” declared Christ, “and he saw it, and was glad” (Joh 8.56). Dying Jacob said, “I have waited for your salvation, O LORD” (Gen 49.18): what “salvation” could he expect when he felt himself about to expire, unless he had seen in death the commencement of a new life? Moses “refused to be called the son of Pharaoh’s daughter; Choosing to suffer affliction with the people of God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt: for he had respect to the recompense of the reward” (Heb 11.24-26). Job exclaimed, “I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God” (Job 19.25, 26). David avowed, “Whom do I have in heaven but you? And there is none upon earth that I desire beside you. My flesh and my heart fail: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion forever” (Psa 73.25, 26). What is true here in general, also pertains to particulars. Not only were God’s dealings with His people in Old Testament times substantially the same as those with His people under the New Testament era, but also in many, many details. So instead of seeking to pit Scripture against Scripture (as the Dispensationalists are constantly doing), let us rather compare passage with passage, and note the blessed harmony which exists between the two Testaments. For example, we read, “He believed in the LORD; and He counted it to him for righteousness” (Gen 15.6); then in Act 13.39 we are also told, “By Him all who believe are justified” (i.e., pronounced righteous). God said to His people of old, “you are strangers and sojourners” (Lev 25.23). So does He now address them, “I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims” (1Pet 2.11). We are told that, “The LORD’S

71

portion is His people; Jacob is the lot of His inheritance” (Deu 32.9), Paul also prayed that we might know what are “the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints” (Eph 1.18). In Deu 33.3 we are told, “All His saints are in your hand,” while in John 10.28 Christ says of His sheep “they shall never perish, nor shall any man pluck them out of My hand.” “Yield yourselves to the LORD” (2Chr 30.8); compare this with, “yield yourselves to God” (Rom 6.13). “And my God put into my heart to gather together the nobles” (Neh. 7.5); compare this with, “For it is God who works in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure” (Phi 2.13). “you also gave your good Spirit to instruct them” (Neh. 9.20); compare this with, “when He, the Spirit of truth, comes, He will guide you into all truth” (Joh 16.13). “I will behold your face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with your likeness” (Psa 17.15); compare this with, “we shall be like Him; for we shall see Him as He is” (1Joh 3.2). Read carefully Psa 34.12-16, and compare 1Pet 3.10-12. “I will cry out to God most high; to God who performs all things for me” (Psa 57.2); compare, “but our sufficiency is of God” (2Cor 3.5). “Men shall be blessed in Him” (Psa 72.17); compare, “Who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ” (Eph 1.3). Read carefully Psa 89.30-33 and compare Heb 12.8-11. “For there the LORD commanded the blessing, even life for evermore” (Psa 133.3); compare, “the Father which sent Me, He gave Me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. And I know that His commandment is life everlasting” (Joh 12.49, 50). “Whatever the LORD pleased, that did He in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places” (Psa 135.6); compare, “Him who works all things after the counsel of His own will” (Eph 1.11). “In the day when I cried you answered me, and strengthened me with strength in my soul” (Psa 138.3); compare, “strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man” (Eph 3.16). Before pointing out some more of the numerous parallelisms between the Old and New Testaments, let us anticipate an objection here: Objection: While there are many close comparisons between the earlier and the later Scriptures, yet there are more numerous points of dissimilarity — how are the latter to be explained? Answer: In meeting this objection, let us begin by noting that Christians are said to “walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham” (Rom 4.12). How, we ask, could they do so if they had a different rule of faith to walk by? To this it may be answered, Abraham circumcised all the male members of his household (Gen 17.23): should we do the same? If we answer, “No,” then the objector imagines he has scored a victory. That is his mistake, arising from his failure to distinguish between two distinct kinds of Divine laws. This brings us to a point of considerable importance, and one upon which there is widespread ignorance today. We ask the reader to give his best attention to what follows. The Divine commands and precepts recorded in Scripture need to be classified under two heads: moral and positive — a distinction well known among God’s people in days gone by when they were better instructed. MORAL duties are those which pertain prior to any command to perform them, existing in the very nature of the case. POSITIVE duties are binding only because of the Divine command, and they would not be duties at all if God did not enjoin them. Hence, there is a double responsibility resting on us to discharge the former, but only a single responsibility to discharge the latter. For example, the worship of God is a moral duty, something which in the very nature of the case we owe to God — as His creatures, as the recipients of His bounties. But to worship God in a certain place (the temple), according to a prescribed order, at specified times, were positive duties which God required of the nation of Israel under the old covenant. Again: to believe in Christ and surrender to His Lordship is a moral duty devolving on all who hear the Gospel; whereas baptism is a positive duty required of His disciples. “POSITIVE laws are taken to be those which have no reason for them in themselves, nothing in the matter of them is taken from the things commanded in themselves; but they depend merely

72

and solely on the sovereign will and pleasure of God. Such were the laws and institutions of the sacrifices of old; and such are those which concern the sacraments and other things of a similar nature under the New Testament. “MORAL laws are those which have their reasons taken from the nature of the things themselves, as required in them. For they are good from their respect to the nature of God Himself, and from that nature and order of all things which He has placed in the creation. Thus, this sort of law is declarative of the absolute goodness of what they require; the other is constitutive of it, as to some certain ends. “POSITIVE Laws, because they are occasionally given, they are esteemed alterable at pleasure. Being fixed by mere will and prerogative, without respect to anything that makes them necessary, they may (prior to being enacted), be taken away and abolished at any time by the same authority. I say, they are this way in their own nature. As to any stability, they have that from their own subject matter. But with respect to God’s determination, positive Divine laws may eventually become unalterable. “And there is this difference between legal and evangelical institutions: the laws of both are POSITIVE only, equally proceeding from sovereign will and pleasure; and in their own natures, they are equally alterable. As to the former [legal], God had fixed in His purpose a determinative time and season in which they would expire, or be altered by His authority. As to the latter [evangelical], He has attached a perpetuity and unchangeableness during the state and condition of His church in this world. “The other sort of laws are perpetual and unalterable in themselves, so far as they are of the MORAL sort. For although a law of that kind may especially enjoin those circumstances which may be changed and varied (as did the whole Decalogue in the commonwealth of Israel), yet so far as it is moral — that is, so far as its commands or prohibitions are necessary emergencies, or expressions of the good or evil of the things that it commands or forbids — it is invariable.” — John Owen “By POSITIVE Laws of God, we mean those institutions which depend only on the sovereign will and pleasure of God, and which He might not have enjoined — and yet His nature has remained the same. Such was the command given to Adam not to eat the forbidden fruit. For we can easily conceive that some other test of obedience might have been given, and if it had been given, it would have been equally binding. And all the ceremonial precepts under the Mosaic dispensation were certainly of this description; for they have long since been actually abrogated by Christ, the Law-Giver of the Church.” — Green’s Lectures on the Shorter Catechism If the above excerpts are carefully pondered, the very real distinction between moral and positive duties should not be difficult to grasp. The former are manifestations of the nature of God, the latter are expressive of His will. The former proceed from God’s goodness and righteousness, the latter issue from His absolute sovereignty. The former are designed for our good, the latter are for the enforcement of His authority. The former are necessarily unchanging, the latter may be rescinded when and as the Law-Giver pleases. These two diverse elements may combine in a single institution. That is seen in the holy Sabbath: it is a bound moral duty that some part of our time be set apart and dedicated to God, as it is for our own good that we periodically rest from all work. But by a positive decree, God makes known how much time and which day of the week shall be sanctified to His worship. The moral duty of the Sabbath is permanent and perpetual; but the particular day on which it falls may be changed by God as He pleases. The natural pre-eminence of the man above the woman ensues from the order of creation, in that the man was made first, and the woman for the man, as the Apostle argues in 1Tim 22.12, 13. And therefore, it is the moral duty of the wife to be subject to her husband. In like manner, the original creation of only one man and one woman gave the natural or moral law of marriage: polygamy

73

and fornication becoming the violation of the law of nature. A Divine precept given for the due exercise of this principle completes the law of it, with the addition of a formal obligation. The moral nature with which we are now endowed inclines toward actions that are suitable to it; the command of God concerning the regulation of it, transforms it into a formal law. “The LORD will perfect that which concerns me” (Psa 138.8); compare, “He who has begun a good work in you, will perform it” (Phi 1.6). “Draw me, we will run after you” (Song. 1.4); compare, “no man can come to Me, unless the Father who has sent Me draws him” (Joh 6.44). “You are all fair, my love; there is no spot in you” (Song. 4.7); compare, “the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin” (1Joh 1.7). “How beautiful are your feet with shoes, O Prince’s daughter!” (Song. 7.1); compare, “And your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace” (Eph 6.15). “All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags” (Isa 64.6); compare, “I know that in me (that is, in my flesh,) dwells no good thing” (Rom 7.18). “That you may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations” (Isa 66.11); compare, “desire the sincere milk of the Word” (1Pet 2.2). “I have loved you with an everlasting love” (Jer 31.3); compare, “beloved of the Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation” (2The 2.13). “From Me is your fruit found” (Hos 14.8); compare, “he that abides in Me, and I in him, will bring forth much fruit” (Joh 15.5). “The just shall live by his faith” (Hab 2.4); compare, “we walk by faith” (2Cor 5.7). “I will strengthen them in the LORD” (Zec 10.12); compare, “be strong in the Lord” (Eph 6.10). Above we have given twenty-five examples of the minute harmony which exists between the Old and New Testaments. The moral teachings of the one, are harmonious with the moral teachings of the other. The promises given to the Patriarchs were made to them not as Jews, but as believers, and therefore their spiritual contents belong to believers today. The promises given to carnal Israel are the legitimate property of spiritual Israel now. The moral laws and precepts given under the old economy are equally binding on those who live under the new covenant. The positive (including the “ceremonial”) laws which God gave throughout the Old Testament, and which were either special injunctions to particular individuals, or typical institutions which were imposed “until the time of reformation” (Heb 9.10), are not binding on Christians today. In Gen 22.2 we hear God bidding Abraham, “Take now your son, your only son Isaac... and offer him there for a burnt offering,” whereas in Gen 22.12 we find Him saying, “Do not lay your hand on the lad, nor do anything to him.” With as much propriety, seducers of souls might say that these two commandments “can only be reconciled by rightly dividing the Word and placing them in separate dispensations,” as to make the other arbitrary divisions of Scripture which they do. They might say that the book of Acts “does not belong to us because God does not require Christians to remain on an endangered ship and refuse to get into the lifeboats” (Act 27.31). They might also argue that Matthew’s Gospel “is not for us” because when the Lord is pleased to grant physical healing to one of His elect today, he is no longer required to go and show himself “to the priest” (Mat 8.4). Our unwelcome task (for the present, at any rate) is completed. From what has been before us in these papers, we now draw up the following bill of indictment against the Dispensationalists. 1. Their starting-point is wrong: they begin at the Garden of Eden instead of going back to the Everlasting Covenant. 2. They rob God’s children of many of their Father’s precious promises. 3. They force into 2Tim 2.15 a meaning which its context in no way warrants. 4. They are all at sea concerning the mystical Body of Christ, failing to see that the Church of God is commensurate with the entire ELECTION OF GRACE. 5. They introduce the utmost confusion into the study of Prophecy, by ignoring the fundamental distinction between carnal or national Israel, and the spiritual “Israel of God.”

74

6. They ignore the grace of God in Old Testament times, and teach the monstrous error that under the Mosaic economy, sinners were saved by their own doings. 7. They repudiate the moral Law of God as a Rule of Life for the Christian today. 8. They invidiously seek to pit Scripture against Scripture, instead of showing their perfect unity and lovely harmony. 9. They split up the one predestined, adopted, redeemed, and regenerated Family of God into various groups and cliques, many of them going so far as to insist that the father of the faithful will have no part in the inheritance of many of his children. 10. They are woefully ignorant of the vast difference between the commands and precepts of God which are special and peculiar, and those which are general and universal; between those which are evanescent, and those which are perpetual; between ceremonial and moral duties. Thus they are perverters of God’s Truth, enemies of the Faith, and their preachings and writings should be shunned by all who desire the pure milk of the Word.

75
