PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 51
Trusting in God


CHAPTER 5

Verse 1. Set not thy heart upon thy goods, and say not, I have enough for my life.

Verse 2. Follow not thine own mind and thy strength, to walk in the ways of thy heart.

Verse 3. Say not, Who shall control me for my works? For the Lord will surely revenge thy pride.

Verse 4. Say not, I have sinned, and what harm hath happened unto me? For the Lord is longsuffering, He will in no wise let thee go.

Verse 5. Concerning propitiation, be not without fear to add sin unto sin.

Verse 6. And say not, His mercy is great; He will be pacified for the multitude of my sins. For mercy and wrath come from Him, and His indignation resteth upon sinners.

Verse 7. Make no tarrying to turn to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt be destroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance.

Verse 8. Set not thine heart upon goods unjustly gotten, for they shall not profit thee in the day of calamity.

Verse 9. Winnow not with every wind, and go not into every way; for so doth the sinner that hath a double tongue.

Verse 10. Be steadfast in thy understanding, and let thy word be the same.

Verse 11. Be swift to hear, and let thy life be sincere, and with patience give answer.

Verse 12. If thou hast understanding, answer thy neighbor; if not, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.

Verse 13. Honor and shame is in talk, and the tongue of man is his fall.

Verse 14. Be not called a whisperer, and lie not in wait with thy tongue; for a foul shame is upon the thief, and an evil condemnation upon the double-tongued.

Verse 15. Be not ignorant of anything in a great matter or a small.


This concludes Part 1 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 6 through Chapter 10, covering true friendship, the pursuit of wisdom, duties of children, and the dangers of pride.

In these chapters, Ben Sira teaches on the testing and value of true friendship, the diligent pursuit of wisdom, the duties owed by children, the grave dangers of pride and arrogance, and the responsibilities of those who hold authority and govern others.
