PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 15 of 51
Free Will and Wisdom

---

CHAPTER 15

Verse 1. He that feareth the Lord will do good, and he that hath the knowledge of the law shall obtain her.

Verse 2. And as a mother shall she meet him, and receive him as a wife married of a virgin.

Verse 3. With the bread of understanding shall she feed him, and give him the water of wisdom to drink.

Verse 4. He shall be stayed upon her, and shall not be moved; and shall rely upon her, and shall not be confounded.

Verse 5. She shall exalt him above his neighbors, and in the midst of the congregation shall she open his mouth.

Verse 6. He shall find joy and a crown of gladness, and she shall cause him to inherit an everlasting name.

Verse 7. But foolish men shall not attain unto her, and sinners shall not see her.

Verse 8. For she is far from pride, and men that are liars cannot remember her.

Verse 9. Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner, for it was not sent him of the Lord.

Verse 10. For praise shall be uttered in wisdom, and the Lord will prosper it.

Verse 11. Say not thou, It is through the Lord that I fell away; for thou oughtest not to do the things that He hateth.

Verse 12. Say not thou, He hath caused me to err; for He hath no need of the sinful man.

Verse 13. The Lord hateth all abomination, and they that fear God love it not.

Verse 14. He Himself made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel.

Verse 15. If thou wilt, to keep the commandments, and to perform acceptable faithfulness.

Verse 16. He hath set fire and water before thee; stretch forth thy hand unto whether thou wilt.

Verse 17. Before man is life and death, and whether him liketh shall be given him.

Verse 18. For the wisdom of the Lord is great, and He is mighty in power, and beholdeth all things.

Verse 19. And His eyes are upon them that fear Him, and He knoweth every work of man.

Verse 20. He hath commanded no man to do wickedly, neither hath He given any man license to sin.

---

This concludes Part 3 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 16 through Chapter 20, covering God's justice and punishment, His mercy toward frail humanity, and the governance of the tongue.

In these chapters, Ben Sira meditates on the certainty of divine reward and punishment, the majesty of God's justice revealed through His creation, the Lord's mercy toward human frailty and weakness, the discipline of the tongue, and the contrast between wise and foolish speech.