PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 16 of 18
The Law of God (Concluded)


4. THE LAW OF GOD (CONCLUDED).
All truth is catholic or universal. It embraces many elements and opens upon wide horizons; and
it therefore involves endless difficulties and apparent inconsistencies. But the mind of man seeks
after unity, and tends to prematurely force unity in the sphere of his imperfect knowledge, by
securing one element of truth at the sacrifice of another. This is eminently the case with all
rationalists. They are clear and logical, but at the expense of being superficial and half-orbed. Such
is the case with heretics. The Greek word from which “heresy” is derived, means an act of choice,
and hence of diversion — picking and choosing one part instead of comprehensively embracing
the whole truth. The man who holds to the Law of God and repudiates Divine grace, is a heretic.
Equally so, the man who glories in the grace of God, and throws overboard His Law, is a heretic.
Jude 4 speaks of “turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness.”
In his Estimate of Manton, 38 J.C. Ryle wrote,
“I admire the scriptural wisdom of a man who, in a day of hard-and-fast systems could dare to
be apparently inconsistent, in order to ‘declare all the counsel of God.’ I firmly believe that this
is the test of theology, which does good in the Church of Christ. The man who is not tied hand
and foot by systems, and does not pretend to reconcile what our imperfect eyesight cannot
reconcile in this dispensation — he is the man whom God will bless. Manton was such a man;
and because he was such a man, I think his works, like the ‘Pilgrim’s Progress,’ deserve the
attention of all true Christians.”
Alas, how few such men has Christendom been favoured with during the last century. For the
most part, certain favorite portions of Scripture have been seized, and everything which appeared
to conflict with them has been either ignored, explained away, or repudiated. Some aspects of the
truth have been eagerly contended for by champions of the faith, but anything which appeared
37 Spring: the source, motivation, or moving force behind some action.
38 Thomas Manton (1620–1677) — Puritan; clerk at Westminster Assembly, and served under Oliver Cromwell.

62

“inconsistent” with it, has been studiously avoided or bitterly denounced. The great majority
would not allow there to be a perfect agreement between the invincibility of God’s decrees and the
freedom of human actions, insisting that if God has definitely predestined a certain course of
conduct, the individual is reduced to the level of a machine. Some believe in God’s sovereignty,
and some in man’s responsibility; but few indeed really believe in both; and with rare exceptions,
the more strongly the one is retained, the more loosely the other is held.
Few perceive that there is a perfect consistency between justification by the righteousness and
blood of Christ, and the necessity of our obedience if we are ever to reach Heaven. Nor can they
reconcile the efficacy of Divine grace with the indispensability of our performance of duty. There
have been some good men who have honoured the Spirit in clearly teaching His effectual call; but
those same men have denounced others who exhorted unsaved sinners to repent of their sins and
believe in Christ. Certain men of God have rightly affirmed that Scripture assures the real saint of
the absolute security of his salvation, but they have denied that the solemn warnings and
admonitions addressed to Christians in the New Testament, also belong to them: they gloried in
the immutability of God’s promises, but failed to see that the Christian is preserved from apostasy
by his own use of appointed means.
Logic takes a certain premise and draws from it a rational and “consistent” conclusion. But faith
appropriates a Divine statement and leaves God to draw His own conclusions. For faith knows
that “logical conclusions” often contradict the Scriptures. For example, logic says, “God is one,
and therefore there cannot be three persons in the Godhead.” Faith says, “God is one, yet Scripture
affirms there are three Divine Persons, and [by God’s grace] I believe it.” Logic says, “Jesus Christ
is man, and therefore He cannot be God.” Faith says, “Christ is man, but Scripture also declares
He is God, and [by God’s grace] I believe it.” It is really pitiful to see some men such slaves to
“logical consistency” that they use one portion of Truth to overthrow another portion that is
equally blessed. So it is deplorable to find so many ignoring or despising passage after passage of
Holy Writ, because they are unable to “harmonize” them with some favorite text. O for grace to
receive all that God has given us in His Word!
The same spirit of partiality or lopsidedness explains why so many insist that law and grace are
antagonistic principles. In his youth, the writer was taught by men he looked up to, that law and
grace could no more be united than oil and water. May the Lord forgive him for inserting this
error in some of his earlier writings. How many are now being told by the “champions of
orthodoxy” that law and grace are hostile to each other, and that where the one is exercised, the
other must necessarily be inactive. But this is a serious mistake. How could the Law of God and
the grace of God conflict? The one expresses Him as “light” (1Joh 1.5); the other manifests Him
as “love” (1Joh 4.8); the one makes known His righteousness, the other reveals His mercy. The
manifold wisdom of God has made known the perfect consistency between them. Instead of being
contradictory, they are complementary. Both shone forth in their full glory at the Cross; both are
published in the true Gospel.
In all of God’s works and ways, we may discern a meeting together of seemingly conflicting
elements. The centrifugal and centripetal forces which are ever at work in the material realm
illustrate this principle. So it is in connection with Divine providence: there is a constant interpenetration of the natural and supernatural. So it was in the giving of the Scriptures: they are the
product of both God’s agency and man’s agency; they are a Divine revelation, yet couched in
human language and given through human media. They are inerrantly true, yet written by fallible
men. They are inspired throughout, yet the superintending control of the Spirit over the writers
did not exclude nor interfere with the natural exercise of their faculties. So it was with Christ. He
was omniscient, yet He marveled at unbelief. He was omnipotent, yet He hungered and slept. He
was eternal, yet He died. He was man, yet He rose again from the dead by His own power.

63

In view of what has been pointed out in the preceding paragraph, to which many other examples
might be added, why should so many stumble over the fact of Divine Law and Divine grace being
exercised side by side, operating at the same time? Do law and grace present any greater contrast
than the inexorable justice and abounding mercy of God, or between His fathomless love and
everlasting wrath? No indeed; not so great. Grace must not be regarded as an attribute of God
which eclipses all His other perfections. As Rom 5.21 so plainly tells us, “That as sin has reigned
unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness,” and not at the expense of
righteousness. Divine grace and Divine righteousness, Divine love and Divine holiness, are as
inseparable as light and heat from the sun. In bestowing grace, God never rescinds His claims on
us, but rather enables us to meet them. Was the prodigal son, after his penitent return and
forgiveness, less obliged to conform to the laws of his father’s house than before he left it? No
indeed; but more so.
“The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; He shined forth from mount Paran,
and He came with ten thousand saints: from His right hand went a fiery law for them. Yes, he
loved the people” (Deu 33.2, 3). What a strange collocation of terms those words must present to
many today! The very giving of the fiery law to Israel was, in effect, an evidence of Jehovah’s
special love for them! His very grant to them of what is now so bitterly hated, is here said to be a
signal instance of God’s benignity, being a distinguishing blessing which other nations were not
favored with. So too, as good old Matthew Henry says, “The law of God written in the heart, is a
certain evidence of the love of God being shed abroad there.”
Divine grace was exercised unto Israel throughout the entire Mosaic economy. It seems to be
generally overlooked that full provision was made for forgiveness and restoration unto those who
transgressed the Divine statutes. The ceremonial institutions, which afforded expiation and
ablution, were wholly of grace. Amongst the “statutes and judgments and laws which the LORD
made between Him and the children of Israel in Mount Sinai” (Lev 26.46) was this one:
“If they confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass which they
trespassed against Me, and also that they have walked contrary to Me; And that I also have
walked contrary to them, and have brought them into the land of their enemies; if then their
uncircumcised hearts are humbled, and they then accept the punishment of their iniquity: Then
I will remember My covenant with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My
covenant with Abraham” (Lev 26.40-42)!
Note how this was reiterated in the time of Solomon: 1Kng 8.37-40; 44-49! Thus, under the Old
Testament dispensation, there was provision for pardon of penitent sinners.
How deplorable, then, that one who exercised such a wide influence as the late J.N. Darby, should
say in volume 1 of his “Synopsis” (p. 126), “Had it been a human righteousness, it would have been
by the law, which is the rule of that righteousness — a law given to the Jews only.” And again, “It
is certain we do not have commandments like those of the old law — they would be quite contrary
to the spirit of the Gospel of grace” (p. 218). Yet the Lord Jesus plainly enough declared, “If you
love Me, keep My commandments” (Joh 14.15). Equally baneful is this statement found in the
introduction to “The Four Gospels” in the popular Scofield Bible, “The sermon on the mount is
not grace... the doctrines of grace are to be sought in the epistles, not in the gospels.” We are
prepared to show that every doctrine of grace contained in the epistles is found clearly expressed
in the four gospels; while the law is just as clearly enforced in the epistles.
That there is no conflict whatever between the Law and the Gospel is plain enough from Rom 3.31,
“Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid! Indeed, we establish the law.” Here the
Apostle anticipates an objection which might be drawn from what he said in verses 26-30, namely,
that justification is entirely by grace through faith. But so far is this from annulling the law, that
it recognizes and enforces it. No greater respect could have been shown to the law than this: in

64

determining to save some men from its curse, God sent His own co-equal Son to fulfill all its
requirements. O marvel of marvels! the great Legislator humbled Himself to full obedience to its
precepts. The God who gave the law, became incarnate and bled under its condemning sentence,
rather than a tittle of it should fail. Thus the law was magnified, indeed, and forever “made
honourable.”
God’s method of salvation by grace has “established” the law in a threefold way. First, by Christ,
the Surety of God’s elect, being “made under the law” (Gal 4.4), fulfilling its precepts (Mat 5.17),
and suffering its penalty in the stead of His people; and thus He has “brought in everlasting
righteousness” (Dan. 9.24). Second, by the Holy Spirit, at regeneration, imparting a nature which
delights in the law, which is what is meant by His writing the law in our hearts (Heb 8.10). Third,
by the Christian’s voluntary consent to the law as his Rule of Life, so that he can say, “With the
mind I myself serve the law of God” (Rom 7.25). Thus is the law established both in the high court
of Heaven and in the affections of the saint. Faith is not opposed to doing good works in obedience
to the Law of God, from right principles and with right ends — but it is opposed to trusting in and
depending upon them as the matter of justification before God.
The law is a mirror to believers, in which, by the light of the Spirit, they behold the deformity of
their souls by sin, and the imperfection of their obedience, by which they grow out of love with
themselves. In this view of things, David said, “I have seen an end of all perfection — Your
commandment is exceedingly broad” (Psa 119.96). So the Apostle Paul, comparing his heart and
conduct with the Law of God, declared “We know that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal, sold
under sin” (Rom 7.14). The law is also used by the Spirit to make the righteousness of Christ more
precious to the Christian. For he sees how imperfect his own righteousness is, and how far short
of the demands of the law his obedience comes; and thus he desires to “be found in Him, not
having my own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of Christ,
the righteousness which is of God by faith” (Phi 3.9).
There is therefore no feud whatever between the Law and the Gospel. They sweetly stand together
in their proper place. In the Gospel, we see the law fulfilled (by Christ) as a covenant, and
established (in the hands of Christ) as a rule of obedience. The Gospel brings to light new motives
and arguments to obedience, arguments drawn from the consideration of redeeming grace and
love, which have a far greater constraining power than all the threats and cursings which the law
denounces against those who do not continue in obedience to it. Thus, in the case of the Christian,
the law remains, although the motives to obedience are changed: our obedience is spontaneous,
our motive is love. If it should be asked, What happens when the Christian deliberately breaks the
law? The answer is given in Psalm 89.30-33, “If His children forsake My law, and do not walk in
My judgments; If they break My statutes, and do not keep My commandments; Then I will visit
their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless, I will not utterly
take My lovingkindness from him, nor suffer My faithfulness to fail” — he comes under the rod of
his heavenly Father’s displeasure, but the Spirit leads him to repentance and confession, and he
is forgiven: Pro 28.13, 1Joh 1.9.39
Summing up now what has been before us in these four articles.
1. Adam was under the Law of God in a twofold way: His fear and love ruling his heart, there
was wrought into the very constitution of his soul, that which answered to all the requirements
of his Maker; and further, he received from Him, objectively, a revelation of His will: Gen 1.26,
Rom 7.9-10. 40
39 Pro 28:13 He who covers his sins will not prosper, But whoever confesses and forsakes them will have mercy. 1Joh

1:9 If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
40 Gen 1:26 Then God said, "Let Us make man in Our image, according to Our likeness; let them have dominion over
the fish of the sea, over the birds of the air, and over the cattle, over all the earth and over every creeping thing that

65

2. The whole human race was, in Eden, placed under the law as a covenant of works, and fell
under its penalty when their federal head broke it: Rom 5.18. 41
3. The law was known long before Sinai: Gen 26.5. 42
4. All mankind are under the law, and will be judged by it: Rom 3.19. 43
5. Christ satisfied every demand of the law and His righteousness is imputed to His people: Rom
5.19, 2Cor 5.21. 44
6. The Holy Spirit implants in the heart of the regenerate a love for the law: Rom 7.22. 45
7. The true Christian is under the law to Christ (1Cor 9.21), and gladly obeys it: Rom 7.25. 46
“It is time for you, LORD, to work: for they have made void your law” (Psa 119.126).

creeps on the earth." Rom 7:9 I was alive once without the law, but when the commandment came, sin revived and I
died. 10 And the commandment, which was to bring life, I found to bring death.
41 Rom 5:18 Therefore, as through one man's offense judgment came to all men, resulting in condemnation, even so
through one Man's righteous act the free gift came to all men, resulting in justification of life.
42 Gen 26:5 "because Abraham obeyed My voice and kept My charge, My commandments, My statutes, and My laws."
43 Rom 3:19 Now we know that whatever the law says, it says to those who are under the law, that every mouth may
be stopped, and all the world may become guilty before God.
44 Rom 5:19 For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so also by one Man's obedience many will be
made righteous. 2Cor 5:21 For He made Him who knew no sin to be sin for us, that we might become the righteousness
of God in Him.
45 Rom 7:22 For I delight in the law of God according to the inward man.
46 Rom 7:25 I thank God-- through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but
with the flesh the law of sin.

66

Part VIII
