PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 46 of 51
Joshua, Caleb, and Samuel

---

CHAPTER 46

Verse 1. Joshua the son of Nun was valiant in the wars, and was the successor of Moses in prophecies, who according to his name was made great for the saving of the elect of God, and taking vengeance of the enemies that rose up against them, that he might set Israel in their inheritance.

Verse 2. How great glory gat he, when he did lift up his hands, and stretched out his sword against the cities!

Verse 3. Who before him so stood to it? For the Lord Himself brought His enemies unto him.

Verse 4. Did not the sun go back by his means? And was not one day as long as two?

Verse 5. He called upon the Most High Lord, when the enemies pressed upon him on every side; and the great Lord heard him.

Verse 6. And with hailstones of mighty power He made the battle to fall violently upon the nations, and in the descent of Beth-horon He destroyed them that resisted, that the nations might know all their strength, because he fought in the sight of the Lord, and he followed the Mighty One.

Verse 7. In the time of Moses also he did a work of mercy, he and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, in that they withstood the congregation, and withheld the people from sin, and appeased the wicked murmuring.

Verse 8. And of six hundred thousand people on foot, they two were preserved to bring them into the heritage, even into a land that floweth with milk and honey.

Verse 9. The Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which remained with him unto his old age, so that he entered upon the high places of the land, and his seed obtained it for a heritage;

Verse 10. That all the children of Israel might see that it is good to follow the Lord.

Verse 11. And concerning the judges, every one by name, whose heart went not a-whoring, and who turned not away from the Lord: let their memory be blessed.

Verse 12. Let their bones flourish out of their place, and let the name of them that were honored be continued upon their children.

Verse 13. Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, beloved of his Lord, established a kingdom and anointed princes over his people.

Verse 14. By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, and the Lord had respect unto Jacob.

Verse 15. By his faithfulness he was found a true prophet, and by his word he was known to be faithful in vision.

Verse 16. He called upon the Lord Almighty, when his enemies pressed upon him on every side, when he offered the sucking lamb.

Verse 17. And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a great noise made His voice to be heard.

Verse 18. And he destroyed the rulers of the Tyrians, and all the princes of the Philistines.

Verse 19. And before his long sleep he made protestations in the sight of the Lord and His anointed: I have not taken any man's goods, not so much as a shoe; and no man did accuse him.

Verse 20. And after his death he prophesied and showed the king his end, and lifted up his voice from the earth in prophecy, to blot out the wickedness of the people.