PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 36 of 51
Prayer for Israel


CHAPTER 36

Verse 1. Have mercy upon us, O Lord God of all, and behold us.

Verse 2. And send Thy fear upon all the nations that seek not after Thee.

Verse 3. Lift up Thy hand against the strange nations, and let them see Thy power.

Verse 4. As Thou wast sanctified in us before them, so be Thou magnified among them before us.

Verse 5. And let them know Thee, as we have known Thee, that there is no God but only Thou, O God.

Verse 6. Show new signs, and make other strange wonders; glorify Thy hand and Thy right arm.

Verse 7. Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath; take away the adversary and destroy the enemy.

Verse 8. Make the time short; remember the covenant, and let them declare Thy wonderful works.

Verse 9. Let him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of the fire, and let them perish that oppress the people.

Verse 10. Smite asunder the heads of the rulers of the heathen, that say, There is none other but we.

Verse 11. Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, and inherit Thou them as from the beginning.

Verse 12. O Lord, have mercy upon the people that is called by Thy name, and upon Israel, whom Thou hast named Thy firstborn.

Verse 13. O be merciful unto Jerusalem, Thy holy city, the place of Thy dwelling.

Verse 14. Fill Zion with Thine unspeakable oracles, and Thy people with Thy glory.

Verse 15. Give testimony unto those that Thou hast possessed from the beginning, and raise up prophets that have been in Thy name.

Verse 16. Reward them that wait for Thee, and let Thy prophets be found faithful.

Verse 17. O Lord, hear the prayer of Thy servants, according to the blessing of Aaron over Thy people, that all they which dwell upon the earth may know that Thou art the Lord, the eternal God.

Verse 18. The belly devoureth all meats, yet is one meat better than another.

Verse 19. As the palate tasteth diverse kinds of venison, so doth an heart of understanding false speeches.

Verse 20. A froward heart causeth heaviness, but a man of experience will recompense him.

Verse 21. A woman will receive every man, yet is one daughter better than another.

Verse 22. The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance, and a man loveth nothing better.

Verse 23. If there be kindness, meekness, and comfort in her tongue, then is not her husband like other men.

Verse 24. He that getteth a wife beginneth a possession, a help like unto himself, and a pillar of rest.

Verse 25. Where no hedge is, there the possession is spoiled; and he that hath no wife will wander up and down mourning.

Verse 26. Who will trust a thief well appointed, that skippeth from city to city? So who will believe a man that hath no house, and lodgeth wheresoever the night taketh him?

This concludes Part 7 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 31 through 36. In our next reading, we shall hear Ben Sira's counsel on choosing advisors, on sickness and physicians, and on the craftsman and the scholar.

We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach. In these chapters, Ben Sira counsels us on choosing advisors wisely, on sickness and physicians, on mourning the dead, the dignity of skilled labor, and the things of which a man ought to be ashamed.
