PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 29 of 51
Lending and Alms

CHAPTER 29

Verse 1. He that is merciful will lend unto his neighbor, and he that strengtheneth his hand keepeth the commandments.

Verse 2. Lend to thy neighbor in time of his need, and pay thou thy neighbor again in due season.

Verse 3. Keep thy word and deal faithfully with him, and thou shalt always find that which is needful for thee.

Verse 4. Many, when a thing was lent them, reckoned it to be found and put them to trouble that helped them.

Verse 5. Till he hath received, he will kiss a man's hand; and for his neighbor's money he will speak submissly; but when he should repay, he will prolong the time, and return words of grief, and complain of the time.

Verse 6. If he prevail, the lender shall hardly receive the half, and he will count it as if he had found it.

Verse 7. If not, the borrower hath defrauded him of his money, and he hath gotten him an enemy without cause.

Verse 8. He payeth him with cursings and railings, and for honor he will pay him disgrace.

Verse 9. Many therefore have refused to lend for other men's ill dealing, fearing to be defrauded.

Verse 10. Yet have thou patience with a man in poor estate, and delay not to show him mercy.

Verse 11. Help the poor for the commandment's sake, and turn him not away because of his poverty.

Verse 12. Lose thy money for thy brother and thy friend, and let it not rust under a stone to be lost.

Verse 13. Lay up thy treasure according to the commandments of the Most High, and it shall bring thee more profit than gold.

Verse 14. Shut up alms in thy storehouses, and it shall deliver thee from all affliction.

Verse 15. It shall fight for thee against thine enemies better than a mighty shield and a strong spear.

Verse 16. A good man becometh surety for his neighbor, but he that is impudent will forsake him.

Verse 17. Forget not the friendship of thy surety, for he hath given his life for thee.

Verse 18. A sinner will overthrow the good estate of his surety.

Verse 19. And he that is of an ungrateful mind will leave him in danger that delivered him.

Verse 20. Suretyship hath undone many of good estate, and shaken them as a wave of the sea.

Verse 21. Mighty men hath it driven from their houses, so that they wandered among strange nations.

Verse 22. A wicked man transgressing the commandments of the Lord shall fall into suretyship, and he that undertaketh and followeth other men's business for gain shall fall into suits.

Verse 23. Help thy neighbor according to thy power, and beware that thou thyself fall not into the same.

Verse 24. The chief thing for life is water and bread and clothing, and a house to cover shame.

Verse 25. Better is the life of a poor man in a mean cottage than delicate fare in another man's house.

Verse 26. Be it little or much, hold thee contented, and thou shalt not hear the reproach of wandering.

Verse 27. It is a miserable life to go from house to house, for where thou art a stranger thou darest not open thy mouth.

Verse 28. Thou shalt entertain and feed and give drink unto the unthankful, and moreover thou shalt hear bitter words.

Verse 29. Come, thou stranger, and furnish a table, and feed me of that thou hast ready.

Verse 30. Give place, thou stranger, to an honorable man; my brother cometh to be lodged, and I have need of mine house.

Verse 31. These things are grievous to a man of understanding: the upbraiding of house-room and the reproaching of the lender.
