PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 2 of 18
The Promises of God (Concluded)

---

2. THE PROMISES OF GOD (CONCLUDED).
In view of the confusion which now exists in so many minds, a second article on this aspect of our
subject seems called for. One leading branch of Satan’s evil work is to torment the children of God,
and as far as he can, destroy their peace. He knows full well that he cannot prevent them entering
their eternal rest (which is evident by his admission in Job 1.10); therefore he bends his efforts
toward undermining their present spiritual comforts. And to a large extent, his end is gained in
this if he succeeds in weakening or removing our confidence in the precious promises of God,
which form a considerable part of the source and substance of the saints’ consolation. Knowing
that he is unable to shake the faith of the regenerate in the Divine inspiration and veracity of the

6

promises recorded in Holy Writ, he has employed the subtler attack (which is equally effective if
yielded to) of seeking to persuade us that the great majority of God’s promises do not belong to
Christians at all — for seeing that they are recorded in the Old Testament, they are the property
of the Jews only.
Cleverly, indeed, has the Devil pushed this campaign of enervating the importance and value of
the larger half of God’s Word. The agents whom he has employed in this evil work have not been
open atheists and avowed infidels; but instead, men who posed as the champions of orthodoxy,
acknowledging their faith in the full inspiration of the Scriptures. Thereby, the confidence of the
unwary was gained. Though at first the radical and revolutionary postulates of the teachers of
“dispensational truth” may have awakened a measure of uneasiness in simple-minded souls, only
too often they quenched their fears by reassuring themselves that such teachers — who are so
faithful to the “fundamentals,” so loyal to Christ, so well-versed in the Scriptures — “must be
right.” Moreover, the claims made by these men, that God had given them much more “light” on
His Word than all who had preceded them, made an attractive appeal to the pride of their hearers.
For who wants to be “behind the times”?
In Jeremiah 36.23, we are told that when Jehoiakim, king of Judah, heard the Prophet read a
message from God, that “he cut it with the penknife.” This incident has often been referred to by
teachers of “dispensational truth,” who have applied or accommodated it to the pernicious
methods employed by the “higher critics.” This too has served to quiet any fears that might exist
in the hearer. For supposing that his teachers “stood for the whole Word of God,” and impressed
by their fervent denunciations of “modernism” and “evolutionism,” he thinks that they are to be
safely followed in all their assertions. How wily the Devil is! Nevertheless, the fact remains that
the effects produced the labors of the Dispensationalists, have been as subversive of faith as those
of the “higher critics.” — the latter affirming that much of the Old Testament is spurious, and the
former insisting that it does not belong to us. In either case, most of God’s Word is reduced to a
dead letter, so far as faith receiving its present validity and virtue is concerned.
But are there not many promises which God gave to Israel, which have no direct application to
the Church? Are there not many promises recorded in the Old Testament which Christians of
today could by no means appropriate to themselves and rightly expect their fulfillment? Of course
not! Were that the case, then Rom 15.4 would not be true: “For whatever things were written
before, were written for our learning, that through patience and the comfort of the Scriptures, we
might have hope.” What “comfort” can I draw from Scriptures which “do not belong to me”? What
“hope” can possibly be inspired in the Christian today by promises which pertain to none but the
Jews? Christ came here not to cancel, but “to confirm the promises made to the fathers, and that
the Gentiles might glorify God for His mercy” (Rom 15.8, 9).
Now, with regard to all the Divine promises which respect temporal or material blessings, the
following rules must be steadily borne in mind when pleading for their fulfillment. First, there
must be the heart’s entire submission to the absolute sovereignty of God. General promises such
as, “And all things, whatever you ask in prayer, believing, you shall receive them” (Mat 21.22),
must always be understood in the light of “If we ask anything according to His will, He hears us”
(1Joh 5.14). The fulfillment of His promises must necessarily be subordinated to God’s own good
pleasure. By this we do not mean that God ever fails to make good any word that He has given;
but rather, He has so worded His promises, or so modified them by other declarations, that He is
free to exercise His high sovereignty in the fulfilling of them, without in the slightest degree
sullying His veracity.
To be more specific: God exercises His sovereignty in the fulfillment of His promises in a threefold
way: as to whom He makes them good, as to how, and as to when He does so. Let us illustrate this
by Psalm 34.7, “The angel of the Lord encamps around those who fear Him, and delivers them.”
First, as to whom He makes this good. Note the indefiniteness of the promise: it does not say “all

7

who fear Him.” The three Hebrews were “delivered” from Babylon’s furnace; but others “were
stoned” and sawn asunder” (Heb 11.36, 37). Second, as to how: Daniel was delivered from the
lions’ den; Stephen, at his death, was “delivered” from a world of sin and sorrow, and removed to
Heaven! Third, as to when: godly Josiah was “delivered” from this scene of wickedness and woe
before he reached the age of forty; whereas Noah was suffered to remain on earth till he was nine
hundred and fifty!
Second, the heart’s genuine desire for the glory of God. In all true prayer, the petitions are framed
with this specific end in view. Thus the Lord Jesus Himself has plainly taught in the pattern prayer
He has graciously given us: “Hallowed be your name” is the first petition, and therefore it is the
standard which measures all that follows. Hereby we are instructed to make this our paramount
concern as well as plea, when we supplicate the Throne of Grace. Abraham was “strong in faith,
giving glory to God” (Rom 4.20); this is the chief object which faith sets before it, not only asking
for that which will glorify God, but that which will be most for His glory. And this, of course, “Seek
them for yourself? seek them not” (Jer 45.5); but seek rather that God may be honored and
magnified — whether He gives or whether He withholds what your heart so much longs for.
Third, complete submission to the unerring wisdom of God. Our loving Father has reserved to
Himself the liberty of deciding what is best for us and what is not. “And therefore the Lord will
wait, that He may be gracious to you, and therefore He will be exalted, that He may have mercy
upon you: for the Lord is a God of judgment: blessed are all those who wait for Him” (Isa 30.18).
His delays are not arbitrary and capricious, but are regulated by both love and omniscience. He
does not tarry only for the fittest season in which to manifest His mercy to us, but decides which
are the most suitable gifts to bestow upon us. He has in mind our highest spiritual good as well as
our temporal well-being; but it must be left to Him to decide what will most promote these.
“To pray for outward and worldly blessings is not contrary to the will of God, for He has
promised to bestow them. But then, as His promise is conditional, if it is consistent with our
good: so truly, must our prayers be conditional: that God would give them to us if it is consistent
with His will and with our good. Whatever we thus ask, we do it according to the will of God;
and we are sure of speeding in our request, either by obtaining our desires, or by being blessed
with a denial. For, alas! we are blind and ignorant creatures, and cannot look into the designs
and drift of Providence, and see how God has laid in order good and evil in His own purpose.
Oftentimes we must mistake evil for good, because of the present appearance of good that it has.
Indeed, we are so shortsighted that we can look no further than outward and present
appearance. But God, who sees through the whole series and connection of His own counsels,
knows, many times, that those things, which we account and desire as good, are really evil. And
therefore, it is our wisdom to resign all our desires to His disposal, and to say, ‘Lord, though
such temporal enjoyments may seem good and desirable to me at present, yet you are infinitely
wise, and you know what the consequence and issue of them will be. I beg them, if they may
stand with your will; and if you see they will be as really good for me, as I suppose them now to
be. If they are not so, I beg the favor of a denial.’ This is the right frame in which a Christian’s
heart should be, when he comes to beg temporal mercies of God; and while he thus asks for any
worldly comforts, he cannot ask amiss.” — Ezekiel Hopkins (1633-1689)
Fourth, in keeping with the covenant under which they were given, many of the promises made
to the patriarchs and their descendants were typical in character. Earthly blessings foreshadowed
heavenly ones. This is not an arbitrary assertion of ours, for he who knows anything at all about
the things of God, is aware that everything during the Abrahamic and Mosaic economies had a
figurative meaning. While it be true that every Old Testament promise received a literal fulfillment
for some of God’s children, yet not for all. For even then, the promises which concern temporal
blessings necessarily had this proviso: if they promote spiritual and eternal happiness. Otherwise

8

they would not have been promises but threats, and the fulfillment or bestowment a snare and a
curse, rather than a blessing.
Yet let it not be concluded from what has just been said that the literal purport of those Old
Testament promises which relate to material blessings, do not concern the Christian today. The
greater includes the lesser. We who are his spiritual children, and so “blessed with faithful
Abraham” (Gal 3.9), may rightly make the promises to his natural seed, the ground of our faith.
We are still on earth in the body, and our physical needs are the same today as were those of the
Jews of old; and according to our faith and obedience, so it will be unto us. The Lord Jesus plainly
declared, “But seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness; and all these things shall be
added unto you” (Mat 6.33); and “these things” refer to food and clothing. 1Timothy 4.8 expressly
affirms, “Godliness is profitable for all things, having promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come.”
As an illustration and example of what has been pointed out, take the Lord’s promise to Abraham
in Genesis 13.15: “All the land which you see, I will give it to you, and to your seed forever.” Now
the fulfillment of this promise is to be understood in a twofold way. First, mystically or
sacramentally. The land of Canaan is to be regarded not only as a country in Asia, fertile and
fruitful, but also as a figure and type of that heavenly Canaan where every blessing is found in its
fullness. It is for this reason that Christ called Heaven “Abraham’s bosom” (Luke 16.22), rather
than call it after any of the other patriarchs — not Abel’s bosom, not Enoch’s, not Moses’, not
David’s, but “Abraham’s bosom.” From this we learn that in fulfilling His promises, God often
gives not the particular thing promised, but either something proportional to it, or something
better. Thus, in promising long life (Eph 6.3) He takes some away to eternal life early. Second,
Abraham inherited Canaan four hundred and thirty years after, in his posterity; for they were in
him when God made the promise.
“Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He does not say ‘And to seeds,’ as of
many; but as of one. ‘And to your Seed,’ which is Christ” (Gal 3.16). Upon this, we cannot do better
now than to quote from James Haldane (1848):
“The original promise was that God would bless Abraham, and make him a great nation; and
that in him all the families of the earth should be blessed (Gen 12.1-3). After many years had
elapsed, God condescended to enter into a solemn covenant or engagement with Abraham,
which contained three distinct promises: first, that he who had been so long childless should be
the father of many nations; second, that He would be a God to him and to his seed; third, that
He would give to him and to his seed the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession (Gen 17.48). Each of these promises received a literal and spiritual fulfillment.
“The literal fulfillment of the first was the multitude that sprung from Abraham, the many
thousands of Israel (Num. 10.36). But this promise also had a spiritual fulfillment, of which the
literal was but a type or figure; and the Apostle refers to this, ‘Therefore it is of faith, that it
might be by grace; to the end that the promise might be sure to all the seed; not only to that
which is of the law, but to also that which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all,
(As it is written, I have made you a father of many nations), before Him whom he believed, even
God who quickens the dead, and calls those things which are not, as though they were” (Rom
4.16, 17). In this sense, Abraham was the father of all believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, and
of them only. Hence the Jews, when cast off for their rejection of Christ, are represented as
complaining that Abraham does not acknowledge them (Isa 63.16).
“The second promise was that God would be a God to him and to his seed after him. This had
its fulfillment in the riches and prosperity of Abraham, and in Israel after the flesh, being
brought into covenant with God, whereby He became their God, and acknowledged them as His

9

peculiar people. Its spiritual fulfillment was God becoming the God of the true Israel —
Abraham’s children by faith — by a better covenant, established upon better promises.
“The third promise was the possession of the land of Canaan, literally fulfilled in its conquest
and occupation, and spiritually in the possession of the Better Country which those who are of
the faith of Abraham shall forever inherit. One great means by which Satan has succeeded in
corrupting the Gospel, has been the blending of the literal and spiritual fulfillment of these
promises, thus confounding the old and new covenants. The former was a type of the latter. The
Apostle refers to this in speaking of the revelation of the mystery ‘which was kept secret since
the world began, but now is made manifest, and by the Scriptures of the prophets, according to
the commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of faith’
(Rom 16.25, 26). The mystery spoken of here, is the hidden meaning of God’s dealings with the
posterity of Abraham, to which Paul frequently refers in his epistles.”
Yes, a hundred years ago Satan sought to corrupt the Truth of God by confounding the literal and
spiritual meaning and fulfillment of the Abrahamic promises. During the last two generations, his
efforts have been directed toward denying that they have any spiritual meaning, value, and
application at all. How true it is that “the natural man (no matter how well-versed he is in the
letter of Scripture) does not receive the things of the Spirit of God;” he cannot know them “for
they are spiritually discerned;” and not being a spiritual or regenerate man, he has no “spiritual
discernment.” (1Cor 2.14)
But we shall, D. V.,3 have more to say on this in future articles.

3 D.V., Deo Volente, God willing.

10

Part II