PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 31 of 51
Riches and Feasting


CHAPTER 31

Verse 1. Watching for riches consumeth the flesh, and the care thereof driveth away sleep.

Verse 2. Waking care will not let a man slumber, as a sore disease breaketh sleep.

Verse 3. The rich hath great labor in gathering riches together, and when he resteth, he is filled with his delicacies.

Verse 4. The poor laboreth in his poor estate, and when he leaveth off, he is still needy.

Verse 5. He that loveth gold shall not be justified, and he that followeth corruption shall have enough thereof.

Verse 6. Gold hath been the ruin of many, and their destruction was present.

Verse 7. It is a stumbling block unto them that sacrifice unto it, and every fool shall be taken therewith.

Verse 8. Blessed is the rich that is found without blemish, and hath not gone after gold.

Verse 9. Who is he? And we will call him blessed; for wonderful things hath he done among his people.

Verse 10. Who hath been tried thereby, and found perfect? Then let him glory. Who might offend, and hath not offended? Or done evil, and hath not done it?

Verse 11. His goods shall be established, and the congregation shall declare his alms.

Verse 12. If thou sit at a bountiful table, be not greedy upon it, and say not, There is much meat on it.

Verse 13. Remember that a wicked eye is an evil thing; and what is created more wicked than an eye? Therefore it weepeth upon every occasion.

Verse 14. Stretch not thine hand whithersoever it looketh, and thrust it not with him into the dish.

Verse 15. Judge of thy neighbor by thyself, and be discreet in every point.

Verse 16. Eat, as it becometh a man, those things which are set before thee; and devour not, lest thou be hated.

Verse 17. Leave off first for manners' sake, and be not insatiable, lest thou offend.

Verse 18. When thou sittest among many, reach not thine hand out first of all.

Verse 19. A very little is sufficient for a man well nurtured, and he fetcheth not his wind short upon his bed.

Verse 20. Sound sleep cometh of moderate eating; he riseth early, and his wits are with him. But the pain of watching and choler and pangs of the belly are with an insatiable man.

Verse 21. And if thou hast been forced to eat, arise, go forth, vomit, and thou shalt have rest.

Verse 22. My son, hear me, and despise me not, and at the last thou shalt find as I told thee. In all thy works be quick, and no infirmity shall come unto thee.

Verse 23. Whoso is liberal of his meat, men shall speak well of him; and the report of his good housekeeping will be believed.

Verse 24. But against him that is a niggard of his meat the whole city shall murmur, and the testimonies of his niggardness shall not be doubted of.

Verse 25. Show not thy valiantness in wine, for wine hath destroyed many.

Verse 26. The furnace proveth the edge by dipping, so doth wine the hearts of the proud by drunkenness.

Verse 27. Wine is as good as life to a man if it be drunk moderately. What life is then to a man that is without wine? For it was made to make men glad.

Verse 28. Wine measurably drunk and in season bringeth gladness of the heart and cheerfulness of the mind.

Verse 29. But wine drunk with excess maketh bitterness of the mind, with brawling and quarreling.

Verse 30. Drunkenness increaseth the rage of a fool till he offend; it diminisheth strength and maketh wounds.

Verse 31. Rebuke not thy neighbor at the wine, and despise him not in his mirth. Give him no despiteful words, and press not upon him with urging him to drink.
