PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 35 of 51
Sacrifices Pleasing to God


CHAPTER 35

Verse 1. He that keepeth the law bringeth offerings enough; he that taketh heed to the commandment offereth a peace offering.

Verse 2. He that requiteth a good turn offereth fine flour, and he that giveth alms sacrificeth praise.

Verse 3. To depart from wickedness is a thing pleasing to the Lord, and to forsake unrighteousness is a propitiation.

Verse 4. Thou shalt not appear empty before the Lord.

Verse 5. For all these things are to be done because of the commandment.

Verse 6. The offering of the righteous maketh the altar fat, and the sweet savor thereof is before the Most High.

Verse 7. The sacrifice of a just man is acceptable, and the memorial thereof shall never be forgotten.

Verse 8. Give the Lord His honor with a good eye, and diminish not the firstfruits of thine hands.

Verse 9. In all thy gifts show a cheerful countenance, and dedicate thy tithes with gladness.

Verse 10. Give unto the Most High according as He hath enriched thee, and as thou hast gotten give with a cheerful eye.

Verse 11. For the Lord recompenseth, and will give thee seven times as much.

Verse 12. Do not think to corrupt with gifts, for such He will not receive; and trust not to unrighteous sacrifices, for the Lord is judge, and with Him is no respect of persons.

Verse 13. He will not accept any person against a poor man, but will hear the prayer of the oppressed.

Verse 14. He will not despise the supplication of the fatherless, nor the widow, when she poureth out her complaint.

Verse 15. Do not the tears run down the widow's cheeks? And is not her cry against him that causeth them to fall?

Verse 16. He that serveth the Lord shall be accepted with favor, and his prayer shall reach unto the clouds.

Verse 17. The prayer of the humble pierceth the clouds, and till it come nigh he will not be comforted; and he will not depart until the Most High shall behold to judge righteously and execute judgment.

Verse 18. For the Lord will not be slack, neither will the Mighty be patient toward them, till He have smitten asunder the loins of the unmerciful, and repaid vengeance to the heathen;

Verse 19. Till He have taken away the multitude of the proud, and broken the sceptre of the unrighteous;

Verse 20. Till He have rendered to every man according to his deeds, and to the works of men according to their devices; till He have judged the cause of His people, and made them to rejoice in His mercy.

Verse 21. Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of rain in the time of drought.
