PURITAN GOLD -- Exposition of 1 John by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 21 of 39
Forgiven Children (2:12)


“I write unto you, little children, because your sins
are forgiven you for his name’s sake.”
The title of this chapter raises the question, Are there any unforgiven children? To which we reply, certainly there are—
the whole company of God’s elect remaining so while in their natural condition. “But surely such could hardly be denominated ‘children’—children of God.” Wrong, they are children of God when they enter this world, though they possess not
then the divine nature, and therefore are as yet unmanifested as such, and unknown either to themselves or to others until
they be born again. They are God’s children by eternal predestination (Eph 1:5). It was as such that Christ died for them
(Joh 11:52). It is because they are such that, in due time, the Holy Spirit is sent into their hearts (Gal 4:6). But their sins are
not forgiven them before they savingly believe in Christ, and that is not until the Holy Spirit is given them and they are
quickened into newness of life, for it is impossible that anyone who is dead in trespasses and sins should really feel his dire
need of a Saviour and come to Him for pardon. Thus our text speaks of the regenerated children of God whose sins are forgiven.
What a truly amazing thing it is that there should be such a thing as divine forgiveness of sins—transgressions of God’s
Law, affronts to His holiness, rebellions against His exalted majesty. What a marvel that God does not deal with all mankind
as He did with the angels when they fell—“delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment” (2Pe 2:4)!
Next to the gift of Christ Himself and the grace we receive from His fullness (Joh 1:16), forgiveness of sin is the greatest
blessing God bestows, and therefore does it head the list of benefits for which the Psalmist blessed the Lord with all his soul
(103:2-3). Forgiveness may be defined as that judicial act of God whereby the penitent believer is released from the guilt of
his transgressions against the Law, without receiving any satisfaction at his hands or inflicting any punishment upon him.


It is the remitting of the penalty, which he had incurred. It is a revoking of the sentence of justice, an acquittal of his person
before the bar of God. It is described in Scripture by a variety of expressions, which serve to open unto us the nature of the
thing itself. Several of them are brought together in Psalm 32:1-2.
Before proceeding any further to develop the principal subject of our verse, let us outline its contents. “I write unto you,
little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name’s sake.” Five things call for consideration.
• The connection between that statement and what precedes as well as follows.
• The significance of “I write unto.”
• The appellation which is here given to those addressed—“little children.”
• The reason why the apostle sent this epistle unto them—“because your sins are forgiven.”
• The ground of this blessing—“for His name’s sake.”
First, the relation between 2:12-14, and its context. Hitherto we have had before us the fellowship of the Father with His
children: the nature of that fellowship, the means appointed for its maintenance, and the obligations and privileges which
the same entails. Now we are introduced, as it were, to the different members of God’s family, notice being taken of their
several ages or stages of growth, with their corresponding spiritual attainments. But before John begins to divide the family
into its component parts he addresses himself to the whole thereof, comprehending them all under the endearing expression of “little children,” announcing their sins to be forgiven. That was in strict accord with his central design in this epistle: “These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal
life,” (v. 13), for a saving faith in Christ which issues in forgiveness is a sure sign that the one exercising the same is already
in possession of eternal life.
“These verses (12-14) form a break or interruption in the apostle’s line of argument. There is, as it were, a pause. John
calls upon those to whom he writes to consider, not only what he is writing to them, but what they themselves were to
whom he is writing: what is their character and standing: what he is entitled to assume in and about them as likely to
ensure a fair reception of his message. That was the common apostolic method. It is a courteous and complaisant way
of insinuating advice; taking for granted the attainments to be enforced. But it is far more than that, and it is so emphatically here. It is a trumpet call summoning all the faithful to a recognition of their real and true position before
God; and that with a view to their receiving aright what His servant is now writing to them” (R. Candlish).
In other words, verses 12-14 pave the way for what follows.
While stressing the necessity of a godly walk and a fruitful life, the foundation on which they rest must ever be insisted
upon. “Holiness of life ought indeed to be urged, the fear of God to be carefully enjoined; men ought to be sharply goaded to
repentance, newness of life, together with its fruits. But still we ought ever to take heed lest the doctrine of faith be smothered—that doctrine which teaches that Christ is the only Author of salvation and all its blessings. On the contrary, such
moderation ought to be presented that faith may ever retain its primacy. This is the rule that is presented to us by John:
having faithfully spoken of good works, lest he should seem to give them more importance than he ought to have done, he
carefully calls us back to contemplate the grace of Christ” (Calvin). In other words, duly to observe the order and balance
of truth. Doubtless there is, too, a designed link with verse 10: real faith, saving faith, “worketh by love” (Gal 5:6), and where
it exists and is exercised, we may be assured that this results from God’s having pardoned our sins.
“I write unto you.” Three things were intimated by that language. First, a holy privilege. It was the conferring of a great
favour upon them. If the reader were to receive a letter from the official secretary of the king of England, he would feel himself highly honoured: how much more so to be addressed by one of the ambassadors of the King of kings! Second, a call to
duty. As 2:1, shows, “I write unto you” is a hortatory expression. I John am telling you what to do, and what not to do: sin
not (verse 1), keep God’s commandments (verses 3-5), follow the example Christ has left us (verse 6), love the brethren
(verses 7-11), love not the world (verse 15). Give heed then to my injunctions for they are invested with divine authority.
Third, a permanent record: writing conveys the idea of fixedness. The message delivered by the apostle was no mere transient one, allowing a subsequent revision, either of subtraction or addition. It was the imperial and imperishable Word of God
for all generations, and a solemn curse is pronounced upon anyone who adds to or takes from the same (Rev 22:18-19).
Thereby God’s children are graciously provided for against all the attacks of Satan and his agents, who are ever to be met
with “It is written”!
“Little children.” The word used here is quite another from the one found in the next verse, and from “newborn babes”
in 1 Peter 2:2. In the Greek there are two different words which are both translated “little children” in our English version
without distinguishing between them. The one in our text is teknion, which occurs seven times in this epistle, and in each

means – the instruments through which God works to communicate to the hearts of men.
John Calvin (1509-1564): the father of Reformed and Presbyterian theology. During the course of his ministry in Geneva, lasting nearly
twenty-five years, Calvin lectured to theological students and preached an average of five sermons a week in addition to writing a commentary on nearly every book of the Bible as well as numerous treatises on theological topics. His correspondence fills eleven volumes.
Born in Noyon, Picardie, France.


instance is applied to the whole company addressed: 2:1, 12, 28; 3:7, 18; 4:4; 5:21. The one in verse 13 is paidion, which occurs again only in 2:18, and is restricted to spiritual infants. The former is a term of affection, and is given to the entire believing family; whereas the latter is a discriminating word, which signifies those who are very young, and in verse 13 is
limited unto a particular class in God’s family—the spiritual babes, in contradistinction from the “young men” and the “fathers.” Teknion, then, is used of believers of all ages and degrees of growth. This is clear from its first occurrence, for in
both halves of 2:1, the whole household of faith is obviously in view: “My little children, these things write I unto you, that
ye sin not. And if any one sin, we have an advocate with the Father.”
The blessing which is predicated in our text of those written unto is not one that is peculiar to any special grade of Christians—as are the attainments of the several classes referred to separately in verse 13, but is true of all alike, for the forgiveness of sins pertains to every one of them. There is a community of life, and pardon is the portion of all saints. By the
new life received at regeneration, they are related to God as Father and to each other as brethren; by forgiveness a title is
conveyed which makes them heirs of heaven. In verse 12 the apostle postulates that which pertains to every believing child
of God; but in verse 13 he describes that which characterizes their respective grades according to their measures of growth.
In styling all “little children,” John expressed both his authority and his affection: it stamped his address with weight and
dignity, and at the same time revealed the warmth of his heart unto them. From the remainder of the sentence he would
have them know that it was out of love to Christ and to them that he penned this letter: not to distress, but to promote their
spiritual happiness and mutual affection one to another.
“I write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you.”
“As this epistle is what we style a catholic epistle, so the address is suited to this, and a universal blessing which belongs
unto and is actually bestowed on all the members of the true Church of Christ is expressed. This is the reason he assigns for writing to them, and why he so lovingly addressed them. He had before declared that the blood of Christ, the
Son of God, cleanseth them now, in the present tense, from all sin. He then proceeded to declare if any of them should
sin, they had in Christ an all-prevailing Advocate. He was with the Father. He was their righteousness and their atonement. Then he showed what the true and spiritual knowledge of this, and communion with Christ in the blessings and
benefits of the same, would consequently and evidentially produce. And now he addressed them because they were the
pardoned ones of God. Thus here is consolation, abounding consolation, increasing consolation for them. They were
brought to the knowledge of the Father and the Son; they were admitted into fellowship with Them; they were in
Christ, pure and righteous. He was their High Priest before the Majesty in the heavens. Their sins were completely taken away, and they were in their individual persons pardoned” (S.E. Pierce).
“For thou, LORD, art good, and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee” (Psa 86:5).
What a word is that in Nehemiah 9:17, “Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
kindness”! It was on the basis of that blessed fact that Daniel prayed, “To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him” (Dan 9:9). In Psalm 32:1, forgiveness of sins is likened, first, to a removal of them:
“Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven” is literally “whose transgression is lifted up”—taken off him because laid on
Christ. Second, to a covering of them—by the blood of Christ. Sin is nauseous and abhorrent to the eye of the Holy One.
Third, to a non-imputation of them: they are not reckoned to his account, because charged to his Surety. In Isaiah 43:25, to
a blotting out of sins; in Luke 7:41-42, and Matthew 6:12, to the cancellation of debts; in Hebrews 8:12, to God’s no more
remembering them—thinking no further about them, His justice having been satisfied; and in Isaiah 1:18, to a washing of
them “as white as snow.”
It is therefore very clear that one grand design of a Gospel ministry is the assuring and comforting of the saints, for unbelief is ever at work within them, and Satan constantly engaged in efforts to destroy or at least disturb their peace. No
small part of the work assigned to the Lord’s servants is so to set the person and work of the Saviour before His redeemed
that, by occupying their hearts with the same, they will be lifted out of themselves and delivered from their fears. The forgiveness of sins of those who believe is one of the first blessings announced by the Gospel: in fact there is no true proclamation of God’s good news where that is not plainly set forth. When the Lord Jesus gave the great commission to His apostles,
He declared, “that repentance and remission [forgiveness] of sins should be preached in his name among all nations” (Luk
24:47), and accordingly we find that when Peter was sent to Cornelius and his friends he asserted of Christ, “To him give all
the prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive remission of sins” (Act 10:43). Paul,
too, bore witness at Antioch, “Through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins: And by him all that believe are
justified from all things” (Act 13:38-39).
The object of divine pardon is a penitent believer, and the fruit thereof is a longing and determination to please the Bestower of it. “And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven...Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace” (Luk 7:48, 50). Faith is as
necessary in an instrumental way as Christ’s satisfaction in a meritorious way: “that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith that is in me” (Act 26:18). Christ purchased remission of sins,
faith puts us in possession of it. It is fitting that those who are indebted to Christ for this benefit should give up themselves
to Him, both in a way of dependence and of submission, putting their case into His hands as the Advocate with the Father,
and devoting themselves in subjection to Him, for He is “the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him” (Heb
5:9). Evangelical repentance issues from the renewed heart’s sorrow and horror of sin—which cost the Saviour so dearly.


Saving faith is that which clings to Christ as our only refuge and hope. Gratitude flows forth in affection to Him: “Her sins,
which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven [in their own apprehension], the same
loveth little” (Luk 7:47).
This divine pardon of sins is free, no charge being exacted of its subject: “the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of His grace” (Eph 1:7). Our redemption and recovery cost us nothing, and since it be by grace, then without our deserving.
“Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money” (Isa 52:3). It is bestowed without respect to
anything in us or from us: “and when they had nothing [wherewith] to pay, he frankly forgave them both” (Luk 7:42). Thus
it is wholly gratuitous. “I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions, for mine own sake” (Isa 43:25)—whatever
God does in our salvation it is to glorify His mercy, and out of compassion for our misery. “For thy name’s sake, O LORD,
pardon mine iniquity; for it is great” (Psa 25:11): the penitent believer has no other plea but the honour of God’s name engaged by gracious covenant. Well may we exclaim, “Who is a God like unto thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage?” (Mic 7:18).
Divine forgiveness is full: “Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon” (Isa 55:7). And since He
does so “according to the riches of his grace,” we may be sure it is neither niggard nor grudging. Possibly the reader has
acknowledged a fault unto a fellow Christian, and he has said, “I forgive you,” but in such a tone of voice and expression of
countenance that you felt you had been just as well without such a pardon. But when God forgives, there is—as Luke 15:20
reveals—just as much joy in His heart as there is in the recipient’s. God does things not by halves, but perfectly: “Who forgiveth all thine iniquities” (Psa 103:3), canceling the whole, so that not one is left on record in His book. A partial for32
giveness would not shed sufficient glory on the blood of the Lamb. As John Gill said of His atoning sacrifice, “It reaches to
all sins: original and actual, secret and open, past, present, and to come.”
Divine forgiveness is final. When God pardons it is not merely for a season, but forever. His sentence is irrevocable, releasing the believer from the whole guilt of his transgressions, so that the triumphant challenge goes forth, “Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of God’s elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth?” (Rom 8:33-34). His sentence is
never repealed; the saint is fully discharged from all punishment, for the Law can demand no penalty from him. “Thou wilt
cast all their sins into the depths of the sea” (Mic 7:19), and the ocean, my reader, never casts up anything which has sunk
into its depths. When God pardons sin it is never charged again to the culprit: “their sins and iniquities will I remember no
more” (Heb 10:17). Divine forgiveness is permanent and continuous because of the everlasting value and validity of Christ’s
atonement. It is the standing office of Christ to act as the great High Priest of His people, and His blood has not only
cleansed, but “cleanseth from all sin.”
The great assize is indeed at the last day, but God is exercising His judicial office even now. “Verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth” (Psa 58:11) weighing every action, passing verdict on each person, forgiving or not forgiving. The final
judgment is but a public proclamation and execution of the same. As Manton so aptly pointed out, there is a threefold distinction between God’s forgiving us now and then. First, during this life the sentence of the Law may be revoked, but then it
is definitive and peremptory. One who is now condemned by the Law may be absolved. Every son of Adam is “condemned
already” (Joh 3:18), and he binds that condemnation upon himself if he dies in his unbelief and impenitence, in contempt of
the gracious offer of the Gospel. That his state is now capable of alteration is clear from John 5:24, “Verily, verily, I say unto
you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is [judicially] passed from death unto life.” But at the last great day the sentence is inexorable and irrevocable, and
as the tree fell so will it for ever lie.
Second, the divine sentence is now given in private; then it shall be proclaimed publicly. At conversion the verdict is
passed in the awakened conscience according to the Word of God, the Holy Spirit sealing upon the renewed and believing
heart some sure promise of God. But when the dread tribunal is set up the sentence will be pronounced by the Judge’s own
mouth before an assembled universe, saying either “Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world” (Mat 5:34) or “Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels” (Mat 5:41). As the believer now has the Spirit’s witness within him, then it will be ratified in open court, the
Judge of all the earth publicly exonerating him. Third, then there will be an actual execution of the sentence. Now we have
our everlasting portion either by promise or threat; but then both the promise and the threat will be fully made good.


gratuitous – free; without cost or condition.


niggard – stingy or ungenerous.


John Gill (1697-1771) – Baptist minister, theologian, and biblical scholar. Author of A Complete Body of Doctrinal and Practical Divinity
and his nine-volume Expositions of the Old and New Testaments. Born in Kettering, Northamptonshire, England.
Thomas Manton (1620-1677) – nonconformist Puritan preacher. Graduated from Oxford and preached until forbidden by the Act of Uniformity of 1662. Preached in his own house, was imprisoned, then preached in London. James Ussher called him “one of the best preachers in England.” Appointed as one of three clerks at the Westminster Assembly. Born in Lawrence-Lydiat, county of Somerset, England.
