PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 26 of 51
Good and Evil Wives

---

CHAPTER 26

Verse 1. Blessed is the husband of a good wife, for the number of his years shall be doubled.

Verse 2. A worthy woman rejoiceth her husband, and he shall fulfill the years of his life in peace.

Verse 3. A good wife is a good portion, and she shall be given in the portion of them that fear the Lord.

Verse 4. Whether a man be rich or poor, if he hath a good heart toward the Lord, he shall at all times rejoice with a cheerful countenance.

Verse 5. There are three things which my heart feareth, and before the fourth my face is made afraid:

Verse 6. The slander of a city, the gathering of a mob, and a false accusation — all these are worse than death.

Verse 7. But a grief of heart and sorrow is a woman that is jealous over another woman, and the scourge of the tongue communicating to all.

Verse 8. As a yoke of oxen that is moved to and fro, so also is a wicked woman; he that holdeth her is as though he grasped a scorpion.

Verse 9. A drunken woman is a great wrath, and her reproach and shame shall not be hid.

Verse 10. The whoredom of a woman may be known by the haughtiness of her eyes and by her eyelids.

Verse 11. Keep a strict watch over a headstrong daughter, lest she make thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, a byword in the city and a reproach among the people, and she shame thee before the multitude.

Verse 12. Behold not every body's beauty, and sit not in the midst of women.

Verse 13. For from garments cometh a moth, and from a woman cometh the wickedness of a woman.

Verse 14. Better is the churlishness of a man than a woman that doeth good but bringeth shame and reproach.

Verse 15. Now I will remember the works of the Lord, and will declare the things that I have seen. By the words of the Lord are His works made.

Verse 16. As the sun giving light looketh upon all things, so the work of the Lord is full of His glory.

Verse 17. Hath not the Lord made His saints to declare all His wondrous works, which the Lord Almighty hath firmly settled to be established for His glory?

Verse 18. He searcheth out the deep and the heart, and considereth their crafty devices; for the Lord knoweth all that may be known, and He beholdeth the signs of the world.

Verse 19. He declareth the things that are past and the things that are to come, and revealeth the steps of hidden things.

Verse 20. No thought escapeth Him, neither any word is hidden from Him.

Verse 21. He hath garnished the mighty works of His wisdom, and He is from everlasting to everlasting; unto Him nothing may be added, neither can He be diminished, and He hath no need of any counselor.

Verse 22. Oh how desirable are all His works! And that which a man may behold is but a spark.

Verse 23. All these things live and remain forever for every purpose, and they are all obedient to Him.

Verse 24. All things are double one against another, and He hath made nothing imperfect.

Verse 25. One thing establisheth the good of another, and who shall be filled with beholding His glory?