PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 8 of 18
The Church of God (Concluded)

---

2. THE CHURCH OF GOD (CONCLUDED).
In the last article we furnished proof that “the Church of God” (in such passages as Act 20.28) and
“God’s elect” (in such passages as Rom 8.33), comprise identically the same persons. And
inasmuch as Abraham (Isa 51.2), Isaac and Jacob (Rom 9.7, 13) were among God’s elect, they were
most certainly members of the Church. Nor has this ever been denied throughout the long
centuries of this Christian era (so far as we are aware), until the Dispensationalists came on the
scene and sought to confuse the simple. Both appellations view the saints in their relation to God,
His chosen and called out people. When the same individuals are designated the Church which is
Christ’s body, they are contemplated in relation to Christ as their Head; and He is a “Head” of
dignity (supremacy), authority, and influence, as the physical head is in the human body.
The Church, which is the body of Christ, comprises all who are federally and vitally united to Him.
As the last Adam, He was the federal Head of the entire ELECTION OF GRACE, and as such He is a
“quickening Spirit” to them. In Eph 5.23 we are told that “Christ is the Head of the Church: and
He is the Saviour of the Body,” which unmistakably proves that His Headship and Saviourhood
are of equal extent, and that all who are saved by Him out of Adam’s fallen and ruined race, belong
to and are members of His Church. If then, Abel, Enoch, and Noah were saved by God (their sins
remitted, their persons justified, their souls regenerated and sanctified by the Spirit, and made
joint-heirs with Christ — as they most certainly were) on the ground of the retrospective merits of
Christ’s satisfaction, then they are just as truly members of the body of Christ, as Paul and the
Philippian jailer, who were saved by God on the ground of the prospective value of Christ’s
atonement.
Not only were the Old Testament saints gathered into and united to the Church, which is the body
of Christ, but they themselves knew this as truly as do the saints of today. A clear proof of this is
furnished in Heb 11.24-26. How could Moses “esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than
the treasures in Egypt,” if he had been in total ignorance of “Christ”? But what is meant here by
“Christ”? or rather “the Christ” as it is in the Greek, and so rendered in Bagster’s International,
and in the margin of the R.V.? We answer, precisely the same as in Gal 3.16: “the Christ” personal
and “the Christ” mystical. Moses esteemed the “reproach” which would follow both on account of
his faith in the person of Christ, and his fellowship with His suffering members, greater riches
than the transitory and perishing riches of Egypt, “for he had respect to the recompense of the
reward,” that is, the eternal reward or “inheritance.”
While allowing the double reference to “the Christ” in Heb 11.26 — for really the Head and the
Body cannot be separated, though they may be viewed distinctly — yet the principal allusion is
undoubtedly to the mystical Christ, the Church which is His body. This is clear from a comparison
of verses 25, 26, which are obviously parallel and explanatory of one another. In the former, we
are told that Moses “chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season.” Thus, there is a threefold parallelism: the “reproach” of verse 26
agrees with and is interpreted by the “suffering affliction” of verse 25: the “Christ” of verse 26
corresponds with and is defined by “the people of God” in verse 25; and the “treasures in Egypt”
balances with the “pleasures of sin”; while the “pleasures of sin for a season” (v. 25) is set over
against the “recompense of the reward” (v. 26), which consists of those “pleasures” which are at
God’s right hand “forever more” (Psa 16.11).
From what has just been set before us, no man can fairly deny that the “people of God” in Hebrews
11.25 are, by the Holy Spirit, expressly designated “the Christ” in verse 26, which is the very title
given to the Church in 1Cor 12.12! Nor can it be truly denied that the Church or mystical body of
Christ is synonymous with “the people of God.” Thus, it unequivocally follows that the true (in

30

contrast to the nominal — just as we now distinguish between genuine and nominal “Christians”)
“people of God” in the entire Old Testament era belong to and were members of the mystical
Christ. In perfect accord with this, we find Stephen “a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit” (Act
6.5), speaking of “THE CHURCH in the wilderness” (Act 7.38). This is more striking in view of the
immediate context, where Stephen quoted from Deu 18.15, “the Lord your God shall raise up for
you a Prophet like me (Moses), from your brethren; Him you shall hear.” This is He that was IN
the church in the wilderness.
What could be plainer and more certain than what has just been set before us? In view of this,
what will be thought of such a statement as that made by A. C. Gaebelein in his notes on Mat 16.18:
“The Lord’s speaking of the church as to be built upon this rock, makes it clear that there was
no church in existence up to that time. It is therefore all wrong to speak, as it is done so often,
of the Old Testament Church. There was no such institution in Old Testament times.”
Such men (and all who echo their anti-scriptural teaching) will yet have to answer to God for
belying His Holy Word.
Another passage which clearly sets forth the relation of Christ to the Old Testament saints is
1Corinthians 10.1-4:
“Moreover, brethren, I would not have you be ignorant that all our fathers were under the cloud,
and all passed through the sea; And were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea;
And all ate the same spiritual meat; And all drank the same spiritual drink: for they drank of
that spiritual Rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ.”
So definite and decisive is the testimony of those verses, we refrain from making any comment on
them, except to urge the reader to prayerfully heed its opening words, and no longer “be ignorant”
of that blessed fact.
As to how long the knowledge of Christ’s relation to them, and their relation to Christ, was
retained by the Old Testament saints, we may not be able to fully show. False prophets abounded
then as they do now. All sorts of novelties were introduced, and at various periods, error was
rampant. Thus it became necessary for God to raise up man after man, bidding His people to ask
for “the old paths” (Jer 6.16). And it has now become necessary for such articles as these to be
written, if the cloud of dust is to be cleared away which the Dispensationalists have raised, and
which has clouded the vision of so many. But it is certain that the Old Testament saints were far
from being the ignoramuses which so many of our conceited moderns declare they were. The path
of the just has always been “as the shining light” (Pro 4.18) — and not as a dim candle! — though
it admittedly shone “more and more” as the “perfect Day” drew nearer.
We must not fail to notice the particular passages to which the Dispensationalists appeal,
supposing that they support their ridiculous contention that the mystical body of Christ never
existed before the day of Pentecost. But before examining those verses, let it be pointed out that
the Word of God does not contradict itself. It is impossible that Act 7.38 should speak of “the
Church in the wilderness,” and then one of the Epistles declare there was no Church in Old
Testament times. Let it be further pointed out that it is axiomatic that whenever a truth or fact
has been definitely established, no objection can possibly overthrow it. For example, if it is
demonstrated that there is a soul dwelling within the body, my inability to show how that which
is immaterial can act upon and be counter-influenced by that which is material, does not disprove
its existence. Hence, if we were unable to satisfactorily explain the verses which are to come before
us, this would by no means annul all that which has been so clearly and abundantly proven.
“Upon this rock I will build My Church” (Mat 16.18). From Christ’s use of the future tense here, it
has been inferred that He had no Church up to that time. But the difficulty (if it is “difficulty”) is
at once removed when the remainder of the sentence is read: “And the gates of hell shall not

31

prevail against it. And I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatever you bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”
Two things are evident there. First, that our Lord was not speaking here of His “Church” in its
highest character (that is, viewed as His body and bride), but in its economical state here on earth
— the Church “militant.” For it would be superfluous to speak about the “gates of hell” not
prevailing against the Church “triumphant.”
Second, Christ had before Him the new constitution of the membership of His Church upon earth,
which the abolishing of Judaism and the institution of Christianity necessarily entailed.
“God had a church in the world from the beginning, and it was built upon the promised Seed
(Gen 3.15); but now that the promised Seed had come, it was requisite that the Church have a
new charter, a Christian charter, standing in relation to a Christ who had already come. Now
here we have that Charter.” — Matthew Henry on Mat 16.18.
That no new Church was instituted by the Lord Jesus is very plain from Heb 2.12, where the Holy
Spirit quotes the Saviour’s words from Psalm 22.22. He designated “the Congregation of the
Lord,” as “the Church”! 17 It should be added to this, that when Christ said, “on this Rock I will
build My Church,” it is evident He was referring to the Assembly under the figure of the “House”
(Heb 3.6), and the “Temple” (2Cor 6.16), rather than the “Body” — the “rock” foundation suited
the former but not the latter. Now the “House” of God was not some new thing begun at Pentecost,
as may be seen from such scriptures as Psa 127.1, Pro 9.1, Song 2.4, Mat 10.25. 18
Further proof that the Church to which the New Testament saints belonged is not peculiar to this
Christian dispensation, is found in Heb 12.22, 23. We cannot now give a detailed examination of
the passage, but must defer this until we reach it (D.V.) in the course of our exposition of that
Epistle. Suffice it now to point out that in that chapter, the Holy Spirit draws a series of contrasts
between what characterized Judaism as such (vv. 18-21), and what pertained to Christianity (vv.
22-24). The Apostle was assuring the Hebrew saints (3.1) that in refusing to return to an apostate
system which God had now abandoned, and by remaining loyal to Christ, they lost nothing, but
gained everything. For under the new covenant they had the substance of all that was shadowed
under the old covenant. By virtue of their union to Christ, they had “come to Mount Zion, and to
the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem” — three names for Christ’s mystical body,
viewed in different relations. And they were connected with the whole body of the faithful: they
had “come to... the General Assembly and Church of the Firstborn, who are written in Heaven” —
the “General Assembly” obviously denoting the entire ELECTION OF GRACE; this is confirmed by
“who are written in Heaven.” Compare Exo 32.32, Isa 4.3, Dan 12.1, Luk 10.20, Phi 4.3.
The next passage which is appealed to by those who teach that the “Church” was born on the day
of Pentecost, is 1Cor 12.13, “For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we are
Jews or Gentiles, whether we are bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit.”
There is nothing whatever in this which favors, to the slightest degree, the absurd notion of the
Dispensationalists. In that verse, the Apostle is simply advancing proof of what he affirmed in
verse 12, where he said, “For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of
that one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ.” In that 12th verse, he illustrates the

17 KJV Psa 22:22 I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. The

word congregation in Hebrew is qahal. The LXE (English translation of the Septuagint), has this: LXE Psa 22:22 I will
declare thy name to my brethren: in the midst of the church will I sing praise to thee. KJV Heb 2:12 I will declare thy
name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee. The word church in Greek, whether OT
or NT, is ekklesia. The Greek and Hebrew words are therefore equivalent, as are the people: those called of God.
18 Psa 127:1 Unless the LORD builds the house, They labor in vain who build it; Pro 9:1 Wisdom has built her house;
Song 2:4 THE SHULAMITE TO THE DAUGHTERS OF JERUSALEM: He brought me to the banqueting house. Mat 10:25 If
they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more will they call those of his household!

32

truth taught in the context of it: every organism is characterized by diversity and unity; that is, the
uniting of different parts so as to form one body.
In the church at Corinth there was a great variety of gifts, such variety as is to be found in the
different members of the human body; nevertheless, despite the diversity of its members, the
physical body is a unit, an organic whole. Moreover, such diversity is essential to its unity; for
unless the physical organism has many members, it would not be a body. So also is the “Christ,”
the Church — it has many members, among which are marked varieties and gifts. But just as one
soul animates the entire physical body, so does one Spirit animate the Church. “For by one Spirit
we are (“we were”) all baptized into one body.” Observe, it is not said that “all baptized at the same
time” — or no “Gentiles” were baptized by the Spirit! The reference is to a common operation of
the Spirit upon all of God’s elect, from Abel onwards. The “baptized” signifies regenerated, by
which each saint manifestly becomes a member of the body of Christ; “drinking into one Spirit”
refers to His sanctifying influences and gifts — faith, hope, love.
The third passage which is appealed to by those who deny Christ had any Church before Pentecost,
is Eph 1.19-23. From these verses it is pointed out that God gave Christ to be “head over all things
to the Church, which is His body” after His ascension. It might just as well be argued that none
had their sins remitted before Christ made atonement at the Cross, or that none were regenerated
until He was made a “quickening Spirit” consequent to His resurrection. Or with as good effect it
might be said that Christ could not make intercession nor act as the Advocate of His people before
he sat down at God’s right hand. This is plainly refuted by Zec 1.12-13 and 3.1-2! 19 In the purpose
of the Triune Jehovah, the God-man Mediator was “set up (or “anointed”) from everlasting, from
the beginning, or before the earth ever was” (Pro 8.23). In their jumbled ideas on Eph 1.19-23,
these “rightly dividers” fail to “divide” or distinguish between Christ as the virtual Head of His
people from the beginning — because He is “the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world” —
and Christ as the actual Head after He became historically incarnate.
But the favorite passage of these heretics which we are now refuting is Eph 3.3-9, which may be
linked with Rom 16.25 and Col 1.26.20 A few words may suffice to point out the perfect consistency
between these verses and all that has been said above. The “mystery” in all of them refers to the
counsels of Divine grace in the Everlasting Covenant concerning the whole company of the elect.
Those counsels of grace were “revealed” in the Old Testament, but it was largely under types and
foreshadowings, by means of hints and obscure prophecies, and not so clearly and fully “as it is
now revealed by the Spirit” (Eph 3.5) through the Gospel. Moreover, the earliest and partial
revelation found in the Old Testament Scriptures was confined to one nation, and “not made
19 Zec 1:12 Then the Angel of the LORD answered and said, "O LORD of hosts, how long will You not have mercy on

Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which You were angry these seventy years?" 13 And the LORD answered
the angel who talked to me, with good and comforting words. Zec 3:1 Then he showed me Joshua the high priest
standing before the Angel of the LORD, and Satan standing at his right hand to oppose him. 2 And the LORD said to Satan,
"The LORD rebuke you, Satan! The LORD who has chosen Jerusalem rebuke you! Is this not a brand plucked from the
fire?"
20 Eph 3:3 how that by revelation He made known to me the mystery (as I have briefly written already, 4 by which,
when you read, you may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ), 5 which in other ages was not made
known to the sons of men, as it has now been revealed by the Spirit to His holy apostles and prophets: 6 that the Gentiles
should be fellow heirs, of the same body, and partakers of His promise in Christ through the gospel, 7 of which I became
a minister according to the gift of the grace of God given to me by the effective working of His power. 8 To me, who am
less than the least of all the saints, this grace was given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches
of Christ, 9 and to make all see what is the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the ages has been
hidden in God who created all things through Jesus Christ; Rom 16:25 Now to Him who is able to establish you
according to my gospel and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery kept secret since
the world began... Col 1:26 the mystery which has been hidden from ages and from generations, but now has been
revealed to His saints. 27 To them God willed to make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among
the Gentiles: which is CHRIST IN YOU, THE HOPE OF GLORY.

33

known to the sons of men” (Eph 3.5). Whereas, the New Testament revelation is “made known to
all nations” (Rom 16.26), so that “all” may see it (Eph 3.9).
We have now noted all the passages (so far as we are aware) appealed to by those who deny that
the mystical Body or Church of Christ, existed in Old Testament times; but none of them give the
slightest countenance to any such contention. The margin of Daniel 7.18 expressly refers to “the
saints of the high places,” which is parallel with Eph 1.3, and Heb 3.1. Ephesians 2.11-13, 19-22,21
plainly declare that God’s elect from the Gentiles, so far from constituting a new Body, are now
made “fellow-citizens with the saints” — this can only mean the Old Testament saints — being
“built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets. Jesus Christ Himself being the chief
cornerstone, in whom all the building (Old and New Testament saints) fitly framed together,
grows into a holy temple in the Lord.” We therefore affirm that, in their fantastical efforts to
“rightly divide” the Word of God, Dispensationalists have wrongly divided the family of God.
They are so far from maintaining the “unity of the Spirit,” that they have represented Him as being
the Author of confusion. The “new Jerusalem” not only has the names of the twelve Apostles in
its foundations (Rev. 21.14), but it also has on its gates the names “of the twelve tribes of Israel”
(Rev. 21.12)!! 22

21 Eph 2:11-13 Therefore remember that you, once Gentiles in the flesh-- who are called Uncircumcision by what is

called the Circumcision made in the flesh by hands-- 12 that at that time you were without Christ, being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel and strangers from the covenants of promise, having no hope and without God in the world. 13
But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off have been brought near by the blood of Christ. Eph 2:19-22 Now,
therefore, you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints and members of the
household of God, 20 having been built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ Himself
being the chief cornerstone, 21 in whom the whole building, being joined together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord,
22 in whom you also are being built together for a dwelling place of God in the Spirit.
22 Perhaps explaining “the twenty-four elders” mentioned in Rev 4.4, 10; 5.8; 11.16; and 19.4.

34

Part IV