PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 19 of 51
Gossip and Wisdom

---

CHAPTER 19

Verse 1. A laboring man that is given to drunkenness shall not be rich, and he that contemneth small things shall fall by little and little.

Verse 2. Wine and women will make men of understanding to fall away, and he that cleaveth to harlots will become impudent.

Verse 3. Moths and worms shall have him to heritage, and a bold man shall be taken away.

Verse 4. He that is hasty to give credit is lightminded, and he that sinneth shall offend against his own soul.

Verse 5. Whoso taketh pleasure in wickedness shall be condemned, but he that resisteth pleasures crowneth his life.

Verse 6. He that can rule his tongue shall live without strife, and he that hateth babbling shall have less evil.

Verse 7. Rehearse not unto another that which is told unto thee, and thou shalt fare never the worse.

Verse 8. Whether it be to friend or foe, talk not of other men's lives; and if thou canst without offence, reveal them not.

Verse 9. For he heard and observed thee, and when time cometh he will hate thee.

Verse 10. If thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee; and be bold, it will not burst thee.

Verse 11. A fool travaileth with a word, as a woman in labor of a child.

Verse 12. As an arrow that sticketh in a man's thigh, so is a word within a fool's belly.

Verse 13. Admonish a friend; it may be he hath not done it; and if he have, that he do it no more.

Verse 14. Admonish thy friend; it may be he hath not said it; and if he have, that he speak it not again.

Verse 15. Admonish a friend, for many times it is a slander, and believe not every tale.

Verse 16. There is one that slippeth in his speech, but not from his heart; and who is he that hath not offended with his tongue?

Verse 17. Admonish thy neighbor before thou threaten him, and not being angry, give place to the law of the Most High.

Verse 18. The fear of the Lord is the first step to be accepted of Him, and wisdom obtaineth His love.

Verse 19. The knowledge of the commandments of the Lord is the doctrine of life, and they that do things that please Him shall receive the fruit of the tree of immortality.

Verse 20. The fear of the Lord is all wisdom, and in all wisdom is the performance of the law, and the knowledge of His omnipotency.

Verse 21. If a servant say to his master, I will not do as it pleaseth thee, though afterward he do it, he angereth him that nourisheth him.

Verse 22. The knowledge of wickedness is not wisdom, neither at any time the counsel of sinners prudence.

Verse 23. There is a wickedness, and the same an abomination; and there is a fool wanting in wisdom.

Verse 24. He that hath small understanding, and feareth God, is better than one that hath much wisdom, and transgresseth the law of the Most High.

Verse 25. There is an exquisite subtlety, and the same is unjust; and there is one that turneth aside to make judgment appear; and there is a wise man that justifieth in judgment.

Verse 26. There is a wicked man that hangeth down his head sadly, but inwardly he is full of deceit.

Verse 27. Casting down his countenance, and making as if he heard not; where he is not known, he will do thee mischief before thou be aware.

Verse 28. And if for want of power he be hindered from sinning, yet when he findeth opportunity he will do evil.

Verse 29. A man may be known by his look, and one that hath understanding by his countenance, when thou meetest him.

Verse 30. A man's attire, and excessive laughter, and gait, show what he is.