PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 7 of 18 The Church of God

1. THE CHURCH OF GOD. One might reasonably conclude that the Greek word for “church” settles forever not only the meaning of the term itself, but also the scope of its membership. Ek-klesia, by common consent, signifies “out-called” or “called out.” It is a separated company. Thus the “Church of God” is synonymous with “God’s elect.” The Church of God is neither broader nor narrower in its range than the entire ELECTION OF GRACE. To deny this is either to repudiate on the one hand the unequivocal meaning of “Ek-klesia,” or to reject on the other hand the Scripture doctrine of election. It is both a significant and ominous fact that the vast majority of Dispensationalists, who limit the “Church” to believers of the Christian era, are men who so far from holding fast the precious and basic truth of God’s sovereign and unconditional election, insist that God loves everybody, that Christ atoned for the sins of the whole human race, and that the Holy Spirit is trying to save all who hear the Gospel. This, by itself, is quite sufficient to discredit these men in the eyes of all who love sound doctrine. That the “Church” and “the elect” are co-extensive in their persons, may be seen by a comparison of Col 1.24 with 2Tim 2.10. In the former we read, “Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for His body’s sake, which is the church.” The “afflictions of Christ” does not refer to the sufferings of Christ personally, for those were all finished when He was exalted to the Father’s right hand. No, the allusion is to Christ mystical; that is, to the members of His mystical body who are united to Him by such a near and vital bond, and with whom He has such a fellow-feeling for their infirmities, that they are called by His name. The Apostle “filled up” those “afflictions” not vicariously, but ministerially, “for” the Church’s good. Now in 2Tim 2.10, the same Apostle declared, “Therefore I endure all things for the elect’s sake.” The “elect” are the ones whom God chose for salvation from everlasting. For them the Lord Jesus obeyed and died; for them the Gospel is preached; and for their sakes ministers are qualified and commissioned to teach and suffer what they do in the faithful prosecution of this mission. But what we would call particular attention to here, is that in Col 1.24 Paul speaks of his “sufferings” for “Christ’s body’s sake, which is the Church;” while in 2Tim 2.10 he says he endured those sufferings for “the elect’s sake”; which proves that the “Church” and the “elect” are the same persons. In Act 20.28, we read of “the church of God, which He has purchased with His own blood.” Here is a declaration free from all ambiguity, which leaves an honest heart in no doubt whatever as to who compose the members of the “Church.” It is all those for whom the precious blood of Christ was shed, Old Testament saints as truly as New. Inasmuch as in the eternal purpose of God, Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, His blood had a promissory or prospective value, as well as a retrospective value; that is to say, the work which He historically completed at Calvary, accomplished as much for the elect of God who lived hundreds of years before that work was performed, as for those of God’s elect who lived centuries after it was finished. “Christ also loved the Church, and gave Himself for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word, that he might present it to Himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish” (Eph 5.25-27). And who are they that were “loved” by Christ antecedent to His giving Himself for them? The New Testament saints only? No, He had a people in Old Testament times too, to whom He said, “I have loved you with an everlasting love” (Jer 31.3); indeed, of whom He declared, “The saints who are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all My delight” (Psa 16.3) — and those people have been washed, cleansed, and sanctified by Him.

26

The “Church of God,” then, is that chosen generation, that royal priesthood, that holy nation, that peculiar people, whom He has called out of darkness into His marvelous light to show forth His praises for all eternity (1Pet 2.9). Its members comprise the whole of that favoured company whom God chose in Christ their Head before the foundation of the world, that they should be holy, and without blame before Him; those whom He, in love, predestined to the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will (Eph 1.3, 4). Its members are those to whom Christ referred when He said, “that of all whom He (the Father) has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day” (Joh 6.39); and concerning whom He declared, “all Mine are yours, and yours are Mine; and I am glorified in them” (Joh 17.10). Its entire membership comprises the mystical body of Christ. But it may be asked, where in the Old Testament do we have any reference to the mystical body of Christ? Answer, in many passages, so numerous that we can scarcely mention more than a few of them here. Yet, before turning to them, let it be pointed out that only an anointed eye is capable of discerning them. This does not mean that the interpretation we give to them is so far-fetched that only the credulous will receive it, nor that the passages themselves are so ambiguous that they are hard to be understood. No, rather it means that spirituality of mind is required in order to perceive their beauty, and a comparison of the New Testament Scriptures with those of the Old is necessary to discover their hidden harmonies. As the principle we are now explaining is of such great importance in connection with our present study, let us point to a concrete example or illustration of it in the book of Acts. “And he fell to the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why do you persecute Me?” (Act 9.4). Now an unspiritual reader would see in those words no reference whatever to the mystical body (the Church) of Christ; nevertheless, it is unmistakably there. Saul of Tarsus thought he was righteously hounding a company of deluded fanatics and obstinate heretics; but he is now told that he was assaulting none other than the Lord of Glory. But how could that be? Thus, there is such an intimate union existing between the Redeemer and the redeemed, that what is done to the latter, is done to the former. Christ and His people are one, for it is written that they are “members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones” (Eph 5.30); yes, “he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit” (1Cor 6.17). Now, the same vital relationship existing between the members of the body of Christ and their Head, which is explicitly taught in the New Testament, is with equal clearness implicitly revealed in the Old Testament. A living “oneness” exists between the Lord and His people. It causes Him to so absolutely identify Himself with them, that He declares when they are being persecuted, He is being persecuted. This is brought out in many places. For example, in Isaiah 63.9 we read, “In all their affliction He was afflicted” — the reference is to the afflictions of Israel in Egypt. When one member of the body is injured “all the members suffer with it” (1Cor 12.26). So too, when the members of Jehovah’s body suffered in Egypt, their Head suffered too. We would beg the reader to give his prayerful and closest attention to the passages which now follow. “The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh comes; and to Him shall be the gathering 12 of the people” (Gen 49.10). Here, we believe, was a prophecy that the Mediator should “gather together in one, the children of God that were scattered abroad” (Joh 11.52). It expressed the same truth that is now made known in Eph 1.10, that “in the dispensation of the fullness of times He might gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in Him.” The reference here is not to something which is yet to take place, but to that which was accomplished when God put all things under Christ’s feet, and gave Him “to be the Head over all things to the Church, which is His body” (Eph 1.22, 23). 12 KJV; later translations, “obedience of the people.” The Greek can mean cleanse or purge (distill out a remnant).

27

“And Moses said, Thus says the LORD, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt: And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits upon his throne, even to the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of beasts. And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there was none like it, nor shall be like it any more... and after that I will go out” (Exo. 11.4-8). Though there may be room for an argument as to the grammatical structure of this passage, and as to the antecedent of the personal pronoun, yet it is the writer’s studied conviction that it was Jehovah Himself who here said, “I will go out”: that is, Jehovah, as being one with His people in their exodus; it was the Head absolutely identified with His body! “The land shall not be sold forever: for the land is Mine; for you are strangers and sojourners with Me” (Lev 25.23). This is a remarkable word indeed, and one which has received far less notice than it deserves. How close is the parallel between it and such a verse as John 17.16, “They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world”! It reveals to us the infinite condescension of Jehovah, and shows Him identified with His people. It is beautiful to see how David, centuries later, laid hold of this word, and pleaded before God the spiritual union existing between them: “Hear my prayer, O LORD, and give ear to my cry; do not hold your peace at my tears: for I am a stranger with you, and a sojourner, as all my fathers were” (Psa 39.12). “All my bones shall say, LORD, who is like you, who delivers the poor from him who is too strong for him; Yes, the poor and the needy from him who plunders him?” (Psa 35.10). Here is a verse which plainly shows the lie of those who claim that the “one Body” truth is quite unknown in the Old Testament The Speaker in this verse is the Lord Jesus, as the next two verses unquestionably show. He speaks there as the Head of His body, which is the Church. He refers to His mystical “bones,” that is, to the members of His mystical Body. Compare Ephesians 5.30.13 The 40th Psalm is another where the Holy Spirit clearly records the oneness of Christ and His people. We know that this is a Messianic Psalm from the Spirit’s quotation of verses 6 and 7 in Hebrews 10. The first verse of it presents the suffering Saviour in Gethsemane. The second, shows us Christ delivered from the curse, and brought out onto resurrection ground. The third, records His consequent praise, “He has put a new song in My mouth, even praise to our God.” Notice very carefully, dear reader, the remarkable variation in the number of pronouns: how plainly the change from the “My” to “our” brings out the spiritual union of the Redeemer and the redeemed! The same precious truth comes out again in verse 5: “Many, O LORD My God, are your wonderful works which you have done, and your thoughts which are toward us.” Christ’s use of “toward us” unequivocally reveals the Head and the members of His body as one before God. “O God, you know My foolishness; and My sins are not hidden from you” (Psa 69.5). This is well known as another of the Messianic Psalms; several of its verses being directly applied to Christ in the New Testament. It depicts many of the sufferings and sorrows He endured in the days of His flesh, while serving as the Sponsor and Surety of His people. It shows us the depths of humiliation and shame into which He descended in order to bring His people near to God. It reveals His oneness with His people in their guilt and condemnation. So absolute is the union here between the Head and the members of His mystical body, that He speaks of their folly and sins as His! “His name shall endure forever: His name shall be continued as long as the sun: and men shall be blessed in Him: all nations shall call Him blessed” (Psa 72.17). Observe well that it is not “blessed by Him, but “IN HIM.” It is exactly the same as what we find in Eph 1.3, “Blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.” In Psa 87.7 we find David again declaring, “All my springs are in you.” How greatly men err, then, when they declare that “in Christ,” truth is never found in the Old Testament. 13 Eph 5:30 For we are members of His body, of His flesh and of His bones.

28

“This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land of Egypt, where I heard a language that I did not understand” (Psa 81.5). What a remarkable statement that is! The speaker is none other than Jehovah; yet He “did not understand” the language of Egypt. There is only one way in which such a verse can be understood, and that is by recognizing it was Christ speaking in the person of Israel — he is so one with them as to refer to their ignorance as His own. “O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah. Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of your Anointed” (Psa 84.8, 9). What was this if not the Psalmist asking the Father to hear Him for Christ’s sake! So too Daniel prayed, “Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of your servant, and his supplications, and cause your face to shine upon your sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord’s sake” (Dan 9.17)! How these verses expose the ignorance and folly of those who affirm that the privileges enjoyed by the Old Testament saints were far inferior to ours, and that they occupied a much lower spiritual plane. Psalm 89.32, 33.14 Those words occur in one of the great Messianic predictions. That Christ is in view here, is plain from verse 27.15 Then, in the verses that follow, the Father speaks of Christ’s “seed” or “children.” 16 But what we wish to particularly note is the remarkable change of pronouns in verses 32, 33, which can only be accounted for on the ground that God was here speaking of the members of Christ’s body, as one with their Head: He declares that though He will visit their transgressions with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes, nevertheless “My lovingkindness will I not utterly take from Him,” not “them,” though He is speaking of them! And mark well how this wonderful passages closes: “The faithful witness in the sky” (v. 37), and this is in a book which is supposed to address only “an earthly people”! “My substance was not hidden from you when I was made in secret, and skillfully wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. your eyes saw my substance, yet imperfect; and in your book all My members were written, which were fashioned in continuance, when as yet there were none of them” (Psa 139. 15, 16). We will quote from “Treasury of David,” a part of C.H. Spurgeon’s comments: “As the form of Eve grew spiritually in silence and secrecy under the fashioning hand of the Maker, so at this hour the Bride is being fashioned for the Lord Jesus; or to change the figure — a body is being prepared in which the life and glory of the indwelling Lord shall be displayed. The Lord knows those who are His; He has a specially familiar acquaintance with the members of the body of Christ; He sees their substance, imperfect though they be.” “In His days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is His name by which HE shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS” (Jer 23.6). “In those days Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely: and this is the name with which SHE shall be called, The LORD our righteousness” (Jer 33.16)! Here we have the Bridegroom and the Bride given the same name. Nothing could possibly bring out more plainly the oneness of Christ and His people. Here we have in the Old Testament the mystical body, revealed as plainly as it is in the New Testament, where the Church is designated “Christ” (1Cor 12.12). We here publicly challenge any man on earth to refute this affirmation. In view of the many plain Scriptures above, what shall be thought of such statements as these? “The assembly, and its union with Christ, and adoption individually known, are the only things I am aware of not revealed in the Old Testament” (Synopsis vol. 2, p. 185 by J.N. Darby, the father of the “Plymouth Brethren”). “The revelation of this mystery, which was foretold but not explained 14 Psa 89:32-33 Then I will punish their transgression with the rod, And their iniquity with stripes. 33 Nevertheless

My lovingkindness I will not utterly take from him, Nor allow My faithfulness to fail. 15 Psa 89:27 Also I will make him My firstborn, The highest of the kings of the earth. 16 Psa 89:29 His seed also I will make to endure forever, And his throne as the days of heaven.

29

by Christ (Mat 16.18), was committed to Paul. In his writings alone we find the doctrine, position, walk, and duty of the Church” (Scofield Bible, under Eph 3.6)?
