PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 27 of 51
Sin and Betrayal

---

CHAPTER 27

Verse 1. Many have sinned for the sake of gain, and he that seeketh to grow rich shall turn away his eyes.

Verse 2. As a nail sticketh fast between the joinings of stones, so doth sin stick close between buying and selling.

Verse 3. Unless a man hold himself diligently in the fear of the Lord, his house shall quickly be overthrown.

Verse 4. As when one sifteth with a sieve, the refuse remaineth, so the filth of man cometh forth in his talk.

Verse 5. The furnace trieth the potter's vessels, and the trial of man is in his reasoning.

Verse 6. The fruit of a tree declareth the husbandry thereof; so is the utterance of a thought the test of the heart of man.

Verse 7. Praise no man before thou hearest him speak, for this is the trial of men.

Verse 8. If thou followest righteousness, thou shalt obtain her, and put her on as a glorious long robe.

Verse 9. The birds will resort unto their like, and truth will return unto them that practise in her.

Verse 10. As the lion lieth in wait for his prey, so do sins for them that work iniquity.

Verse 11. The discourse of a godly man is always with wisdom, but a fool changeth as the moon.

Verse 12. If thou art among the unwise, observe the time; but among the thoughtful, continue steadfastly.

Verse 13. The discourse of fools is irksome, and their sport is in the wantonness of sin.

Verse 14. The talk of him that sweareth much maketh the hair stand on end, and their brawls make one stop his ears.

Verse 15. The strife of the proud is bloodshedding, and their cursings are grievous to hear.

Verse 16. Whoso discovereth secrets loseth his credit, and shall never find a friend to his mind.

Verse 17. Love thy friend and be faithful unto him; but if thou bewrayest his secrets, follow no more after him.

Verse 18. For as a man hath destroyed his enemy, so hast thou destroyed the love of thy neighbor.

Verse 19. And as one that letteth a bird go out of his hand, so hast thou let thy neighbor go and shalt not get him again.

Verse 20. Follow after him no more, for he is too far off; he is escaped as a roe out of the snare.

Verse 21. For a wound may be bound up, and after reviling there may be reconciliation; but he that bewrayeth secrets is without hope.

Verse 22. He that winketh with the eyes worketh evil, and he that knoweth him will depart from him.

Verse 23. When thou art present, he will speak sweetly, and will admire thy words; but at the last he will writhe his mouth and slander thy sayings.

Verse 24. I have hated many things, but nothing like him, and the Lord will hate him.

Verse 25. Whoso casteth a stone on high casteth it on his own head, and a deceitful stroke shall make wounds.

Verse 26. Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein, and he that setteth a trap shall be taken in it.

Verse 27. He that worketh mischief, it shall fall upon him, and he shall not know whence it cometh.

Verse 28. Mockery and reproach are from the proud; but vengeance, as a lion, shall lie in wait for them.

Verse 29. They that rejoice at the fall of the righteous shall be taken in the snare, and anguish shall consume them before they die.

Verse 30. Malice and wrath, even these are abominations, and the sinful man shall have them both.