PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 1 of 18 The Promises of God

formatted, corrected, modernized, and annotated by William H. Gross www.onthewing.org June 2006, May 2019 Except where noted, Scripture in the footnotes is the NKJV (Thomas Nelson Publishers © 1982)

A Disclaimer Arthur W. Pink died in 1952, shortly after these articles were published. He had little patience with the distortions of John Darby, whose method of biblical interpretation, Pink felt, had badly distorted the proper understanding of God’s word. The Scofield Study Bible of 1909 led to widespread acceptance of those distortions. In 1924, Dallas Theological Seminary was founded to promote Darby’s ideas. What had once been considered a cult, and a heresy — a fringe group — embedded itself in mainstream evangelical theology. Over time, it became a norm. As with so many doctrinal aberrations, objections by mainstream theologians only led to adjustments by the advocates of dispensationalism. And those adjustments led to increasing acceptance by the Christian community. But in turn, that acceptance led to adjustments to the traditional doctrines of the Church. Orthodoxy became a moving target. What might have been labelled heresy in the past, was received as mere heterodoxy — different, but not error. Orthodoxy looked more and more like a barnacled ship, sinking under the weight of its accretions. Darby’s “classical” dispensationalism morphed into “revised” dispensationalism, and then into “progressive” dispensationalism. Even in its final or current form, what does it teach that still conflicts with covenant theology, even if it is now considered an acceptable method of biblical interpretation? J. Ligon Duncan tackled that question in an article available here: https://www.the-highway.com/dispensationalism_Duncan.html He concludes that dispensationalism remains incompatible with covenant theology, i.e., with historic Protestant reformed doctrine. Dispensationalism’s increasing acceptance, then, is troubling, because using two opposing methods of biblical interpretation, necessarily yields two opposing orthodoxies, and two opposing orthopraxies — doctrine governs practice. How can the teachers of the church tell fellow Christians, in good conscience, that they may safely use either of two incompatible methods of biblical interpretation? That incompatibility is what Arthur Pink highlights and criticizes in this series of articles. Some say that Pink’s objections don’t apply to “progressive” dispensationalism. But that’s debatable. The Left Behind series of books by Tim LaHaye, and scores of other doctrinal oddities in film, print, and online blogs, reveal a “popular,” malignant, and largely incoherent dispensationalism. It belies the Gospel, and undermines the hope of believers. Without the anchor of historic reformed orthodoxy, without a fixed standard of biblical interpretation, the churches will be (and are) tossed about by every wind of doctrine. But maybe that’s too strong an indictment. I encourage you to read what Arthur Pink has to say, and determine for yourself how far the historic faith was off the mark, according to Darby and his progeny. And then ask yourself whether his replacement is an improvement, or a bane. William Gross May 2019

Part I

1. THE PROMISES OF GOD. The general policy which we have steadily sought to follow during the past eleven years has been that of seeking (by Divine aid) the spiritual edification of our Christian readers. For this we have endeavored to set forth a well-balanced constructive ministry. Poisons do not nourish, nor does the refutation of error build up the soul. Very occasionally we have departed from our rule, and only then against our spiritual inclinations — for we know full well it is difficult to handle pitch without being defiled. But once or twice we have felt forced to lift up our voice and sound an alarm. We feel constrained to do so again. While Paul was at Athens and saw the city wholly given up to idolatry, “his spirit was stirred in him.” And as we behold the reckless and irreverent handling of the Word of God by many who style themselves the teachers of “dispensational truth,” and witness the pernicious effects it has produced in the minds and lives of many, we are moved by what is, we trust, a holy indignation. It is not our present purpose to take up seriatim 1 the various postulates of this modern school of prophetic interpretation, nor to examine in detail the wild conclusions which have been drawn from flimsy premises. Nor do we have any expectation of converting from the error of their way, any of the present-day leaders of this system which is growing in popularity. No, we would not waste valuable time on them; for it is our firm conviction that God has given them over to the spirit of delusion. If the Lord permits, we expect to deal with some other features of this “false doctrine” in later issues; but for the moment, we confine our attention to one fearful evil which has been engendered by it: namely, robbing God’s children of many “exceeding great and precious promises.” 2Pet 1.4 We are not unmindful of the subtle distinctions which have been drawn by the above-mentioned teachers between the interpretation and the application of Scripture, nor of their oft-repeated slogan that “All Scripture is for us, but it is not all to us, or about us.” Whatever may be thought of such a statement, this is clear and cannot be denied: that there are now tens of thousands in Great Britain and the U.S.A. who say of large portions of God’s Word, “This is not for me; this belongs to the Jews; this does not relate to the present dispensation; that concerns those who will be on earth during the great tribulation or the millennium.” And thus, their souls are deprived of the present value of much which God Himself plainly declares is “profitable” for us (2Tim 3.16). It may surprise some of our readers when we say that this limiting of so much of God’s Word to the Jews is an ancient lie of the Devil, dressed up in a new garb. Yet such it is. Nor should any be surprised at this news, for Scripture declares that, “There is no new thing under the sun” (Ecc 1.9). Two hundred and fifty years ago, in his work on “The Doctrine of the Saints’ Perseverance explained and confirmed,” John Owen wrote, “Some labor much to rob believers of the consolation intended for them in the evangelical promises of the Old Testament. Though made in general to the Church on this account, [these promises] were made to the Jews; and being peculiar to them, our concern does not now lie in them.” Over three hundred years ago, when the Thirtynine Articles of the Church of England (the “Episcopal Church”) were drawn up, the 7th article reads as follows: “The Old Testament is not contradictory to the New; for both in the Old and New Testament, everlasting life is offered to mankind by Christ, who is the only Mediator between God and men, being both God and Man. Therefore, they are not to be heard, who pretend that the old fathers [i.e., OLD TESTAMENT saints] looked only for transitory promises.” Almost four hundred years ago, in his Institutes, Calvin began his chapter on “The Similarity of the Old and New Testaments” by saying: 1 Seriatim: One after the other in series; or point by point.

3

“From the preceding observations, it may now be evidenced that all those persons, from the beginning of the world, whom God has adopted into the society of His people, have been federally connected with Him by the same law and the same doctrine which are in force among us. But because it is of no small importance that this point be established, I shall show, by way of appendix — since the fathers were partakers with us of the same inheritance, and hoped for the same salvation through the grace of our common Mediator — how far their condition in this connection was different from ours. For though the testimonies we have collected from the law and the prophets in proof of this, render it sufficiently evident that the people of God have never had any other rule of religion and piety, yet because some writers have raised many disputes concerning the difference between the Old and New Testaments, which may occasion doubts in the mind of an undiscerning reader, we will assign a particular chapter for a better and more accurate discussion of this subject. Moreover, what would otherwise have been very useful, has now been rendered necessary for us by Servetus and some madmen of the sect of the Anabaptists. They entertain no other ideas of the Israelite nation than of a herd of swine, whom they pretend to have been pampered by the Lord in this world, without the least hope of future immortality in heaven.” One plain statement of Holy Writ is of infinitely more value than all the empty reasonings of carnal men. We have such a statement concerning the promises of God in 2Cor 1.20, “For all the promises of God in Him are yes, and in Him amen, to the glory of God by us.” The line of thought in the context is easily followed. First, the Apostle had intended to pay the Corinthians a second visit (vv. 15, 16), but was providentially hindered (vv. 8-10). Second, knowing that his enemies were likely to use his delay as a taunt that he was ignorant of the Lord’s mind, and fickle in keeping his word, the Apostle anticipates this charge (vv. 17, 18) — there were Divine reasons why Paul had delayed his promised journey to them. Third, whether that satisfied the Corinthians or not, this could not be denied: that there was no uncertainty about his preaching. He had proclaimed Jesus Christ among them in a plain and positive way (v. 19). Having reminded the Corinthians that the message he had delivered in their hearing on his first visit was invariable and constant (2Cor 1.19), the Apostle now gave proof of his assertion: Christ was the sum and substance of his preaching: he had known nothing among them save Jesus Christ and Him crucified (see 1Cor 2.2), and since Christ Himself is always “yes” or unchanging, then his message was always “yes” or the same. The manner in which he now supplied proof of this was by affirming, “For all the promises of God in Him (viz. Christ) are yes, and in Him (Christ), amen”: therefore Christ cannot be “yes and no.” The plain meaning of 2Cor 1.20 is, The promises which God has given His people are absolutely reliable, for they were made to them in Christ; they are absolutely certain of fulfillment, for they are accomplished in Him. 1. Since the Fall alienated the creature from the Creator there could be no intercourse between God and man except by some promise on His part. None can challenge anything from the Majesty on High without a warrant from Himself, nor could the conscience be satisfied unless it had a Divine promise for any good that we hope for from God. 2. God will have His people ruled by promises in all ages so as to exercise faith, hope, prayer, and dependence upon Himself. God gives us promises to test whether or not we trust Him. 3. The ground of the promises is the God-man Mediator, Jesus Christ; for all intercourse between God and us can only be in and through the appointed Daysman. 2 Christ must receive all good for us, and we must have it second-hand from Him. Hence “all the promises of God in Him (Christ) are yes and amen.”

2 Daysman: a mediator or arbitrator.

4

4. Let the Christian ever be on his guard, never to contemplate any promise of God apart from Christ: whether the thing promised, the blessing desired, is temporal or spiritual, we cannot rightly or truly enjoy it except in and by Christ. Therefore Paul reminded the Galatians, “Now the promise was made to Abraham and his seed: he does not say to seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to your Seed, which is Christ” (3.16): we shall have more to say about this (D.V.) later. All the promises of good to us are made to Christ, the Surety of the everlasting covenant; and they are conveyed from Christ to us — both the promises, and the things promised. “This is the (all-inclusive) promise that He has promised us, even eternal life” (1Joh 2.25), and as 1Joh 5.11 tells us “this life is in His Son” — and so of “grace,” and whatsoever is in Him. “If I read any of the promises, I found that all and every one contained Christ in their bosom, He Himself being the one great Promise of the Bible. They were all first given to Him; they derive all their efficacy, sweetness, value, and importance from Him; they are brought home to the heart by Him; and they are all yes and amen in Him” (Robert Hawker, 1810). 5. All the promises of God are made in Christ; none of them can be of any good to those who are out of Christ, for a man out of Christ is out of the favor of God. God cannot look on such a man except as an object of His wrath, as fuel for His vengeance; there is no hope for any man till he is in Christ. But it may be asked, Does not God do many good things to those who are out of Christ, sending His rain on the just as well as the unjust, and filling the bellies of the wicked with good things (Psa 17.14)? Yes, He does indeed, But are those temporal mercies blessings? Indeed they are not: as God says in Mal 2.2 “I will curse your blessings: yes, I have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to heart” — cf. Deu 28.15-20. To the wicked, the temporal mercies of God are like the food given to bullocks — they only “prepare them for the day of slaughter” (Jer 12.3 and cf. Jas 5.5). Having presented above a brief outline of the subject of the Divine promises, let us now carefully observe the fact that 2Cor 1.20 plainly affirms “For all the promises of God in Him are yes, and in Him amen.” How inexpressibly blessed is this to the humble-minded children of God — yet it is a mystery hidden from those who are wise in their own conceits. “He that did not spare His own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things” (Rom 8.32). The promises of God are many, relating both to this life and also to that which is to come; concerning our temporal well being as well as our spiritual; covering the needs of the body as well as the soul. But whatever their character is, not one of them could be made good to us except in, and through, and by Him who died for us. “Having these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit” (2Cor 7.1). What promises? Why, those mentioned in the closing verses of the preceding chapter, of course. There we read, “And what agreement has the temple of God with idols? for you are the temple of the living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people” (2Cor 6.16). And where had God said this? Why, way back in Lev 26.12, “And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and you shall be My people.” That was a promise made to Israel in the days of Moses! Again, in 2Cor 6.17, 18 we read, “Therefore, come out from among them, and be separate, says the Lord, and do not touch the unclean thing, and I will receive you; And I will be a Father to you, and you shall be My sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.” These words are a manifest reference to Jeremiah 31.9 and Hosea 1.9, 10. Now observe very particularly what the Holy Spirit says about these “promises” to the New Testament saints. He makes no mention of His “applying” them; He says nothing about our “appropriating” them; instead, He assures us of “Having these promises.” Yes, “these” Old Testament “promises” are ours: ours to enjoy, ours to feed upon, ours to delight in, ours to give praise for. Since Christ is ours, all things are ours (1Cor 3.22, 23). O my reader, allow no man, under the pretense of “rightly dividing” the Word of Truth, to cut you off from any of the

5

“exceeding great and precious” promises of your Father. If he is determined to confine himself to a few Epistles in the New Testament, let him do so — that is his loss; but do not allow him to confine you to so narrow a place. One other passage will engage our attention and we will close this article. Writing to the New Testament saints, the Apostle Paul was moved by the Holy Spirit to say, “Let your conversation be without covetousness, be content with such things as you have: for He has said, I will never leave you, nor forsake you” (Heb 13.5). And to whom do you suppose this blessed “promise” was first given? Why, to Joshua — see Joshua 1.5. John Owen (following his reference to the religious thieves of his day, who sought to rob believers of the consolation intended for them in the evangelical promises of the Old Testament) well said this: — “If this plea might be admitted, I do not know any one promise that would more evidently fall under the power of it, than this we have now in consideration. It was made to a particular person, and that was upon a particular occasion; it was made to a general or captain of armies, with respect to the great wars he had to undertake, upon the special command of God. May not a poor hungry believer say, What is this to me? I am not a general of an army; I have no wars to make upon God’s command; the virtue of this promise doubtless expired with the conquest of Canaan, and died with him to whom it was made. To manifest the sameness of love, that is in all the promises, with their establishment in one Mediator, and the general concern of believers in every one of them, however, and on whatever occasion given to any, this promise to Joshua is here applied to the condition of the weakest, meanest, and poorest of the saints of God — to all, and every one of them, whatever their state and condition may be. And doubtless, believers are not a little lacking in themselves, and their own consolation, that they no more particularly close with those words of truth, grace, and faithfulness, which on sundry occasions, and at diverse times, have been given to the saints of old, even Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, and the remainder of those who walked with God in their generations. These things, in an especial manner, are recorded for our consolation, that we ‘through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope’ (Rom 15.4). “Now the Holy Spirit, knowing the weakness of our faith, and how apt we are to be beaten from engaging the promises, and from mixing them with faith, upon the least discouragement that may arise — as indeed this is not the least discouragement: that the promise is not made to us; it was made to others, and they may reap the sweetness of it; God may be faithful in it, though we never enjoy the mercy intended in it — in the next words, He leads believers by the hand, to draw the same conclusion with boldness and with confidence from this and similar promises, as David did of old, upon the many gracious assurances that he had received of the presence of God with him: ‘So that [He says, on account of that promise] we may say boldly [without staggering at it by unbelief], the Lord is my Helper.’ This is a conclusion of faith; because God said to Joshua, a believer, ‘I will never leave you nor forsake you’ — though on a particular occasion, and in reference to a particular employment — every believer may say with boldness, ‘He is my Helper’.”
