PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 25 of 51
Agreement and Disagreement

---

CHAPTER 25

Verse 1. In three things I was beautified, and stood up beautiful both before God and men: the unity of brethren, the love of neighbors, a man and a wife that agree together.

Verse 2. Three sorts of men my soul hateth, and I am greatly offended at their life: a poor man that is proud, a rich man that is a liar, and an old adulterer that doteth.

Verse 3. If thou hast gathered nothing in thy youth, how canst thou find anything in thine old age?

Verse 4. O how comely a thing is judgment for gray hairs, and for ancient men to know counsel!

Verse 5. O how comely is the wisdom of old men, and understanding and counsel to men of honor!

Verse 6. Much experience is the crown of old men, and the fear of God is their glory.

Verse 7. There be nine things which I have judged in mine heart to be happy, and the tenth I will utter with my tongue: a man that hath joy of his children; and he that liveth to see the fall of his enemy.

Verse 8. Well is him that dwelleth with a wife of understanding, and that hath not slipped with his tongue, and that hath not served a man more unworthy than himself.

Verse 9. Well is him that hath found prudence, and he that speaketh in the ears of them that will hear.

Verse 10. O how great is he that findeth wisdom! Yet is there none above him that feareth the Lord.

Verse 11. But the love of the Lord passeth all things for illumination; he that holdeth it, whereto shall he be likened?

Verse 12. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of His love, and faith is the beginning of cleaving unto Him.

Verse 13. Give me any plague, but the plague of the heart; and any wickedness, but the wickedness of a woman.

Verse 14. And any affliction, but the affliction from them that hate me; and any revenge, but the revenge of enemies.

Verse 15. There is no head above the head of a serpent, and there is no wrath above the wrath of an enemy.

Verse 16. I had rather dwell with a lion and a dragon than to keep house with a wicked woman.

Verse 17. The wickedness of a woman changeth her face, and darkeneth her countenance like sackcloth.

Verse 18. Her husband shall sit among his neighbors, and when he heareth it shall sigh bitterly.

Verse 19. All wickedness is but little to the wickedness of a woman; let the portion of a sinner fall upon her.

Verse 20. As the climbing up a sandy way is to the feet of the aged, so is a wife full of words to a quiet man.

Verse 21. Stumble not at the beauty of a woman, and desire her not for pleasure.

Verse 22. A woman, if she maintain her husband, is full of anger, impudence, and much reproach.

Verse 23. A wicked woman abateth the courage, maketh a heavy countenance, and a wounded heart. A woman that will not comfort her husband in distress maketh weak hands and feeble knees.

Verse 24. Of the woman came the beginning of sin, and through her we all die.

Verse 25. Give the water no passage, neither a wicked woman liberty to gad abroad.

Verse 26. If she go not as thou wouldest have her, cut her off from thy flesh, and give her a bill of divorce, and let her go.

---

This concludes Part 5 of our reading of the Book of Sirach. In our next part, we shall continue with Chapter 26 through Chapter 30, covering the blessings of a virtuous wife, the perils of commerce, the discipline of children, and the value of health above all riches.

We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach, also called Ecclesiasticus. In these chapters, Ben Sira speaks of the virtuous wife, the dangers of trade, the discipline of children, and the blessings of good health.