PURITAN GOLD -- Exposition of 1 John by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 25 of 39
The World Described (2:16)

---

“For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh,
and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life,
is not of the Father, but is of the world.”
The divine precepts ought to be as highly esteemed by us as God’s promises; and if they be not, something is seriously
wrong with our hearts. They are as much an integral part of God’s Word, are accorded a place of quite as much prominence,
are revealed by the same Spirit, and rest upon the same foundation. They proceed from the self-same love, and are designed
equally for our good. When God gave His commandments unto Israel, it was that, by their obedience, “it might be well with
them, and with their children” (Deu 5:29). The preceptive part of the Gospel is designed to be our director in the path of
filial obedience, the rule of our duty, and the standard at which our love is ever to aim. If it be true that God is glorified by
our faith as we trust Him to fulfill His pledges, it is none the less a fact that He is honoured by our submission as we cheerfully keep His statutes. And if it be true that our hearts are strengthened and our lives enriched by laying hold of and feeding

approbation – warm approval; liking; praise.



upon God’s promises, it is equally the case that we are greatly the gainers by cherishing and heeding His precepts. “His
statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good” (Deu 10:13). Walking according to God’s Law is the only way to true
happiness (Psa 119:1).
What has just been pointed out receives illustration in connection with our observing the precept of 1 John 2:15. It is
both our wisdom and our welfare to comply with the prohibition, “Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world,” for, as a whole and in all its parts, it is the deadly enemy of God’s children. One of the distinctive properties of the
Bible is that all its precepts are directed unto our affections. They are not intended to fashion the mere external, but are
meant to mould the inner man. Satan is well aware of that, and therefore he is ever seeking to turn our affections away from
God and wed them to the world. The very fact that we are enjoined, “Love not the world” intimates that its supreme assaults
are upon the heart. It is only by heeding this commandment that we shall be delivered from the world’s fatal snares. It is
therefore a matter of the deepest practical moment that we walk in separation from this deadly menace to spirituality, for in
proportion as we fail to do so will there be a forfeiting of God’s smile and the loss of peace of conscience. Any measure of
love of the world will stunt our growth, deprive us of joy in the Holy Spirit, undermine our assurance, and bring down upon
us the chastening rod of God.
That is God’s design in regeneration: “I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes” (Eze 36:27).
But though the Christian has renounced the world, with its God-defying and self-pleasing ways, yet for the enjoyment of
communion with God in Christ, and to avoid the grieving of His Spirit, he needs to be continually on his guard that the
world does not again possess his heart, for not only is it all around him, but its dominating principle (the “flesh”) is still
within him—a deputy to do its evil work. By nature we were wedded to the world, thoroughly entangled in its vanities, and
naught but love to God and heavenly things delivers the heart from its thraldom. It is indeed a most humbling thing that
believers should be told to “love not the world,” yet they require that injunction, and ought to turn the same into earnest
prayer, daily seeking grace that they may be divinely enabled to decline its temptations and to mortify their desires after its
carnal attractions, remembering that by the cross of Christ the world is (legally) crucified unto them and they unto the
world (Gal 6:14). If we diligently endeavour to cultivate a spirit of contentment with the temporal portion, which God has
given us, however small a one it be, then we shall be delivered from lusting after the husks which the swine feed on.
It is altogether unreasonable for any man to look for satisfaction in anything which this world has to offer him, for how
can material and transient things meet the needs of a soul that has been made for eternity? No real, still less any lasting,
good is to be found in this world. Abundant proof of that is supplied by the book of Ecclesiastes. There we have placed upon
imperishable record the experiences of one who was permitted to gratify every lust of the flesh. The resources at his command were practically limitless. He was a king, and not a poor one, but possessed of abundant means, so that he was able to
procure everything that money could purchase. He surrounded himself with every conceivable luxury, form of pleasure, and
object of beauty. His palace was filled unstintingly with everything the senses could crave. And what was the outcome? Was
he able to say, “All is very good, I can now rest in the enjoyment of what I have acquired?” Very far from it. After he had taken his fill of all its pleasures, drunk deeply from all this world’s streams, he declared that, “all is vanity and vexation of spirit.” And, my reader, if Solomon could find no satisfaction in all his worldly possessions and pursuits, none who comes after
him will ever do so.
Since God’s commandments are designed for our good, a careless neglect of them cannot but be harmful. In proportion,
as we imbibe the spirit of the world, our breathings after God are stifled and the soul becomes dull in holy duties. As one
cannot handle pitch without soiling oneself, neither can a believer take a deep interest in the politics of the world without
suffering loss spiritually. Conversely, the more we delight ourselves in the Lord, the less relish shall we have for the things
on which the unregenerate set their hearts. The two things work in inverse ratio: love to God weans the soul from love to
the world. Now the outstanding evidence of love is obedience: a fixed resolve to please Christ in all things. As He declared,
“If a man love me, he will keep my words” (Joh 14:23). Then how fervently should we pray for more love to Him (Eph 3:1718; Phi 1:9). How we should meditate daily upon His manifold perfections and feast on His excellency. How diligently we
should cultivate a closer and more constant communion with Him. How we should keep short accounts with God, and
make a practice of promptly confessing every known sin. How we should discipline ourselves and love the creature in subordination to Him.
“For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is
of the world” (verse 16). As the opening “For” indicates, that is said by way of explanation and amplification of the previous
verse, which is an instance of the gracious condescension of our God. We ought ever to give a ready and cheerful obedience
to the divine precepts on the bare authority of their Author, without His advancing any reasons for them, and whether or
not we can perceive the wisdom and benevolence of the same. Sufficient for us to act on the merely revealed will of the Most
High. It is not for us to ask the why or the wherefore, but to comply with His demands without demur or delay. But sometimes it pleases the Lord to elucidate, as He expounded His parables unto the apostles. Such is the case here: in support of
the prohibition of His “love not the world,” He adds that all that pertains to it is evil, corrupt, and therefore to set our affections upon it is quite incompatible with devotion to God; equally so does love for such a world make clear demonstration
that the love of the Father is not in such a person.



Here are the contents and sum of the world: the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. It is clear that
the apostle is not referring to the natural world, which is full of the glorious handiwork of its Creator; but to the corrupt
world of sense and sin, all in it which is esteemed by its carnal citizens, which shapes their thoughts, moves their affections,
directs and consumes their energies. Those evil propensities and principles are said to be “in the world,” yet it is evident
that they are principally in the subject rather than in the object. They are said to be “in the world” because the world gets
into the heart, incorporates itself in the affections, and occupies its throne. As faith and God’s promises should be “mixed”
(Heb 4:2), so temptations twine themselves around men’s lusts. Thus we do not have to go very far in order to frame a
Scriptural definition of what constitutes the corrupt “world”: it is not something outside us, but within ourselves. It is not
that which our natural hand can touch or our natural eyes see, but that which fallen man carries in his own bosom. The
world is simply the aggregate of all the hearts of unregenerate men that now dwell upon the earth. The external world only
carries into practice the principles acting in its subjects, putting into operation the sin, which is ever working in them.
The things that are both in and of the world are divided into three classes, according to the three dominant inclinations
of depraved human nature. “The lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life” are the three harpies of
man’s polluted soul to which the things of the world minister. Those are the prolific wombs from which issue all our sinful
acts: the roots which convey life and sap unto that which appears openly above the ground; the branches on which grow all
the evil fruits which abound in human life. Those are the “strongholds” of Satan, which command all about them. They are
the mighty conquerors of all mankind. It was so at the beginning, for it was through those avenues that the serpent attacked and overcame Eve. The inspired account is very brief, but its language corresponds exactly to what is here before us.
First, we are told that, “the woman saw that the tree was good for food”: there was “the lust of the flesh” at work. Second,
“and that it was pleasant to the eyes”: there was “the lust of the eyes” operating. Third, “and a tree to be desired to make one
wise”; there was “the pride of life” active, and yielding to the same, she disobeyed her Maker and took of the fruit.
Let us now take a separate look at each of these evil propensities: “evil” we say, for sin has so vitiated the whole of man’s
being that though the objects that God has provided for his needs be wholesome, yet the affection with which men crave
them is impure.
When the term “flesh” is employed in the Scriptures with a moral force, it is commonly used in the larger sense, as taking the whole of that corrupt nature which we inherited from Adam and bring with us into this world. So in its wider signification “the lusts of the flesh” is an expression which usually takes in all the works of our corrupt nature, whether in the
understanding, by vain imaginations and evil thoughts; in the affections, by inordinate longing or unlawful inclinations; or
in the will, by perversity and stubbornness. But here, since they are distinguished from the lust of the eyes and the pride of
life, the “lusts of the flesh” are to be taken more strictly and narrowly for the sensual appetite: the immoderate craving for
soft and sumptuous living, the intemperate use of pleasures, meats and drinks, all such things as gratify the body. While it
be true that in the catalogue given in Galatians 5:19-21, the horrible products of the flesh are headed by different forms of
immorality, yet they are by no means confined thereto.
“The lusts of the flesh,” then, include the giving way to any form of intemperance, as well as uncleanness: the craving for
and responding to any of the things which excite the irregularities and inordinate hankerings of the animal appetites, as in
the case of Esau, who made a god of his belly. They comprehend every form of pampering the body, whether it be a feeding
of it more than is required for its natural sustenance, or spending more time in sleep than is necessary. When God created
man, He endowed him with an appetite for food, for marriage, for the beauties of Eden; but sin perverts those appetites and
carries them to excess, so that their gratification becomes, only too often, gluttony, uncleanness, covetousness. Everything
that pleases either the body or the mind, and gives us pleasure distinct from God Himself, may be included therein. Though
men differ considerably in their constitutions, interests, pursuits, habits, and objects of desire, yet from first to last it all
comes to the same thing; it is not of the Spirit or of grace; whatever be craved, whether something gross or refined, it is for
the pleasing of carnal self. We have had but two common fathers, Adam and Noah, and both fell by indulging their fleshly
appetites: Adam by eating, Noah by drinking.
“And the lust of the eyes”; that is the second main avenue by which the world gains entrance into the heart. We contract
far more sin through our visive organs than any of us are aware of, for they are the inlets to the mind, setting objects before the fancy which leave an impression and taint which are very difficult to get rid of. It is not so much the object beheld
as the pleasure felt in seeing it, and the longing to possess the same. This then is the spring of wantonness, covetousness,
and avarice. But as from the lust of the flesh proceed not only the gluttony, drunkenness, and immorality which the baser
and more brutish part of mankind is taken up with, but also the inordinate love of pleasure, vain company, and carnal delights with which the more refined are so often bewitched, so the lust of the eyes is not to be restricted to an evil gazing
upon unlawful objects, but from it spring all forms of earthly-mindedness, and immoderate yearnings for the acquisition of
a thousand things, such as costly apparel, jewels, elaborate home furnishings, sight-seeing, etc. In the mental realm, it creates a curiosity to pry into the unseen and tamper with things which pertain to the darkness rather than to the light.
Scripture abounds in solemn examples of those who fell into grievous and fatal sins through indulging the lusts of the
eyes: Lot’s wife (Gen 19:26), Shechem (Gen 34:2), Potiphar’s wife (Gen 39:7), Achan (Jos 7:21), Samson (Jdg 16:1), David

visive – visual; pertaining to vision.



(2Sa 11:2). Like children, we can scarcely see a pleasant object without wanting to possess it: Ahab, not content with his
palace gardens, fell sick for Naboth’s vineyard (1Ki 21:4). What need is there, then, for us to pray, “Turn away mine eyes
from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in thy way” (Psa 119:37). That is a request for restraining grace, that we may
be enabled to look away from whatever entices us to evil. It is by our optics being fastened upon the world’s attractions that
the heart is infected with the love of them, and thereby alienated from divine things. But prayer is not sufficient: there must
also be a walking circumspectly and cautiously. If we pray “lead us not into temptation,” we are also required to watch that
we do not enter into it (Mat 26:41). The more we are engaged with the beauties of the Lord of glory, the more will our
hearts be delivered from the glittering toys of the world, and the less envy shall we have when beholding “the prosperity of
the wicked” (Psa 73:3).
“And the pride of life,” which is the last of the evil triad. The word for “life” here is not zoe, which expresses essential being, but bios, which has to do more with the eternal life of man as pertaining to the natural world. The pride of life consists
of vying with and outvying one another; in every possible way. It gives rise to a conceit of ourselves and a contempt of our
neighbours, producing a spirit of self-superiority and arrogance. It grasps after power, seeks the chief places in the world,
coveting positions of elevation, authority and influence, so that one may have dominion over his fellows. It may assume the
extreme form of the tyrannical dictator, but it is just as truly active in the woman who aspires to be the mistress of a few
servants. It thirsts after admiration, adulation, and applause. It strives after the honours and dignities of the world, craves a
position in society which will convey prestige and repute. It therefore seeks a variety of situations and circumstances, which
have in them an appearance of happiness and satisfaction in self-advancement. It loves pomp and parade, is fond of flattering titles and a glittering show. It covets a name or renown, eagerly pursues popularity, so that one may be distinguished
above others.
This “pride of life” expresses itself in many ways. It evidences itself in an ostentatious display, like the strutting of a peacock, so that there may be an outshining of our neighbours. It induces many to attempt the keeping up of an appearance
which they can ill afford. It leads to much hypocrisy, a pretending to be and have what is possessed not: seen in facial makeup, the wearing of imitation jewelry, etc. It causes people to become the slaves of fashion and to be in bondage to the foolish
conventions of the world, as, for example, extravagant and expensive funerals far beyond their means. Nor is this affectation
of repute, lust for power and love of ostentation by any means confined unto those who have the largest incomes and most
opportunity for gratifying themselves. It works just as powerfully in the poor and humble as it does in the rich and exalted.
The peasant may be loud in his condemnation of the greed of the capitalist and denounce his prodigalities, but place him in
the same position of affluence and influence, and often he proves to be worse than those whom he formerly censured: it is
only the force of his present circumstances which prevents him from making the show he would like to.
The “pride of life” includes much more than either the lust of the flesh or the lust of the eyes. They are restricted either
by their end—the satisfying of our carnal desires, particularly those of the body—or by their instruments—the gratifying of
the senses. But pride is not thus restricted. Man is ever prone to be puffed up by conceit of his own excellence: his strength,
beauty, wisdom, talents, graces, and achievements. It is, then, accurately designed, for it spreads through all the enjoyments
and comforts of life: the entire span of our mortal existence, from the cradle to the grave, being its sphere. As Manton remarked, “He ascribes a universal and unlimited influence, and calls it ‘the pride of life’ because it taints every action, it
serves itself of every enjoyment, it mingles with other lusts. Other vices destroy only their contraries: covetousness destroys
liberality, drunkenness sobriety; but pride destroys them all. There is nothing so low but it yields fuel to pride: the hair,
which is but an excrement, is often hung as a bush and ensign of vanity. And there is nothing so high and sacred but pride
can abase it; like mistletoe, it grows on any tree, but most upon the best.”
It will therefore be evident that these springs of evil are set forth in a climactic order: sensuality, covetousness, pride.
Little as the majority may suppose, the last one is more heinous than the others. Sensuality is the corruption of the lower
part of man’s being, an unlawful gratifying of his bodily appetites; but pride is the corruption of the higher part of his nature—the lifting up of his understanding and spirit. By sensuality man sinks to the level of the beasts, but by pride he rears
up against God, and enters into fellowship with the devil, for “being lifted up with pride” was his condemnation (1Ti 3:6; and
cf. Isa 14:12-14). It was bad enough for the conceited king of Babylon to exclaim, “Is not this great Babylon, that I have
built?” (Dan 4:30), but it was far worse when the haughty monarch of Egypt asked, “Who is the Lord, that I should obey His
voice to let Israel go?” (Exo 5:2). Thus does this abominable pride inflate puny creatures of the dust and cause them to exalt
themselves against the Most High.
