PURITAN GOLD -- Exposition of 1 John by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 32 of 39
Antichrists (2:22-23)


What an immense amount of unedifying and worthless rubbish has been written on “the antichrist”! Yet that is hardly a
thing to be wondered at, since it supplies an object that makes a strong appeal to lovers of the bizarre and sensational.
Moreover, it is a subject that offers an opportunity for every conceited tyro to pose as a “deep student of prophecy.” Almost
endless have been the conjectures as to the identity of “the antichrist”: whether an evil system or a separate individual; and
if the latter, whether he has yet appeared on the stage of human action, or whether his advent is yet future. The Reformers
and almost all of the Puritans held that “the man of sin” (which they regard as another title of this infamous character) signified the Papacy. Later, some who claimed to be more enlightened were quite sure that Napoleon Bonaparte was this son of
perdition. Influenced by his early teachers and associations, this writer once deemed himself qualified to write a book of
three hundred pages thereon (long since out of print), but trusts he has grown wiser with the passing of the years.
During the last three decades many others have speculated upon the personality of “the antichrist.” Not a few who were
regarded as eminent “Bible teachers” insisted that the Kaiser of Germany filled this iniquitous role, but when the closing
years of his career falsified their theorizings, Mussolini (as “the restorer of the old Roman empire”) became their choice;
then as he began to wane in power and be eclipsed by another, Hitler was preferred. Now [that] those men of evil renown
have been called to meet their God, Stalin has occupied the prophetic limelight. And so, we suppose, it will continue to the
end, for human nature changes not, either in its arrogance, blindness, gullibility, or refusal to acknowledge its ignorance.
“Vain man would be wise, though man be born like a wild ass’s colt” (Job 11:12). There ever have been, and doubtless will
continue to be unto the close of this world’s history, men who posed as being wise above that which is written, and a flock of
admirers will credit their pretensions and receive as oracles their wild and profitless theorizings.
Disregarding all speculations and controversies upon prophecies, which may or may not bear upon the subject (for example, those in Daniel and The Revelation, to which so many appeal), let us concentrate upon the term itself. The actual
word “antichrist” occurs only in John’s epistles. In other connections the prefix “anti” is used in various senses: e.g. over
against, contrary to, a substitute for. Thus, abstractedly considered, “antichrist” might refer either to one who pretended to
be the Messiah or to one who openly opposed Him: a pseudo Christ or a rival. It is by carefully observing how the term is
used by the apostle and what he predicated thereof that we must determine its sense. It is true that our Lord announced,
“Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many,” which He explained as “there shall arise false
Christs, and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders” (Mat 24:5, 24)—but that is nothing to the point of our
present inquiry: we consider that history shows those predictions were fulfilled in the first century AD.
First, John had said, “ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists...They went out from
us, but they were not of us” (2:18-19). There we see that the early Christians had been forewarned that the Gospel of Christ
would be opposed, that there were many such opposers by the close of the first century, and that such were apostates. “And
hence we learn that antichrist is not a single person, but many: antichrist in the first clause is explained by antichrists in
the latter” (J. Gill). Second, 2:22 identifies those antichrists by describing them as liars against the truth and repudiators of
the Christ of God. Third, John affirmed, “And every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of
God: and this is that spirit of antichrist” (4:3). As “the spirit of the world” (1Co 2:12) has reference to that principle of carnal

tyro – beginner in learning something; novice.
Pink initially held to the doctrines of dispensationalism during his early years of writing.


reason and gratification, which regulates its subjects, so “the spirit of antichrist” signifies that evil influence which produces hostility to Christ. Finally, he informs us, “For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an antichrist” (2Jo 7). “From this it is clear that John understood by the
word all those who denied that Jesus is the Messiah” (Barnes).
“Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ?” (verse 22).
To deny—either implicitly or explicitly—that Jesus is the Christ is to say that He is not the Messiah, the One announced
and promised by the prophets of old. Second, it is to repudiate Him as the one appointed and endued by God to be the sole
but sufficient Saviour of sinners. Third, it is the rejection of His person and official work, and that is a sin of the highest
magnitude: “whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God” (2Jo 1:9). As Gill remarked,
“The one who denied that Jesus is the Christ is not the only liar in the world, but he is the greatest of liars; this is a consummate lie, being opposed to a glaring truth.” It is the gainsaying of a fact clear and indisputable. It is opposed to the witness of the angels at His incarnation, and to that of His forerunner. It is opposed to the teaching of Him who is the truth
itself, for He clearly manifested Himself to be the Messiah. It flies in the face of His miraculous credentials, which authenticated His claim. It is contrary to the declaration of His apostles, who were eye-witnesses of His miracles, and to the sure
Word of God Himself.
The denial that Jesus is the Christ is a sin committed in many different ways and in varying degrees of culpability. Unitarians, who directly and explicitly repudiate His Godhead, are not the only liars and antichrists. There are many opposers in
Christendom who indirectly and implicitly deny the Christ of God by devising a false Christ from their perverted imagina64
tions. Thus, Pelagians, and in a lesser degree Arminians, are guilty of this horrible crime, for they transfer to the creature
almost all the honour that rightly belongs to the Redeemer alone. And as Calvin pertinently remarked, “So the Papists at
this day, setting up free will in opposition to the grace of the Holy Spirit, ascribing a part of their righteousness and salva65
tion to the merits of works, feigning for themselves innumerable advocates, by whom they render God propitious to them,
have a sort of fictitious Christ I know not what; but the living and genuine image of God that shines forth in Christ they
deform by their wicked inventions—they lessen His power, subvert and pervert His office. Christ is denied whenever those
things that belong to Him are taken away from Him.”
“Who is a liar but he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ?
He is antichrist, that denieth the Father and the Son.”
Those terrible names of opprobrium cannot but fill the renewed heart with holy horror. Yet no terms of infamy and
condemnation can be too strong to designate the opposers and blasphemers of the Christ of God. To deny that Jesus is the
Christ is to repudiate His virgin birth, His vicarious character, His redemptive work—for those things were predicated of
the Messiah. In the preceding chapter we explained that “the Christ” means “the Anointed One” and expresses His threefold
office. Thus any man who denies that Jesus is the great Prophet of the Church, the infallible Teacher, the essential Word of
God, is an antichrist—an arch-heretic. Anyone who denies that Jesus is the great High Priest, the sole Mediator between
God and men, by whose one perfect offering He has perfected forever the sanctified, is an antichrist—His open antagonist.
Anyone who denies that Jesus is the King of the Church, the only one who has the right to command and be obeyed, is an
antichrist—His avowed enemy.
Yet this is not all that is included: “he is antichrist that denieth the Father and the Son.” The Messiahship of Christ is
not an isolated fact; lying behind it is the all-important truth of the Holy Trinity. The denial of Christ is, at the same time, a
repudiation of the mysterious and ineffable union [that] is between the members of the Godhead. There is a most intimate
and unique relation subsisting between the Father and the Son, one that is entirely beyond finite comprehension, expressed
in such terms as “the man...my fellow, saith the Lord of hosts” (Zec 13:7), so that “all men should honour the Son, even as
they honour the Father” (Joh 5:23), for, as He expressly declared, “I and Father are one” (Joh 10:30)—co-essential, coeternal, co-glorious; “His own Son” (Rom 8:32) in a way that the regenerate are not: really, though incomprehensibly,
“His own Son.” Now unless Christ be owned in this highest relation, He is virtually denied in all. Scripture presents the
Father and the Son in eternity past, as engaged in mutual council (Zec 6:13). “A great covenant is negotiated. The Father
and the Son, with the Spirit, are, if one may dare say so, in solemn conference together. From the bosom of the Father, in
which He is dwelling evermore, the Son receives a commission to come forth.
“He is appointed Heir of all things. Creation is assigned to Him as His proper work. All providence is to be His care; and,
above all, the providence of this spot of earth. Here on this earth, from among a fallen race, He is to purchase for Himself, and for His Father, at a great price, a seed given Him by the Father, and to share with Him the blessedness of His
being the Son. So it is announced between the Father and the Son from everlasting; the Holy Spirit being a party to the
arrangement, as He is to have a large share in carrying it out. And so, accordingly, in the fullness of time, the Son ap64

Pelagians – those who (perhaps unknowingly) follow the teachings of the heretic Pelagius (c. 354-c. 420), a British monk who argued

that people could reform themselves by free will and that they can take the first steps toward salvation without the assistance of God’s
grace. His views were condemned as heresy by the Council of Ephesus (431).
propitious – favorably inclined.

opprobrium – that which brings shame or disgrace.


pears among men. He appears as the Son: on the Father’s behalf, entrusted with His Father’s commission, to be about
His Father’s business. He is the Son not merely in respect of His being the Holy Jesus, receiving proofs and pledges of
God’s fatherly presence and approval, as any holy being might. He is the Son also, and chiefly, in respect of the work or
office with a view to which He is the Christ. He is the Son consenting to be the Father’s Servant, and as such anointed
for the accomplishment of the Father’s purpose. Only, therefore, in so far as you acknowledge Jesus as the Christ, do
you really receive Him as the Son.
“And denial, whether practical or doctrinal, of the proposition that Jesus is the Christ, is tantamount to a disowning of
His personality as the Son. It is only when you recognize Him as anointed to do His Father’s will in the sacrifice of
Himself, that you really own Him as the Son. Such, then, is the importance and significancy of the proposition that Jesus is the Christ, considered in itself; and such it’s bearing on the owning of His person as the Saviour and as the Son.
It is a proposition that so vitally affects the essential character of Him to whom it relates, that the denial of it is virtually
a denial of Himself...For, in a word, the completeness of this illustrious personage depends on a full and adequate
recognition of His double relation: to us as sinners, as our Jesus, and to God the Father as His Son. Set aside His being
Christ—the anointed Sacrificer and anointed Sacrifice, the anointed Priest and anointed Victim, the Lamb of God that
taketh away the sin of the world...and we have neither any Jesus fit to be our Saviour, nor any Son of God worth the
owning...Hence he that denieth that Jesus is the Christ is not only a liar, he is antichrist. And being antichrist—setting
himself against the Christ—he, as antichrist, denies the Father and the Son” (R. Candlish).
Let none aspire to more “liberality and charity” than the one who was favoured to lean on the Master’s bosom; those who
are opposed to the person, doctrine, gospel, and kingdom of Christ are liars and antichrists. Those who array themselves
against Him and hold doctrines that are hostile to His Godhead, His official character, His redemptive work, are His adversaries. Yet there is no truth so sacred and well attested, but there have ever been those who controverted it. Some have denied the Saviour’s deity, some have explained away the reality and uniqueness of His humanity, and so the reality of His
sufferings; while others set themselves against His headship and kingly authority—yet professing themselves to be and retaining the name of Christians, imposing their falsehoods on their deluded followers. In their bitter antagonism to the Lord
Jesus, we may discover something more than an ebullition of human depravity, namely the agency of Satan. It is the enmity of that old serpent the devil against the woman’s Seed. It demonstrates his age-long hatred of Christ and His gospel.
“He is antichrist that denieth the Father and the Son.” How little is this realized today! Scriptural views of the Father
cannot be ours if we err concerning the Son. “No man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him” (Mat 11:27). The Father cannot be known apart from the
Son, for He is the One who has “declared him” (Joh 1:18), or made Him known. There is such an ineffable union between
Them that He could aver, “he that hath seen me hath seen the Father...I am in the Father, and the Father in me” (Joh 14:9,
11). Where Christ be denied, the whole revelation of God in and through Him (Heb 1:1-2; 2Co 5:19) is set aside.
“As God has given Himself to us to be enjoyed only in Christ, He is elsewhere sought for in vain; or (if anyone prefers
what is clearer) as in Christ dwells all the fullness of the Deity, there is no God apart from Him. It hence follows that
Turks, Jews, and such as are like them, have a mere idol and not the true God. For by whatever titles they may honour
the God that they worship, still, as they reject Him without whom they cannot come to God, and in whom God has really manifested Himself to us, they have but some creature or fiction of their own” (Calvin).
“Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father” (verse 23). How wide and sweeping is this solemn statement! No matter what his profession and pretensions, if he in any way denies the Son, he cuts himself off from the Father.
The Father can only be known (Joh 17:3), approached (Joh 14:6), worshipped (1Pe 2:5), and glorified (Col 3:17) in and
through His incarnate Son. Despite their boasted orthodoxy, Jesus Christ said to the Jews, “Ye neither know me, nor my
Father; if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also” (Joh 8:19). To be without the One is to be without the
Other. That is abundantly demonstrated in heathendom: their religions are godless because they are Christless! In like
manner, all who acknowledge “the Supreme Being,” “the Architect of the universe,” or even “the Almighty,” and at the same
time refuse the Mediator, believe in one who has no existence. Moreover, if wrong views be entertained of the Son, erroneous conceptions of the Father are necessarily entertained. If Christ be the Son only by adoption, God is not His Father. If He
be Son merely by office, equally so is the Father. If He be Son only by incarnation or resurrection, the Father is denied.
“Whosoever denieth the Son, the same hath not the Father” as his “Father.” This at once gives the lie to one of the most
popular and widely accepted errors of the last century, namely “the universal fatherhood of God.” In the spiritual and highest sense God is the Father of none save of Christ and His redeemed: “For ye [namely the saints] are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus” (Gal 3:26). Where there be no faith in Christ Jesus, there is no spiritual sonship; and where that be
absent, God cannot rightfully be regarded as our Father. Christ made that very plain when He exposed the empty boast of
the unbelieving Jews, who claimed, “we have one Father, God,” and to whom He replied, “If God were your Father, ye would
love me” (Joh 8:41-42). How can one who despises and rejects the Son have God for his Father—have a filial relation to

ebullition – sudden outburst.


Him—when there is no bond of union between them? The Father thinks far too highly of His Son to love any who hate
Him. He will not set a premium upon those who so grievously insult Him by disdaining His Beloved, for “him hath God the
Father sealed” (Joh 6:27).
“But he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also” (verse 23). We have placed that sentence in italics, for so it is
found in the Authorized Version. As most of our readers are aware, that is to indicate that such words are not found in the
Greek, but have been supplied by the translators. This instance serves to manifest the scrupulous fairness of those who produced that edition of the Bible: because it was found in some of the ancient manuscripts, they gave it a place; as it was omitted by others, they marked it as doubtful. The Revised Version includes it in the text without any question, and, we believe,
warrantably so. The editorial note in Calvin’s commentary says, “The words are found in most of the manuscripts, and in
most of the versions, and in many of the Fathers. Besides, they wholly comport with the usual style of the apostle, whose
common practice it was to state things positively and negatively, and vice versa. See 5:12.” A. Barnes tells us that this passage “is found in the Vulgate, the Syriac, the Ethiopian, the Armenian, and Arabic versions; and in the critical editions of
Griesbach, Tittman, and Hahn. It is probable, therefore, that it should be regarded as a genuine portion of the sacred text.”
Gill pointed out that the second half of verse 23 “confirms and illustrates what is before said; for as he who denies the
sonship of Christ cannot hold the paternity of God, so he who owns the sonship of Christ, the second person, maintains the
paternity of the first—for those two are correlates and mutually put or take away each other. No mention is made of the
Spirit, because, as yet, no controversy had arisen concerning Him.” To which we would add, in Scripture, repetition is always for the purpose of emphasis, and often the same thing is stated both negatively and positively (as in 1:6-7) in order to
impress us more deeply with that which is of first importance—as many of our Lord’s weightiest utterances were prefaced
with a double “verily.” The fundamental truth of our present verse cannot be too clearly and emphatically stated or too frequently inculcated: that only by faith’s acceptance of Christ can we obtain any saving knowledge of God; and that all who
believingly receive the Lord Jesus have in fact become the sons and daughters of the Almighty, and are made heirs of eternal
life.
“But he that acknowledgeth the Son hath the Father also.” “For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God” (1Pe 3:18). By Christ all that believe are united to the Father, so that He could say, “I
ascend unto my Father, and your Father” (Joh 20:17). As there is a most intimate relation between the Father and the Son,
so there is in the doctrine and knowledge of Them. And as we cannot have the One without the Other, so on Christ’s becoming our Saviour we are received into the Father’s favour. The Father gives Himself to us in His Son, and by receiving the
Latter we receive the Former. “He hath the Father” for his everlasting portion: to commune with, to enjoy, to supply all his
need. Thus, not only is the honour of Christ involved in our apprehensions of Him, but our blessings and privileges are
bound up therein.
