PURITAN GOLD -- Dispensationalism by Arthur W. Pink: Full Audiobook, Chapter 5 of 18
The Purpose of God (Concluded)


3. THE PURPOSE OF GOD (CONCLUDED).
Let us resume at the point where we closed the second section of this article. “In whom we have
redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His grace” (Eph
1.7). The attentive reader will at once note a change in the tense of the verb from that employed
in the previous verses, which at once marks the division in thought or subject. In verse 3 it was
“who has blessed;” in verse 4 “has chosen us;” verse 5 “having predestined us;” and in verse 6 “has
made us accepted.” In each case, the reference is to the decision or act of the Father in the
everlasting covenant, before the foundations of the world were laid. But in verse 7 it is, “in whom
we have redemption,” etc. — another set of blessings is introduced there, blessings which become
the saints’ portion in a time-state, and which are the means by which they reach the ultimate goal
of eternal glory.
It would lead us too far afield to give here an exposition of Eph 1.7-9; so we must content ourselves
with a bare outline. First, all the blessings which God’s elect enjoy now are based upon the
“redemption” which they have in Christ. Second, three comprehensive blessings are named:
“forgiveness of sins,” which is the negative side of justification. Then regeneration, or the Spirit’s
work of quickening (v. 8): the greatness of this blessing is signified by the “in which He has
abounded toward us”; the nature of it — working in us “wisdom (cf. Psa 19.7, Pro 2.10, Eph 1.17)
and prudence”; the cause being “the good pleasure of His will” (v.9). Third, making known all that
is said in verses 3-8, which is through the preaching of the Word. Now it is this last point which
we must enlarge upon.
As the opening verse of the Epistle to the Hebrews declares, it was not only at “sundry times” (in
broken fragments, as it were) but in “diverse manners” that God, in bygone ages, communicated
to men a knowledge of His eternal counsels. Yet, though the “manners” were diverse or varied,
there was an unmistakable unity underlying them, as well as a noticeable progress in them.
Central in all of them was the revelation of the Covenant of Grace, which when understood in the
most extensive sense, comprehends all the designs and transactions respecting the redemption of
God’s elect by Jesus Christ. The Covenant of Grace is in sharp contrast from the Covenant (or
“law”) of Works, under which man was first made. This Covenant of Grace (or Everlasting
Covenant) is the foundation of all the favour which is shown to the redeemed Church throughout
time and eternity.
Now, the Covenant of Grace is made known in the Gospel; this “Gospel,” as Galatians 3:8 tells us,
was “preached to Abraham,” and which Hebrews 4.2 declares was “preached to” the nation of
Israel. When that Gospel is truly and cordially embraced, there is a covenant transaction that takes
7 Eph 1:7-14 In Him we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His

grace 8 which He made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence, 9 having made known to us the mystery of His
will, according to His good pleasure which He purposed in Himself, 10 that in the dispensation of the fullness of the
times He might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth-- in Him.
11 In Him also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of Him who works all things
according to the counsel of His will, 12 that we who first trusted in Christ should be to the praise of His glory. 13 In Him
you also trusted, after you heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom also, having believed, you
were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise, 14 who is the guarantee of our inheritance until the redemption of the
purchased possession, to the praise of His glory.

18

place between God in Christ, and every believer. This is what is signified by “laying hold of God’s
covenant” (Isa 56.4, 6), and which was figured of old when men entered into a covenant with God.
That is when God also enters into a covenant with us. For when the believing sinner heartily
receives the Gospel, he has fulfilled the only condition required from him; he is at once entitled to
all the promises of the covenant, and salvation is made sure to him. For one of the promises of the
covenant, as proposed by God to men, is that once someone truly believes and accepts the offer
made to him in the Gospel, he will never fall from it, so as to fail to receive its blessings. In this
respect, it is an everlasting covenant; as it ensures eternal life, it can never fail or be broken by
either party in covenant.
The terms of this covenant which God makes with His believing people are described in the
following words,
“And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do
them good; but I will put My fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from Me” (Jer 32.40).
This is the covenant of which David speaks, “He has made with me an everlasting covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire” (2Sam 23.5). The
tenor of this covenant of God is stated as follows,
“I will put My laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God,
and they shall be to Me a people. And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every
man his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord;’ for all shall know Me, from the least to the greatest.
For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities I will
remember no more” (Heb 8.10-12).
This Covenant of Grace is also called in Scripture a new or second covenant, in distinction from
another and previous covenant. This is the Covenant between the Triune God and Christ the
Mediator. The first or old covenant was between God and the first Adam, who represented all
mankind as their legal and public head (Hos 6.7 margin; Job 31.33). Between God and the last
Adam — the Redeemer of the elect, their legal Representative and public Head — is a second and
new covenant. And it is this which lays the foundation of the covenant between God and believers.
Absolutely speaking, the covenant between God and Christ is not a “new” one, for it was entered
into long before Adam was created; but relatively, it is spoken of as “new” as it was made known
to men more fully. This is in contrast to the Covenant of Works, under which all mankind lived
antecedent to redemption by Christ. This covenant of works was brought into view, and kept most
in sight, under the Mosaic economy or dispensation.
“The covenant made with the children of Israel was in the form of a covenant of works. The law
of works was exhibited first, and brought most clearly into sight, that it might be known to be
what it really is; and the covenant of grace, or the Gospel, though revealed and contained in that
covenant (with Israel), was not set in open light, but covered and in a measure hidden under the
types and shadows of that covenant; and under the form of a covenant of works, as the nucleus
or kernel is covered and hidden with the husk or shell that surrounds it. So that, those who were
not spiritual, discerning, and attentive, saw only the outside, and considered it as wholly a
covenant of works; and in that view, they hoped for justification by it. It is certain, this was the
case with the nation of the Jews in general in the apostles’ days. They sought righteousness and
justification, as it were, by the works of the law. They were ignorant of God’s righteousness, and
attempted to establish their own righteousness, the righteousness of the law (Rom 9.32; 10.3).
“This form of a covenant of works is represented by the veil which Moses put over his face when
speaking to the people: ‘So that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look at the end of
what was abolished: But their minds were blinded: for until this day, the same veil remains
untaken away in the reading of the old testament (or the old covenant); this veil is done away in
Christ. But even to this day, when Moses is read, the veil is upon their heart’ (2Cor 3.13-15). In

19

this view of it, and considered as exhibiting the covenant of works, St. Paul calls the giving of
the law from Mount Sinai, and that dispensation, ‘The ministration of death and condemnation,
written and engraved on stones’ (2Cor 3.7). It is therefore said, ‘the law was given by Moses, but
grace and truth came by Jesus Christ’ (Joh 1.17). The dispensation under Moses was a legal
dispensation, exhibiting law in the form of a covenant of works. One particular, and perhaps the
principal design of it, was to reveal the Divine law in the strictness, extent and glory of it. It was
necessary to prepare for the clear and open manifestation of the covenant of grace; which was
then in great measure hidden, and more obscurely revealed under types — so that the whole was
but a shadow of the good things of the covenant of grace (Heb 10.1).
“Therefore, the revelation made by Moses is called the law; and the covenant into which the
children of Israel entered, is represented as a legal covenant, a covenant of works, to which the
covenant of grace is opposed as another and a new covenant. One quotation from Scripture, out
of many that might be mentioned, will ascertain this: namely Heb 8.6-9.8 Therefore the Gospel
is called the ‘new testament,’ and the Mosaic dispensation is called the ‘old testament.’ See
2Corinthians 3.6, 14.9
“The covenant of grace has been revealed to men, and has been administered in different forms,
and by various methods ever since the first intimation of mercy to sinners. It was made soon
after the first human apostasy; and all true believers have been saved by it from that time to
this. None have been saved in any other way; nor will any be saved in any other way but this, to
the end of the world. And in this respect, it is an everlasting covenant... From Moses to the
coming of Christ, the covenant of grace was made known and administered. And the Gospel was
preached to the children of Israel through all that time; and all the pious were saved by it, though
it was covered under the form of a covenant of works, as has been observed and explained.
“The law, as a covenant of works, was not exhibited in the revelation made to the children of
Israel by Moses (as it has been now explained) under the notion that any man could obtain the
favour of God and be saved by this law or covenant — for this was impossible. But this law was
thus revealed and added, that it might be known what the law was, and that men might be
hereby convinced that no man can be justified by the works of the law; because by his sins he is
under the curse of it; and under this conviction, and despairing of salvation by the covenant of
works, they might be led to understand and embrace the covenant of grace, the way of salvation
by faith in the Redeemer. This is the light in which this point is set by the apostle Paul: ‘Is the
law then against the promises of God? God forbid! For if there had been a law given which could
have given life, truly righteousness should have been by the law. But the Scripture has confined
all under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe’ (Gal
3.21, 22).
“This was the end which the revelation of this law answered, to those who were saved under that
dispensation. And it is suited and designed to answer this same end to those who shall be saved
to the end of the world. For by the law thus revealed comes the knowledge of sin, and the curse
of God, under which all men are who do not believe in Christ. St. Paul states the matter with
regard to himself:
8 Heb 8:6 But now He has obtained a more excellent ministry, inasmuch as He is also Mediator of a better covenant,

which was established on better promises. 7 For if that first covenant had been faultless, then no place would have been
sought for a second. 8 Because finding fault with them, He says: “Behold, the days are coming, says the LORD, when I
will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah-- 9 “not according to the covenant that
I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they
did not continue in My covenant, and I disregarded them, says the LORD.
9 2Cor 3:6, 14 who also made us sufficient as ministers of the new covenant, not of the letter but of the Spirit; for the
letter kills, but the Spirit gives life... 14 But their minds were blinded. For until this day the same veil remains unlifted
in the reading of the Old Testament, because the veil is taken away in Christ.

20

‘I would not have known sin, except by the law: for I would not have known lust, unless the
law had said, you shall not covet. For without the law sin was dead. For I was alive once
without the law; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died’ (Rom 7.7-9).
“Even though the Redeemer had not actually performed and gone through what He had
undertaken to do and suffer, yet because it was engaged and made certain, all believers who
lived before His incarnation, were saved by virtue of His sufferings and obedience, which were
certain to take place in due time.
“We trust the difference and opposition between the covenant of works and the new covenant
(the covenant of grace) have been made clear above. The former requires perfect obedience as
the condition of life, as the price to recommend to the favour of God, which is the righteousness
of the law of works. The latter consists in a testimony and promise on God’s part, requiring
nothing of man except that belief of this testimony and promise, which implies a cordial
reception of the good things exhibited and offered in this covenant — without offering anything
as the price of them; but receiving them as a free gift to a sinner, infinitely guilty and wretched.
The condition of the first is beyond the reach of man: it is impossible that he should obtain
righteousness by it, because he is a sinner. The last is made effectual by the Spirit to all of God’s
elect, saving every one who believes.
“The apostle Paul states the difference and opposition between these two covenants from the
writing of Moses, which proves that both these covenants were revealed in that dispensation.
His words are these:
‘Moses describes the righteousness which is of the law, that ‘The man who does those things
shall live by them’ (Lev 18.5). But the righteousness which is of faith speaks in this way, ‘Do
not say in your heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down from
above:) Or, Who shall descend into the deep?’ (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead).
But what does it say? The word is near you, even in your mouth and in your heart (Deu 30.1114) — that is, the word of faith which we preach; That if you confess with your mouth the Lord
Jesus, and believe in your heart that God has raised Him from the dead, you shall be saved’
(Rom 10.5-9).
“In the preaching of the Gospel, the covenant of grace is proposed and the blessings it contains
are offered to all to whom it comes, upon their believing and heartily approving the way of
salvation proposed in it; for all who thus comply, meet the condition of the covenant on their
part, and consequently are interested in all the promises of it.” — Samuel Hopkins 10
Christ and His benefits are offered to all who hear the Gospel. The Lord Jesus says, “He that rejects
Me, and does not receive My words, has One who judges him” (Joh 12.48), and none can reject
Him to whom He is never “offered.”
The lengthy quotation which we made above, from one who was a contemporary and intimate
friend of the celebrated Jonathan Edwards, contains one of the most lucid and illuminating
treatments of that aspect of the theme we are dealing with, which we have ever come across in all
our readings. We earnestly commend it to the best attention of interested readers. It throws a
flood of light upon the Mosaic economy. It shows how the Everlasting Covenant was being
administered, and its blessings bestowed, under the dispensation of the Old Testament. It calls
attention to the fact that the (seemingly incompatible elements of) Law and the Gospel were being
proclaimed at one and the same time, and that the claims of God were being pressed and the grace
of God manifested during the same period.

10 Samuel Hopkins (1721–1803) — American Congregationalist theologian born in Connecticut; he studied at Yale.

Hopkinsian theology (consistent or hyper-Calvinism) takes its name from him. He was a vocal opponent of slavery.

21

From what has been brought out above, it should be plain that preaching the Gospel implies and
entails a declaration of the whole system of truth and duty contained in the Scripture. Though
some truths are more essential and important than others, and though the Gospel may truly be
preached while some truths are overlooked, yet it cannot be fully preached unless the whole of
Divine revelation is brought into view; otherwise it must in some degree be defective. Therefore,
to preach the Gospel is to do as Paul did, and “declare all the counsel of God” (Act 20.27). Every
doctrine revealed in the Word, and every duty prescribed, has a connection with the whole, and
all make but one consistent system.
Finally, what has been said above should make it clear that the preaching of the Covenant of Grace
(the Gospel) does not annul the Law of God, nor discharge men from their duty and obedience;
but it requires and demands obedience of all to whom it is preached. The Law is not in the least
abolished in the extent and strictness of its precepts by the Gospel. Christ’s deliverance of His
people from the curse of the Law, no more lessens their obligations to obey the Law perfectly, than
His healing of the impotent man rendered it needless for Him to say, “Sin no more, lest a worse
thing come to you” (Joh 5.14). No, the Law remains as much the measure and rule of duty to the
Christian, as ever it was, and he is no further holy than he is conformed to the Law, loving God
with all his heart, mind, and strength, and his neighbour as himself. Thus, the preaching of the
Gospel does not make void the Law, but establishes it (Rom 3.31).
