PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 30 of 51
Disciplining Children


CHAPTER 30

Verse 1. He that loveth his son causeth him oft to feel the rod, that he may have joy of him in the end.

Verse 2. He that chastiseth his son shall have joy in him, and shall rejoice of him among his acquaintance.

Verse 3. He that teacheth his son grieveth the enemy, and before his friends he shall rejoice of him.

Verse 4. Though his father die, yet he is as though he were not dead, for he hath left one behind him that is like himself.

Verse 5. While he lived, he saw and rejoiced in him, and when he died, he was not sorrowful.

Verse 6. He left behind him an avenger against his enemies, and one that shall requite kindness to his friends.

Verse 7. He that maketh too much of his son shall bind up his wounds, and his bowels will be troubled at every cry.

Verse 8. A horse not broken becometh headstrong, and a child left to himself becometh willful.

Verse 9. Cocker thy child and he shall make thee afraid; play with him and he will bring thee to heaviness.

Verse 10. Laugh not with him, lest thou have sorrow with him, and lest thou gnash thy teeth in the end.

Verse 11. Give him no liberty in his youth, and wink not at his follies.

Verse 12. Bow down his neck while he is young, and beat him on the sides while he is a child, lest he wax stubborn and be disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart.

Verse 13. Chastise thy son and hold him to labor, lest his lewd behavior be an offense unto thee.

Verse 14. Better is the poor, being sound and strong of constitution, than a rich man that is afflicted in his body.

Verse 15. Health and good estate of body are above all gold, and a strong body above infinite wealth.

Verse 16. There is no riches above a sound body, and no joy above the joy of the heart.

Verse 17. Death is better than a bitter life or continual sickness.

Verse 18. Delicacies poured upon a mouth shut up are as offerings of meat set upon a grave.

Verse 19. What good doeth the offering unto an idol? For it neither eateth nor smelleth. So is he that is persecuted of the Lord.

Verse 20. He seeth with his eyes and groaneth, as a eunuch that embraceth a virgin and sigheth.

Verse 21. Give not over thy mind unto sorrow, and afflict not thyself in thine own counsel.

Verse 22. The gladness of the heart is the life of man, and the joyfulness of a man prolongeth his days.

Verse 23. Love thine own soul, and comfort thy heart. Remove sorrow far from thee, for sorrow hath killed many, and there is no profit therein.

Verse 24. Envy and wrath shorten the life, and carefulness bringeth age before the time.

Verse 25. A cheerful and good heart will have a care of his meat and diet.

This concludes Part 6 of our reading of the Book of Sirach, covering chapters 26 through 30. In our next reading, we shall continue with the wisdom of Ben Sira on riches, contentment, and the worship that pleaseth the Lord.

We continue our reading of the Book of Sirach. In these chapters, Ben Sira addresses the snares of riches, the conduct of the table, true worship and sacrifice, and a great prayer for the deliverance of Israel.
