PURITAN GOLD -- The Book of Sirach: Full Audiobook, Chapter 32 of 51
Conduct at Banquets

---

CHAPTER 32

Verse 1. If thou be made the master of a feast, lift not thyself up, but be among them as one of the rest. Take diligent care for them, and so sit down.

Verse 2. And when thou hast done all thy office, take thy place, that thou mayest be merry with them, and receive a crown for thy well ordering of the feast.

Verse 3. Speak, thou that art the elder, for it becometh thee, but with sound judgment; and hinder not music.

Verse 4. Pour not out words where there is a musician, and show not forth wisdom out of time.

Verse 5. A concert of music in a banquet of wine is as a signet of carbuncle set in gold.

Verse 6. As a signet of an emerald set in a work of gold, so is the melody of music with pleasant wine.

Verse 7. Speak, young man, if there be need of thee; and yet scarcely when thou art twice asked.

Verse 8. Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in few words; be as one that knoweth and yet holdeth his tongue.

Verse 9. If thou be among great men, make not thyself equal with them; and when elders speak, be not much in talking.

Verse 10. Before the thunder goeth lightning, and before a shamefaced man shall grace go forth.

Verse 11. Rise up betimes, and be not the last; but get thee home without delay.

Verse 12. There take thy pastime, and do what thou wilt; but sin not by proud speech.

Verse 13. And for all these things bless Him that made thee, and hath replenished thee with His good things.

Verse 14. Whoso feareth the Lord will receive His discipline, and they that seek Him early shall find favor.

Verse 15. He that seeketh the law shall be filled therewith; but the hypocrite will be offended thereat.

Verse 16. They that fear the Lord shall find judgment, and shall kindle justice as a light.

Verse 17. A sinful man will not be reproved, but findeth an excuse according to his will.

Verse 18. A man of counsel will be considerate; but a strange and proud man is not daunted with fear, even when of himself he hath done without counsel.

Verse 19. Do nothing without advice, and when thou hast once done, repent not.

Verse 20. Go not in a way wherein thou mayest fall, and stumble not among the stones.

Verse 21. Be not overconfident in a plain way.

Verse 22. And beware of thine own children.

Verse 23. In every good work trust thy own soul, for this is the keeping of the commandments.

Verse 24. He that believeth in the Lord taketh heed to the commandment, and he that trusteth in Him shall fare never the worse.