PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Fret Not Thyself Because of the Wicked"
June 17, 2026

---

"My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue, Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I may know how frail I am. Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as nothing before thee: verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah. Surely every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted in vain: he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them." -- Psalm 39:3-6

There are meditations that begin in quiet reflection and end in fire. David sat musing, turning over in his mind the brevity of human life and the seeming futility of human striving, and as he mused, the fire of conviction burned within him until he could no longer contain it. He had resolved to keep silent, to bridle his tongue, to say nothing while the wicked were before him. But the flame of truth would not be suppressed, and at last it broke forth in one of the most searching and solemn meditations upon human mortality that has ever been penned.

"Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; that I may know how frail I am." This is not the prayer of a morbid soul that delights in gloom, but of a wise soul that desires to live in the light of eternity. The knowledge of our frailty is not a depressing truth but a liberating one, for it frees us from the illusion that this world is all there is, that this life is the final chapter, that the things we see with our eyes and hold in our hands are the things that matter most. When a man truly grasps how brief his earthly existence is, he begins to invest in the things that endure, and he ceases to squander his precious days upon vanities that will perish with the using.

Spurgeon preached upon this psalm with great solemnity, observing that God has mercifully hidden from us the exact day and hour of our departure, but He has not hidden the fact that we must depart. We know that we shall die. We know that our days are few. We know that our time is running out with every tick of the clock and every beat of the heart. And yet we live as though we had a thousand years to spend, wasting our hours on trifles, postponing our preparation for eternity, behaving as though death were something that happens only to other people.

"Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth." A handbreadth is the width of four fingers -- the smallest unit of measurement known to the ancient Hebrews. David is saying that his entire life, measured against the backdrop of eternity, is no wider than the span of a man's hand. And if this was true of David, who lived to a ripe old age and accomplished more in his lifetime than most men accomplish in ten, how much more is it true of us? Our days are a handbreadth. Our years are a breath. Our entire earthly existence, from the cradle to the grave, is but a thin wisp of vapour that appears for a little time and then vanishes away.

Thomas Watson wrote with characteristic pungency upon the vanity of human life, reminding his readers that the world promises much and delivers little. It promises satisfaction and delivers only hunger. It promises permanence and delivers only change. It promises happiness and delivers only a restless, gnawing discontent that no earthly pleasure can cure. And the man who heaps up riches and does not know who shall gather them is the very picture of this futility -- labouring all his days to build a fortune that will slip from his fingers at the moment of death and pass into the hands of strangers who may squander it in a year.

"Surely every man walketh in a vain shew." The original word suggests an image, a shadow, a phantom. Men walk about as though they were substantial and permanent, but they are in reality shadows moving across a sunlit wall. They bustle and strive, they plot and plan, they build and accumulate, they quarrel and compete, and all the while they are mere shadows, here today and gone tomorrow, leaving behind them nothing but a name that fades and a memory that dims and at last disappears altogether.

John Owen, in his meditations upon the glory of Christ, taught that the only cure for the vanity of earthly life is the vision of eternal life in Christ. When a man sees the glory of the Saviour, when his eyes are opened to behold the weight of eternal glory that awaits him beyond the grave, the vanities of this present world lose their grip upon his heart. He no longer heaps up riches with frantic anxiety, because he knows that he has a treasure in heaven that moth and rust cannot corrupt and thieves cannot steal. He no longer walks in a vain show, because he has found a reality that is more solid and more enduring than anything this world can offer.

And so David, having poured out his meditation upon the brevity and vanity of human life, turns at last to the only hope that remains. "And now, Lord, what wait I for? My hope is in thee." This is the conclusion of the matter. When every earthly prop has been kicked away, when every illusion has been stripped bare, when every vanity has been exposed for what it is, there remains one solid, unshakeable, everlasting reality: the God who made us, who redeemed us, and who has prepared for us an eternal dwelling in His presence. In Him alone is our hope, and that hope shall never be put to shame. Amen.
