PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Help, Lord, for the Godly Man Ceaseth"
June 5, 2026

---

"Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men. They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak. The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things: who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own: who is lord over us?" -- Psalm 12:1-4

There are times in the history of the church when godliness seems to be at its lowest ebb, when the ranks of the faithful have thinned to a handful, and the voice of truth is all but drowned out by the clamour of falsehood. David found himself in such a time, and his response was not philosophical reflection but urgent prayer. "Help, Lord!" Two words, sharp and direct as a cry from a sinking ship. There is no preamble, no elaborate introduction, no careful arrangement of petitions. The need is desperate, and David throws himself upon the mercy of God with the simplicity of a drowning man reaching for a rope.

"For the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the children of men." This is not an exaggeration born of despair but a sober assessment of the spiritual condition of the nation. Godliness had become rare. Faithfulness had become scarce. The men and women who feared God and walked in integrity had diminished in number until it seemed as though they might disappear altogether. And in their place had risen a generation of flatterers, deceivers, and proud boasters who used the gift of speech not for the glory of God and the good of their neighbours but for the advancement of their own selfish interests.

William Bridge, one of the dissenting brethren of the Westminster Assembly, preached powerfully upon the duty of the faithful remnant in degenerate times. He taught that the scarcity of godliness in the world should not discourage the believer but should rather inflame his zeal. When gold is rare, it is all the more precious. When faithful men are few, each one bears a greater responsibility to hold fast the truth and to shine as a light in the darkness. The temptation in such times is to conform, to soften the sharp edges of truth in order to gain acceptance, to adopt the flattering speech of the age in order to avoid persecution. But this is the very thing that the child of God must never do, for it is precisely in the darkest hour that the light of genuine godliness shines most brightly.

"They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak." Here David identifies the particular sin that characterized the wickedness of his day, and it is a sin that has lost none of its prevalence in ours. Vanity of speech -- empty, hollow, meaningless words that sound impressive but contain no truth. Flattery -- the art of telling people what they want to hear rather than what they need to hear. And beneath it all, a double heart -- a heart divided between what is spoken and what is meant, between the outward profession and the inward intention. The flatterer says one thing to your face and another thing behind your back. He praises you to your face while plotting your ruin in his heart. He uses words not as instruments of truth but as weapons of manipulation.

Jeremiah Burroughs, in his writings on the evils of the tongue, reminded the church that the gift of speech is one of the highest endowments that God has bestowed upon mankind, distinguishing us from the beasts of the field. And therefore the perversion of this gift is a peculiarly heinous sin. When a man uses his tongue to deceive, to flatter, and to manipulate, he is taking the very instrument that God designed for praise and prayer and the communication of truth, and he is turning it into a tool of Satan. It is as though a man were to take the vessels of the temple and use them for profane and unholy purposes. The tongue was made for better things than vanity and flattery.

"Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own: who is lord over us?" Here we reach the very heart of the disease. The proud boasters claim absolute sovereignty over their own speech. They acknowledge no authority above themselves, no standard of truth to which they are accountable, no God whose law governs the use of the tongue. "Our lips are our own." This is the declaration of human autonomy in its most brazen form. It is the spirit of the age in every age, the insistence that man is his own master and may say whatever he pleases without regard to the will of God.

But the psalm does not end with the triumph of the flatterers. In verses five and six, the Lord Himself speaks, and His words are like a thunderclap after the chattering of sparrows. "For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord; I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him. The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times." What a contrast between the vain words of men and the pure words of God. The words of men are dross; the words of God are silver refined sevenfold. The promises of men are chaff; the promises of God are an immovable rock upon which the soul may rest with absolute security.

Thomas Watson observed that God often delays His intervention precisely so that the wickedness of the wicked may be fully manifested and the faith of the righteous may be thoroughly tried. But when He does arise, His coming is sudden and His deliverance is complete. The flatterers and boasters are silenced in an instant, and the poor and needy whom they have oppressed are set in safety. Let us therefore hold fast to the pure words of our God, and let us not be dismayed by the prevalence of vanity and falsehood in the world around us. The Lord has spoken, and His word shall stand forever. Amen.
