PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Judge Me, O Lord, for I Have Walked in Mine Integrity"
June 11, 2026

---

"Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart. For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers." -- Psalm 26:1-4

There is a species of holy confidence that is not the fruit of pride but of grace, and David here gives us a perfect example of it. He does not claim sinless perfection, but he does claim something real and vital: he has walked in integrity. His life has been characterized by an honest, wholehearted devotion to the Lord. He has not played the hypocrite. He has not lived one way in public and another in private. He has not professed love for God while secretly indulging in the ways of the ungodly. And upon this ground of genuine, grace-wrought integrity, he dares to invite the scrutiny of the Almighty. "Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart."

Spurgeon remarked that only a man with a clean conscience could pray such a prayer. The hypocrite dreads nothing more than the examination of God. He piles up his religious performances like so many layers of paint upon a rotting wall, hoping to conceal the corruption beneath. But the man of integrity has nothing to hide. He knows that he is imperfect, that his best works are stained with sin, that he falls short of the glory of God in a thousand ways. But he also knows that his heart is sincere, that his trust is genuine, that his love for God, however feeble, is not feigned. And this knowledge gives him a holy boldness to stand before the Judge of all the earth and say, "Search me. Test me. Try me. You will find that my heart, though weak, is true."

"For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth." Here David reveals the secret spring of his integrity. It is not self-generated. It does not flow from his own native goodness or from the strength of his own resolution. It flows from the lovingkindness of God, which is perpetually before his eyes, and from the truth of God, in which he has chosen to walk. The believer who keeps his eyes fixed upon the lovingkindness of God will find that this vision transforms his character from within. When we truly see how much God has loved us, how great a price He has paid for our redemption, how tenderly He has dealt with us in all our wanderings and backslidings, something happens in the depths of our souls. Gratitude is kindled. Love is awakened. And the desire to walk worthy of such lovingkindness becomes the ruling passion of our lives.

Richard Sibbes, that honey-tongued preacher of the gospel, taught that the contemplation of God's lovingkindness is the most powerful incentive to holiness that the human heart can know. The law commands, and we resist. Fear threatens, and we rebel. But love draws, and we follow willingly. When the heart is won by the lovingkindness of God, obedience ceases to be a burden and becomes a delight. The man who walks with the lovingkindness of God before his eyes does not need to be driven to holiness by the whip of the law; he is drawn to it by the cords of love.

"I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers." David's integrity expresses itself in the company he keeps. He has made a deliberate and principled choice to separate himself from those who would draw him away from God. He does not sit with vain persons -- those whose conversation is empty, whose pursuits are frivolous, whose lives are devoted to the worship of nothingness. And he does not go in with dissemblers -- those who wear masks, who pretend to be what they are not, who make a show of godliness while denying its power.

Matthew Henry observed that a man is known by his companions, and that the surest way to corrupt a good character is to associate habitually with those of bad character. This is not a call to monastic isolation or to a pharisaical separation that looks down upon sinners with contempt. Our Lord Jesus Christ was the friend of publicans and sinners, and He went among them for their salvation. But there is a great difference between going among sinners as a physician goes among the sick, carrying the remedy of the gospel, and sitting among them as a companion, sharing their pleasures and adopting their ways. David made this distinction, and every believer must make it as well.

Thomas Brooks, that practical and warm-hearted Puritan, warned his readers that the company of the ungodly is like a slow poison that works imperceptibly upon the soul. A man may think himself strong enough to resist the influence of evil companions, but he deceives himself. The atmosphere of ungodliness is corrosive, and prolonged exposure to it will eat away at the integrity of even the most resolute heart. The wise man, therefore, chooses his friends with as much care as he chooses his food, knowing that both have the power to nourish or to destroy.

Let us then examine ourselves in the light of this psalm. Can we say with David that we have walked in integrity? Can we invite the examination of God with confidence that, despite our many failings, our hearts are sincere before Him? If so, let us give thanks for the grace that has kept us and continue to fix our eyes upon the lovingkindness of God. And if we find that we have been sitting with vain persons and going in with dissemblers, let us repent without delay and return to the path of truth and holiness, where alone the soul can find its rest. Amen.
