PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"The Lord Shall Judge the People"
June 1, 2026

---

"O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me: lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver. O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands; if I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me; (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy:) let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah." -- Psalm 7:1-5

There are seasons in the life of every believer when the world rises up against him with false accusations and bitter slanders, and his only refuge is the righteous judgment of God. David penned this psalm in such an hour, when the venomous tongue of Cush the Benjamite had poured forth its poison against him, and no earthly tribunal could vindicate his cause. And so he does what every persecuted child of God must learn to do: he flies to the Lord as a bird to its mountain, and commits his case to the Judge of all the earth.

"O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust." Observe the personal appropriation of faith in these words. He does not say merely "O Lord," as though addressing a distant sovereign, but "O Lord my God." This is the language of covenant relationship, the cry of a soul that has laid hold upon the promises and will not let them go. Charles Spurgeon was fond of saying that the sweetest word in all the Bible is that little word "my." It is one thing to believe that God exists, that He is powerful, that He is just. It is another thing altogether to be able to say with the full assurance of faith, "He is my God." And it is precisely this personal trust that becomes the anchor of the soul in the storm of persecution.

Now mark the nature of David's appeal. He does not take up arms against his accuser. He does not plot revenge or seek to destroy his enemy by cunning stratagem. Instead, he opens his heart before the Lord and invites the Almighty to search him, to examine his cause, and to judge between him and his adversary. "O Lord my God, if I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands." This is a remarkable thing. David is so confident of his innocence in this particular matter that he is willing to stake his very life upon it. "Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it," he says, if he is guilty of the wrong laid to his charge. This is not the language of sinless perfection, for David knew himself to be a sinner before God in many things. But in the specific accusation brought against him by Cush, his conscience was clear, and he could appeal to heaven with boldness.

Richard Sibbes, that sweet-spirited Puritan, once taught that a good conscience is the best pillow upon which a man can lay his head. When the storms of slander rage around us, and the waves of false accusation beat upon us, a clear conscience before God is worth more than all the defences that human wisdom can devise. For what does it profit a man if the whole world believes him innocent, if God knows him to be guilty? And what harm can the whole world's censure do him, if God knows him to be upright? The court of heaven is the only court whose verdict is final, and the man who can appeal to that court with a clean conscience has nothing ultimately to fear.

But David does not merely defend himself; he lays down a principle of divine justice that ought to make every soul tremble. If he has rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with him, then let judgment fall. And more than this, he adds a parenthetical statement of extraordinary grace: "Yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy." Not only has David refrained from doing evil to his accuser, he has actually done good to him. He has delivered his enemy when he had the power to destroy him. This is the mark of true godliness, beloved. It is easy enough to be generous to those who love us and treat us well. But to do good to those who hate us, to bless those who curse us, to deliver those who would gladly see us ruined -- this is the fruit of the Spirit of Christ working in the heart of a believer.

John Flavel, that excellent Puritan minister of Dartmouth, wrote much upon the subject of committing our cause to God, and he taught that the great difficulty lies not in believing that God will judge righteously, but in waiting for Him to do so. We are creatures of haste. When we are wronged, every fibre of our being cries out for immediate vindication. We want the world to know this very hour that we are innocent, and we are tempted to take matters into our own hands rather than wait upon the slow and mysterious workings of divine providence. But God's ways are not our ways, and His timing is not our timing. The mills of God grind slowly, but they grind exceedingly fine. And the man who commits his cause to the Lord and waits patiently for Him shall not be put to shame.

There is also in this psalm a solemn warning to those who would bear false witness against the righteous. David declares that God is angry with the wicked every day, and that if a man will not repent, God will whet His sword and make ready His arrows. The slanderer may think himself safe because no human court has called him to account. He may congratulate himself that his lies have gone unchallenged and his victim has made no reply. But let him know that there is a witness in heaven who has heard every whispered falsehood, and a judge upon the throne who will require an accounting for every idle word.

Thomas Watson reminds us that God keeps a book of remembrance, and that in the day of judgment every secret thing shall be brought to light, whether it be good or whether it be evil. The tongue that has sown slander shall reap a harvest of divine wrath. The hands that have dug a pit for the innocent shall fall into it themselves. For this is the unalterable law of God's moral government: whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.

Let us therefore take this psalm to heart in two ways. First, if we are the objects of false accusation and unjust persecution, let us flee to God as David did, commit our cause to the righteous judge, and rest in the assurance that He will vindicate us in His own time and in His own way. And second, let us examine our own tongues and our own hearts, and let us be very careful that we never become instruments of slander against another soul. For the God who hears the cry of the persecuted also marks the malice of the persecutor, and He will render to every man according to his deeds. May the Lord grant us grace to live in the light of His judgment seat, and to find in His righteous character our everlasting refuge and peace. Amen.
