PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Why Standest Thou Afar Off, O Lord?"
June 3, 2026

---

"Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble? The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor: let them be taken in the devices that they have imagined. For the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth. The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts." -- Psalm 10:1-4

Few experiences in the Christian life are more painful than the apparent absence of God in the hour of deepest need. The believer cries out, and heaven seems silent. He looks for the hand of his Deliverer, and sees only the hand of his oppressor. The wicked flourish like a green bay tree, while the righteous languish in affliction. And from the depths of this perplexity rises the ancient and agonizing question: "Why standest thou afar off, O Lord? Why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?"

Let us be clear from the outset that this question does not spring from unbelief but from faith. It is precisely because David believes in the justice and goodness of God that he is perplexed by the seeming contradiction before his eyes. An atheist is never troubled by the prosperity of the wicked, for he has no expectation of divine justice. But the man who knows that God is righteous and that He has promised to defend the poor and to judge the oppressor -- this man is profoundly shaken when reality seems to contradict the promise. And the fact that he brings his perplexity to God in prayer, rather than abandoning his faith altogether, is itself a mark of genuine piety.

Thomas Goodwin, that eminent Puritan theologian, wrote at length upon the subject of God's hiding His face from His people, and he taught that these seasons of apparent abandonment serve a most necessary purpose in the economy of grace. They teach us not to walk by sight but by faith. They strip away our carnal confidence and our dependence upon comfortable feelings, and they drive us to rest upon the naked promise of God when every sensible evidence of His love has been withdrawn. It is easy to trust God when the sun is shining and the harvest is plentiful and the enemies are far away. But it is in the dark night of the soul, when God seems to have hidden Himself and the wicked seem to triumph on every side, that faith is tested and proved and purified like gold in the refiner's fire.

Now observe the psalmist's description of the wicked man in these verses. "The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor." Pride is the root from which all other sins spring, and it is pride that emboldens the wicked man to trample upon those who are weaker than himself. He looks upon the poor and the helpless not with compassion but with contempt. They are to him mere instruments to be used and discarded, obstacles to be crushed, prey to be devoured. And his pride blinds him to the reality that there is a God above him who sees every act of cruelty and who will require an accounting in due time.

"For the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the covetous, whom the Lord abhorreth." Here is a portrait of a society turned upside down, where the values of heaven have been replaced by the values of hell. The greedy man, whom God abhors, is held up as an example to be imitated. The covetous man, whose soul is eaten up with the love of money, is praised and blessed by his fellows. Success is measured not by holiness but by wealth, not by righteousness but by power. And the wicked man boasts openly of the desires of his heart, making no attempt to conceal the selfishness and cruelty that drive him, because in such a society there is no shame in sin.

William Gurnall, that soldier-like Puritan whose pen was as sharp as any sword, warned the church that the prosperity of the wicked is one of Satan's most effective weapons against the faith of believers. When the ungodly grow rich and powerful, when they seem to escape every consequence of their sin, when they live in luxury while the righteous suffer in poverty, the temptation is very strong to conclude that godliness is unprofitable and that the way of the transgressor is the way of wisdom. But Gurnall reminded us that we must not judge the play by the second act alone. The final curtain has not yet fallen. The last chapter has not yet been written. And when the books are opened and the secrets of all hearts are revealed, then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father, and the wicked shall discover that all their boasted prosperity was but a dream from which they have awakened to everlasting destruction.

"The wicked, through the pride of his countenance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts." This is the ultimate tragedy of the ungodly man. It is not merely that he sins in this or that particular; it is that God is excluded from the whole fabric of his existence. He rises in the morning and God is not in his thoughts. He conducts his business and God is not in his calculations. He lays his plans and God is not consulted. He goes to bed at night and God is not remembered. He lives as though the Almighty did not exist, and this practical atheism is the fountain from which all his other sins flow.

John Owen taught us that the great difference between the regenerate and the unregenerate heart is not that the one is sinless and the other sinful, for both are sinful. The difference is that in the renewed heart, God occupies the throne, however imperfectly, while in the unrenewed heart, God has been dethroned and self has been set up in His place. The godly man may fall into sin, but he cannot be comfortable in it, because God is in his thoughts, reproving him, convicting him, drawing him back to the path of righteousness. But the wicked man sins without remorse, because the voice of God has been silenced in his conscience by the pride of his own heart.

Let us therefore take courage from this psalm, even in its darkness. For if God sometimes hides His face, it is not because He has forsaken us, but because He is teaching us to trust Him more deeply than we ever have before. And if the wicked seem for a season to prosper, let us remember that their prosperity is but for a moment, while the inheritance of the righteous is eternal. The Lord shall reign forever and ever, and those who put their trust in Him shall never be confounded. Amen.
