PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"We Have Heard with Our Ears, O God"
June 21, 2026

---

"We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou didst in their days, in the times of old. How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy hand, and plantedst them; how thou didst afflict the people, and cast them out. For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them." -- Psalm 44:1-3

The memory of past mercies is one of the most powerful weapons in the armoury of faith. When the present is dark and the future is uncertain, the believer turns to the record of what God has done in former days and finds there a reason to trust Him still. This is precisely what the sons of Korah do in the opening verses of this psalm. They recall the great works of God in the days of their fathers -- the driving out of the Canaanites, the planting of Israel in the promised land, the mighty acts of deliverance that brought a nation of slaves into an inheritance of milk and honey. And they recall these things not as mere historical curiosities but as evidence of the character of God, evidence that the same God who wrought such wonders in the past is able and willing to work again.

"Our fathers have told us." Here is the sacred chain of testimony that links one generation to the next. The fathers had told their children, and the children had listened, and now the children were telling their own children. This is how faith is transmitted, not merely through books and creeds, though these have their place, but through the living witness of one generation to another. The father who gathers his household around him and tells them what God has done -- in the history of Israel, in the history of the church, in the history of his own life -- is performing one of the most important functions that any human being can perform. He is building a bridge between the past mercies of God and the present faith of his children.

Thomas Watson urged parents to be diligent in this sacred duty, reminding them that the faith of the rising generation depends in large measure upon the faithfulness of the present generation in declaring the works of the Lord. If the fathers are silent, the children will be ignorant. If the chain of testimony is broken, the next generation may grow up without the knowledge of God's mighty acts, and their faith, if they have any, will be thin and rootless, unable to withstand the storms of adversity that will surely come.

"For they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadst a favour unto them." Here is the theological lesson that the fathers drew from their experience and passed down to their children. The conquest of Canaan was not the achievement of human military prowess. Israel did not drive out the heathen by superior generalship or better weapons or greater numbers. The victory belonged entirely to God. His right hand, His arm, the light of His countenance -- these were the instruments of Israel's triumph. And the reason for God's intervention was not Israel's merit but His own sovereign favour. "Because thou hadst a favour unto them."

John Flavel meditated deeply upon the doctrine of divine favour and taught that the whole history of redemption, from the call of Abraham to the coming of Christ and beyond, is one continuous display of unmerited grace. God did not choose Israel because Israel was greater or more righteous than the other nations. He chose them because He loved them, and He loved them because He chose them, and the ultimate ground of both the choice and the love is to be found not in the creature but in the Creator, not in anything that Israel had done or would do, but in the eternal, sovereign, inscrutable good pleasure of God.

Spurgeon applied this truth to the individual Christian life with characteristic directness. "You were not saved by your own sword, dear friend," he would say. "You did not fight your way into the kingdom of God by your own arm. You were brought in by the right hand of the Lord, by the arm of His strength, by the light of His countenance shining upon you in your darkness. And the reason He saved you was not that you deserved it, but that He had a favour unto you. It was all of grace, from first to last, from beginning to end."

Richard Sibbes likewise taught that the remembrance of past mercies is the surest antidote to present fear. When the heart begins to tremble at the prospect of future trials, it should turn back and survey the road already travelled, counting the deliverances, the provisions, the protections, the answered prayers, the unexpected kindnesses, the miraculous interventions that have marked every step of the journey thus far. And having surveyed these, the heart should say, "The God who did all this will not fail me now. The God who brought me thus far will bring me all the way home."

Let us therefore take up the testimony of our fathers and make it our own. Let us remember what God has done in days gone by, and let us trust Him for what He will do in days to come. For it is not by our own sword or our own arm that we shall be saved, but by the right hand of the Lord and the light of His countenance, because He has set His favour upon us in Christ Jesus. Amen.
