PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"But God, Who Is Rich in Mercy"
July 8, 2026

---

"But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus." -- Ephesians 2:4-7

'But God.' These are perhaps the two greatest words in all the Bible. We were dead -- but God. We were enslaved -- but God. We were under wrath -- but God. The entire gospel is contained in this blessed conjunction. Our story was one of unrelieved darkness and despair, but God broke into the narrative with sovereign mercy and changed everything.

'Who is rich in mercy.' Not merely merciful, but rich in mercy -- overflowing, superabounding, inexhaustibly wealthy in compassion toward miserable sinners. John Bunyan, that immortal tinker of Bedford, knew something of this divine wealth. In his autobiography 'Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners,' he tells how he wrestled for years under the burden of his guilt, tormented by the fear that he had committed the unpardonable sin. And then one day, as he was walking through the fields, these words from Ephesians broke in upon his soul like the dawn of a new creation: 'But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us.' Bunyan said that he felt as though he had been lifted out of a dungeon and set upon a rock, and from that day forward the mercy of God was the foundation of all his hope.

Observe when God loved us: 'even when we were dead in sins.' Not when we cleaned ourselves up. Not when we turned over a new leaf. Not when we made ourselves presentable. God loved us at our worst, in the very depth of our corruption and rebellion. This is the wonder of divine love -- it is not attracted by beauty in its object, but creates beauty where there was none. As Augustine famously said, 'God does not love us because we are valuable; we are valuable because God loves us.'

And what has this rich mercy accomplished? Three things, each more glorious than the last. He quickened us -- gave us new life when we were spiritually dead. He raised us up -- lifted us from the grave of sin to walk in newness of life. And He made us sit in heavenly places in Christ -- even now, in our present experience, we are seated with Christ in the realm of spiritual authority and blessing. The same three steps that marked Christ's exaltation -- resurrection, ascension, enthronement -- are applied to every believer.

And all of this for one grand purpose: 'that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace.' Throughout all eternity, redeemed sinners will be the exhibition, the demonstration, the proof of what divine grace can do. Angels will look upon us and marvel. The principalities and powers will behold us and worship. And we ourselves shall stand in the light of God's glory, trophies of His mercy forever. Amen.