PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Redemption Through His Blood"
July 3, 2026

---

"In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace; wherein he hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself: that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him." -- Ephesians 1:7-10

'In whom we have redemption through his blood.' These words take us from the councils of eternity to the cross of Calvary, from the decree of election to the execution of redemption. For what God purposed in eternity past, He accomplished in the fullness of time through the precious blood of His Son.

The word 'redemption' carries the idea of purchasing a slave out of the marketplace and setting him free. We were slaves to sin, in bondage to Satan, under the curse of the law, and utterly unable to deliver ourselves. But Christ entered the slave market of this fallen world, and with His own blood He paid the price of our freedom. Not with silver and gold, as Peter tells us, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.

John Owen, in his monumental work 'The Death of Death in the Death of Christ,' argued that the blood of Christ was not merely sufficient for redemption but efficient -- that is, it actually accomplished what it was designed to accomplish. Christ did not merely make salvation possible; He actually saved His people. He did not simply open a door and hope that some would walk through it; He purchased, redeemed, and secured every soul that the Father had given Him.

And notice the measure of this grace: 'according to the riches of his grace.' Not merely according to the existence of His grace, as though God were a miser doling out the bare minimum. No! According to the riches -- the inexhaustible, immeasurable, unfathomable riches of divine grace. Jeremiah Burroughs taught that a man may give according to his riches without giving according to the riches of his riches. A wealthy man may give a penny -- that is according to his riches, in the sense that he has riches to give from. But God gives according to the riches of His grace, which means He gives lavishly, abundantly, overflowingly, as befits the infinite generosity of His nature.

Oh, what a gospel we have! Redemption full and free, forgiveness without measure, grace upon grace, all flowing to us through the blood of the eternal covenant. Let us never tire of proclaiming these unsearchable riches of Christ. Amen.