PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Chosen Before the Foundation of the World"
July 2, 2026

---

"According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the beloved." -- Ephesians 1:4-6

Here is the fountain from which every stream of blessing flows: the eternal election of God. 'He hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world.' Before the stars were flung into their courses, before the mountains were brought forth, before Adam drew his first breath in the Garden, God had already set His love upon His people and chosen them in Christ.

This doctrine of election has been the comfort and the strength of God's people in every age. The Puritans understood it as perhaps no other generation of Christians has understood it. William Perkins, that father of English Puritanism, taught that election is the golden chain that binds every link of salvation together, from foreknowledge to glorification. If God has chosen us, then nothing can separate us from His love. If He has predestinated us unto adoption, then no power in heaven or earth or hell can prevent us from reaching our Father's house.

But observe the purpose of election: 'that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.' God did not choose us because we were holy; He chose us that we might become holy. Election is not a license for carelessness but a call to consecration. As Thomas Watson memorably wrote, 'Election does not give us liberty to sin but to holiness.' The man who uses the doctrine of election as a pillow for sloth and sin has never truly understood it. For the purpose of God in choosing us was not merely to rescue us from hell, but to conform us to the image of His Son.

And the ultimate end of it all is this: 'to the praise of the glory of his grace.' We were chosen not for our glory, but for His. We were predestinated not to make much of ourselves, but to make much of God. The whole of salvation, from its eternal origin to its eternal consummation, is designed by infinite wisdom to display the exceeding riches of divine grace. And when we at last stand before the throne, the song upon our lips will not be 'worthy am I,' but 'worthy is the Lamb that was slain.' Amen.