PURITAN GOLD -- Daily Study
"Blessed with All Spiritual Blessings"
July 1, 2026

---

"Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, to the saints which are at Ephesus, and to the faithful in Christ Jesus: Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ." -- Ephesians 1:1-3

Beloved, the apostle Paul opens this majestic epistle with a cascade of praise that ought to take our breath away. 'Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.' Mark the comprehensiveness of this statement. Not some spiritual blessings, not many, but all. Every blessing that a soul can need for time and eternity has already been secured for us in Christ Jesus.

Thomas Goodwin, that prince among the Puritans, spent many years of his life expounding the riches of Ephesians, and he was fond of saying that this epistle is the Alps of the New Testament -- the very summit of divine revelation concerning the church and her blessings in Christ. And if that be so, then this opening doxology is the very peak of those Alps, from which we may survey the whole landscape of redeeming grace stretching out in every direction as far as the eye can see.

Consider the phrase 'in heavenly places in Christ.' Our blessings are not earthly and temporal, subject to the fluctuations of fortune and the ravages of time. They are heavenly -- secure, permanent, incorruptible. And they are in Christ -- not in ourselves, not in our works, not in our feelings, but in the unchangeable person and finished work of the Son of God. John Owen taught that the union of the believer with Christ is the foundation of all other blessings, for it is only as we are found in Him that every other gift of grace flows to us. The man who is in Christ lacks nothing. The man who is outside of Christ has nothing, though he possess the whole world.

Let us begin this month in Ephesians with hearts overflowing with gratitude, for the God who has blessed us is the God who planned our redemption before the foundation of the world. Every spiritual blessing we shall explore this month -- election, predestination, redemption, sealing, inheritance -- all of these are already ours, already secured, already accomplished in the eternal purpose of God. We do not hope for them as future possibilities; we receive them as present realities. Blessed be His glorious name forever. Amen.