PURITAN GOLD -- Homeschool, Lesson 7
"William Tyndale and the English Bible"
The Reformation -- Lesson 7

---

Welcome back, students. Today we meet one of the most extraordinary and heroic figures in the entire history of the English-speaking world -- a man whose name you may not know as well as Luther or Calvin, but whose work has shaped your life more profoundly than you may realize. His name is William Tyndale, and he gave the English people the greatest gift they have ever received: the Word of God in their own language. Tyndale's story is one of brilliant scholarship, relentless persecution, lonely exile, and ultimate martyrdom. It is also a story of triumph -- for the Bible that Tyndale translated at the cost of his life became the foundation of every major English Bible that followed, including the King James Version that we use in our studies. Today we will trace the story of how the English Bible came to be, and we will honor the man who, more than any other, made it possible.

--- Lesson ---

To understand why William Tyndale's work was so revolutionary and so dangerous, we must first understand the state of the Bible in England before his time. For over a thousand years, the Bible in Western Europe had existed primarily in Latin -- the language of the Roman Church, of the universities, and of the educated elite. The standard Latin Bible, known as the Vulgate, had been produced by the great scholar Jerome around the year 400 AD, at the request of Pope Damasus I. Jerome had translated the Old Testament from the Hebrew and the New Testament from the Greek into the common Latin of his day, and his translation had served the Western church for over a millennium.

But by the late medieval period, Latin was no longer the common tongue of any European nation. The vast majority of English men and women -- the farmers, the tradesmen, the laborers, the housewives, the children -- could not read Latin and could not understand the Scriptures that were read aloud in their parish churches. The Bible was a closed book, locked away behind the barrier of a dead language. The priests who were supposed to teach the Scriptures were themselves often poorly educated -- many could barely stumble through the Latin text, and fewer still could explain its meaning to their congregations. The result was a spiritual darkness that lay heavy upon the land. The common people were taught to revere the Bible as a sacred object -- the great chained Bibles in the cathedrals were objects of veneration -- but they were not taught what the Bible said. They knew the stories of the saints, the legends of the relics, the rituals of the Mass, but they did not know the gospel. They did not know that "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life" (John 3:16). They did not know that "by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast" (Ephesians 2:8-9). They did not know these things because no one had told them, and they could not read them for themselves.

The institutional church was not merely negligent about providing the Scriptures in the common tongue -- it was actively hostile to the idea. The church authorities feared, not without reason, that if ordinary people could read the Bible for themselves, they would begin to question the teachings, traditions, and practices that had accumulated over centuries but had no clear basis in Scripture. They would question purgatory, indulgences, the veneration of saints, the sacrifice of the Mass, the authority of the pope, and the entire elaborate system of medieval religion that had been built upon foundations that the Bible did not support. A Bible in English was, from the perspective of the medieval church hierarchy, the most dangerous book in the world.

There had been earlier attempts to bring the Scriptures into English. The Venerable Bede, the great Anglo-Saxon monk and scholar of the eighth century, is said to have translated the Gospel of John into Old English on his deathbed in 735. King Alfred the Great, in the ninth century, included translations of portions of the Psalms and the Ten Commandments in his legal code. In the late tenth century, Aelfric of Eynsham produced English translations of portions of the Old Testament. But these were fragmentary efforts, and the language they used -- Old English and early Middle English -- was as foreign to the people of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries as Latin itself.

The first comprehensive effort to produce a complete Bible in English came from John Wycliffe and his followers in the 1380s. Wycliffe, the great Oxford theologian and "Morning Star of the Reformation," championed the principle that the Scriptures should be available to every Christian in their own language. "Christ and His apostles taught the people in the language best known to them," Wycliffe argued. "It is certain that the truth of the Christian faith becomes more evident the more the faith itself is known. Therefore, the doctrine should not only be in Latin but in the common tongue." The Wycliffite Bible, produced by Wycliffe's associates John Purvey and Nicholas of Hereford, was the first complete Bible in English. But it was translated from the Latin Vulgate, not from the original Hebrew and Greek, and its accuracy was therefore limited by the accuracy of the Latin text. Nevertheless, it circulated widely in handwritten manuscripts -- hundreds of copies survive to this day, a remarkable number for a forbidden book -- and it nourished a generation of secret believers known as the Lollards, who met in private homes to read the Scriptures in English and to encourage one another in the faith.

The church's response was fierce. In 1408, the Constitutions of Oxford, issued by Archbishop Thomas Arundel, made it illegal to translate any portion of the Bible into English or to read an English Bible without the specific permission of a bishop. The penalty for unauthorized possession of an English Bible was imprisonment, confiscation of property, and potentially death by burning as a heretic. These restrictions remained in force for over a century and created the hostile legal environment into which William Tyndale was born.

William Tyndale was born around the year 1494 in Gloucestershire, in the west of England, near the Welsh border. Some scholars place his birth in the village of Stinchcombe; others associate him with the nearby town of Dursley. His family name was originally Hychyns (or Hutchins), and the name Tyndale was adopted from the region of Tyndale in Northumberland, from which the family had originally come. He studied at Magdalen Hall (later Hertford College) at the University of Oxford, where he earned his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1512 and his Master of Arts in 1515. Oxford in those years was beginning to feel the influence of Renaissance humanism -- the scholarly movement that emphasized the study of ancient languages and original texts. The great Dutch scholar Erasmus had visited Oxford, and his emphasis on returning to the original Greek and Hebrew sources of the Bible ("ad fontes" -- "to the sources") was gaining adherents among the younger scholars.

From Oxford, Tyndale moved to the University of Cambridge, where he continued his studies, probably between 1517 and 1521. Cambridge in those years was a hotbed of reform-minded thinking. A group of scholars who would later become leaders of the English Reformation -- including Thomas Bilney, Hugh Latimer, Thomas Cranmer, and Miles Coverdale -- met regularly at an inn called the White Horse, which their critics derisively nicknamed "Little Germany" because of their interest in Luther's writings. Whether Tyndale himself attended these meetings is uncertain, but he was certainly aware of the ferment of new ideas that was sweeping through the university.

After leaving Cambridge, Tyndale took a position as a tutor and chaplain in the household of Sir John Walsh at Little Sodbury Manor in Gloucestershire. It was here, in conversation with the local clergy and gentry, that Tyndale's passion for translating the Bible into English crystallized into a burning conviction. The local priests who dined at Sir John's table were, in Tyndale's estimation, shockingly ignorant of the Scriptures. In heated debates around the dinner table, Tyndale demolished their arguments with quotations from the Bible, and they responded not with better arguments but with appeals to the authority of the pope. It was during one of these exchanges that Tyndale made the declaration that defined his life's mission. When a learned clergyman asserted that the common people were better off without the Scriptures, declaring that they would be better without God's law than without the pope's, Tyndale replied with the words that have echoed down through five centuries: "I defy the Pope and all his laws. If God spare my life, ere many years I will cause a boy that driveth the plough to know more of the Scripture than thou dost."

This was not mere rhetoric. Tyndale meant it, and he devoted the rest of his life to fulfilling that promise. His ambition was nothing less than to translate the entire Bible from the original Hebrew and Greek into clear, vigorous, accessible English -- the English of the common people, the English of the fields and the marketplace and the fireside. And he would do it not from the Latin Vulgate, as the Wycliffite translators had done, but from the original languages, using the best scholarship available.

Tyndale first sought permission and support from Cuthbert Tunstall, the Bishop of London, who was known as a man of learning and was a friend of Erasmus. In the summer of 1523, Tyndale traveled to London with a sample of his translation work and sought an interview with Tunstall, hoping for the bishop's patronage. But Tunstall refused to support the project. Tyndale later recalled: "I understood at the last not only that there was no room in my lord of London's palace to translate the New Testament, but also that there was no place to do it in all England." This was a pivotal moment. Tyndale realized that if he was going to translate the Bible into English, he would have to do it outside England, beyond the reach of English bishops and English law.

In the spring of 1524, Tyndale left England for the Continent. He would never return. He traveled first to Hamburg, then to Wittenberg -- the city of Martin Luther, where the great reformer had posted his Ninety-Five Theses just seven years earlier. There is strong circumstantial evidence that Tyndale spent nearly a year in Wittenberg, studying under Luther or at least in close proximity to him. He would certainly have encountered Luther's German translation of the New Testament, published in September 1522, which demonstrated that the Bible could be successfully translated into a modern European language from the original Greek. Luther's example inspired Tyndale, and Luther's translation methodology influenced him, though Tyndale was by no means a mere imitator. His English Bible would bear the stamp of his own extraordinary linguistic gifts.

By early 1525, Tyndale had completed his translation of the New Testament from the Greek into English, and he began the process of having it printed. He went to Cologne, then one of the great printing centers of Europe, and arranged with the printer Peter Quentel to produce an edition of his New Testament. But the project was betrayed. Johann Cochlaeus, a Catholic controversialist living in Cologne, learned of the printing from loose-tongued printers' apprentices and alerted the authorities. The city Senate ordered the printing stopped. Tyndale and his assistant William Roye fled with the printed sheets -- only ten gatherings of the quarto edition had been completed, covering the Gospel of Matthew up to chapter 22.

Tyndale made his way to the free city of Worms, a Protestant stronghold where Luther had made his famous stand before the Diet in 1521. In Worms, the printer Peter Schoeffer completed the printing of the New Testament in a smaller octavo format -- about six thousand copies, small enough to be easily concealed and smuggled. In early 1526, copies of Tyndale's New Testament began arriving in England, hidden in bales of cloth, in barrels of grain, and in the holds of merchant ships. The effect was electrifying. For the first time in history, English men and women could read the words of Jesus, the letters of Paul, the visions of Revelation, in their own tongue.

Let us pause here, students, and consider the quality of Tyndale's translation, for it was truly extraordinary. Tyndale was not only a brilliant scholar -- fluent in Greek, Hebrew, Latin, German, French, Italian, and Spanish -- but also a master of English prose. He had an uncanny ear for the rhythms and cadences of spoken English, and he forged a style that combined clarity, dignity, simplicity, and power in a way that no English writer had achieved before. He created phrases that have become part of the very fabric of the English language. When you say "Let there be light," those are Tyndale's words. When you say "Am I my brother's keeper?" those are Tyndale's words. When you say "the salt of the earth," "the signs of the times," "a law unto themselves," "filthy lucre," "fight the good fight," "the powers that be," "the spirit is willing but the flesh is weak," "eat, drink, and be merry," "my brother's keeper," "the apple of his eye" -- all of these are phrases that William Tyndale coined or crystallized in his translation. Scholars have estimated that approximately eighty to ninety percent of the King James New Testament is directly derived from Tyndale's translation. When you read the King James Bible, you are, to a remarkable degree, reading Tyndale.

Consider a few examples of Tyndale's translation to appreciate his artistry. Here is the opening of the Gospel of John as Tyndale rendered it: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made. In him was life, and the life was the light of men. And the light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not." Compare this with the King James Version of 1611, produced nearly a century later by a committee of fifty-four scholars, and you will find the words are virtually identical. The King James translators recognized the perfection of Tyndale's rendering and wisely chose not to improve upon what could not be improved.

Or consider Tyndale's translation of 1 Corinthians 13, the great hymn to love: "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal." Tyndale chose the word "love" where the Vulgate had used "caritas" (charity). This was a deliberate theological choice. Tyndale believed that "love" more accurately conveyed the meaning of the Greek word "agape" than the Latin-derived "charity," which had become associated in popular understanding with almsgiving rather than with the deep, self-giving love that Paul was describing. The King James translators later changed Tyndale's "love" back to "charity" in this passage, but modern translations have overwhelmingly returned to Tyndale's original choice.

The reaction of the English authorities to Tyndale's New Testament was swift and furious. Cardinal Thomas Wolsey, the Lord Chancellor, and Bishop Cuthbert Tunstall organized a campaign to suppress the book. Tunstall preached against it at St. Paul's Cross in London, denouncing it as containing over two thousand errors -- a grotesque exaggeration, driven by panic rather than scholarship. Copies were publicly burned at St. Paul's Cross, and agents were sent to the Continent to purchase and destroy as many copies as possible. In one famous episode, Tunstall's agent Augustine Packington, who was secretly sympathetic to the Protestant cause, arranged to buy a large quantity of Tyndale's New Testaments from the translator himself. Tyndale gladly sold them, knowing that the money from the sale would finance a new, corrected, and improved edition. As Tyndale's friend and biographer John Foxe records in his "Acts and Monuments" (the "Book of Martyrs"), Tyndale remarked to a friend: "He shall have the books, I shall have the money, and the whole world shall cry out at the burning of God's Word." And so it proved. The bishop burned the books, but Tyndale used the money to produce a better edition, and the demand for the English Bible only increased.

Between 1525 and 1535, Tyndale continued his work of translation and writing from various locations on the Continent -- Antwerp, Hamburg, Marburg, and other cities. He produced revised editions of his New Testament in 1534 and 1535, each time improving and refining his translation. He also began the monumental task of translating the Old Testament from the Hebrew. By the time of his death, he had completed the Pentateuch (Genesis through Deuteronomy), which was published in 1530, and the book of Jonah, published the same year. He had also translated the historical books from Joshua through 2 Chronicles, though these were not published until after his death, appearing in the so-called "Matthew's Bible" of 1537.

Tyndale's translation of the Pentateuch showed the same genius for English prose that characterized his New Testament. His rendering of Genesis 1:1-3 set the standard for all subsequent English Bibles: "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters. And God said, Let there be light: and there was light." These words, majestic in their simplicity, became the foundation of the King James rendering and are known to English speakers around the world.

In addition to his translation work, Tyndale was a prolific and powerful theological writer. His most important theological work was "The Obedience of a Christian Man" (1528), which argued that Christians owe obedience to their rulers in all things except where the ruler commands what God forbids or forbids what God commands. The work also contained a passionate defense of the right of the common people to read the Bible in their own language. Tyndale wrote: "Which thing only moved me to translate the New Testament. Because I had perceived by experience how that it was impossible to stablish the lay people in any truth except the Scripture were plainly laid before their eyes in their mother tongue, that they might see the process, order, and meaning of the text."

Tyndale also wrote "The Parable of the Wicked Mammon" (1528), a treatise on justification by faith that drew heavily on Luther's theology; "The Practice of Prelates" (1530), a sharp attack on the worldliness and corruption of the English bishops; and "An Answer unto Sir Thomas More's Dialogue" (1531), a detailed response to the Lord Chancellor's attack on Tyndale's translation and theology. Tyndale's controversy with More was one of the great literary and theological debates of the English Reformation. More, the most brilliant Catholic layman in England, wrote with devastating wit and rhetorical skill. But Tyndale, armed with the Scriptures and a clear, direct prose style, held his own in the exchange and, in the judgment of many later readers, had the better of the argument on the central theological issues.

Throughout his years of exile, Tyndale lived in constant danger. He was hunted by agents of the English crown, by agents of Emperor Charles V (the ruler of the Low Countries, where Tyndale spent most of his exile), and by the agents of the Catholic Church. He moved frequently, changed his appearance, used false names, and relied on a network of Protestant sympathizers for shelter and support. He was sustained by his faith, by his sense of divine calling, and by the fellowship of a small circle of friends and collaborators, including John Frith, George Joye, Miles Coverdale, and the merchant community in Antwerp.

John Frith deserves special mention. Frith was a young scholar of extraordinary gifts -- a graduate of Eton and King's College, Cambridge, and one of the most promising intellectuals of his generation. He became Tyndale's closest associate and collaborator, and he shared Tyndale's theological convictions with equal courage. Frith wrote treatises against purgatory and against the doctrine of transubstantiation that were models of clear, logical, scriptural argument. He was arrested in England in 1532, imprisoned in the Tower of London, and burned at the stake at Smithfield on July 4, 1533, at the age of thirty. Tyndale was devastated by the loss of his friend. Frith's martyrdom was a stark reminder of the price that was being paid for the English Bible.

Tyndale's own end came through betrayal. In May 1535, he was lured from the safety of the English merchant house in Antwerp -- the house of Thomas Poyntz, where he had been living under the protection of the English mercantile community -- by a man named Henry Phillips. Phillips was an Oxford-educated Englishman who had squandered his patrimony and was probably acting as an agent for the enemies of the Reformation, though his exact motives and employers have never been fully established. Phillips befriended Tyndale, gained his trust, and then led him into a trap. On May 21, 1535, Phillips invited Tyndale to dinner and guided him through a narrow alley where officers of the Holy Roman Emperor were waiting. Tyndale was seized, arrested, and imprisoned in the castle of Vilvoorde, about six miles north of Brussels.

Tyndale spent over a year in prison at Vilvoorde -- from May 1535 to October 1536. The conditions were harsh. He was held in a cold, damp cell, and one surviving letter, written to the governor of the castle, gives us a poignant glimpse of his suffering. Tyndale wrote asking for warmer clothing -- "a warmer cap, for I suffer greatly from cold in the head" -- and for a candle, because the long winter evenings were dark. But most movingly, he asked for his Hebrew Bible, his Hebrew grammar, and his Hebrew dictionary, so that he could continue his translation of the Old Testament even in prison. His passion for the Word of God was undiminished by chains and cold.

Tyndale was tried for heresy in August 1536 by a commission of theologians from the University of Leuven. The charges against him included maintaining that faith alone justifies, that human traditions cannot bind the conscience, that the forgiveness of sins does not depend on confession to a priest, and -- most damning of all -- that he had translated the Bible into English without authorization. He was found guilty, formally degraded from the priesthood (a ceremony in which his priestly vestments were symbolically stripped from his body), and handed over to the secular authorities for execution.

On the morning of October 6, 1536, William Tyndale was led from his cell at Vilvoorde Castle to the place of execution outside the castle walls. The method of execution was strangulation at the stake followed by burning. As the chain was fastened around his neck, Tyndale lifted his voice in a final prayer that has echoed through the centuries. John Foxe records that "he cried with a fervent zeal, and a loud voice, 'Lord, open the King of England's eyes!'" Then the chain was tightened, and Tyndale died. His body was burned to ashes. He was approximately forty-two years old.

Tyndale's dying prayer was answered with astonishing speed. Even before Tyndale's execution, the political and religious landscape in England had shifted dramatically. Henry VIII had broken with Rome in 1534. Thomas Cromwell, the king's chief minister, was sympathetic to Protestant reform. And in 1535, Miles Coverdale -- Tyndale's friend and sometime assistant -- had produced the first complete printed Bible in English, drawing heavily on Tyndale's translations for the New Testament and the Pentateuch. In 1537, "Matthew's Bible" -- a compilation edited by John Rogers under the pseudonym Thomas Matthew, which included Tyndale's previously unpublished translations of the Old Testament historical books -- received a royal license. Thomas Cranmer, the Archbishop of Canterbury, wrote to Cromwell expressing his delight: "So far as I have read thereof, I like it better than any translation heretofore made." And in 1539, the Great Bible -- a revision of Matthew's Bible prepared by Miles Coverdale at Cromwell's direction -- was ordered to be placed in every parish church in England. The title page of the Great Bible showed Henry VIII distributing the Word of God to his grateful subjects. The king's eyes had indeed been opened, though not as fully or as purely as Tyndale would have wished.

The influence of Tyndale's translation on subsequent English Bibles cannot be overstated. The Geneva Bible of 1560 -- the Bible of the Puritans, of Shakespeare, and of the Pilgrim Fathers -- was deeply indebted to Tyndale. The Bishops' Bible of 1568, the official Bible of the Church of England, drew heavily upon his work. And the King James Version of 1611, commissioned by King James I and produced by forty-seven scholars (not fifty-four as sometimes stated) working in six committees at Westminster, Oxford, and Cambridge, preserved Tyndale's language to a remarkable degree. The King James translators were instructed to use the Bishops' Bible as their base text, but in practice they frequently reverted to Tyndale's renderings, recognizing that his translations were more faithful to the original and more beautiful in English. Scholars have estimated that between eighty and ninety percent of the King James New Testament, and a substantial portion of the Old Testament books that Tyndale translated, retain his exact words or very close paraphrases.

Let us reflect on the theological significance of Tyndale's work. Tyndale was not merely a translator -- he was a Reformer. His translation choices were shaped by his theological convictions, and his theological convictions were shaped by his immersion in the original languages of Scripture. Several of his translation choices were deliberately provocative, and they became flashpoints in the great debate between Protestants and Catholics.

Where the Latin Vulgate used the word "ecclesia" (rendered in English as "church"), Tyndale translated the Greek word "ekklesia" as "congregation." This was a deliberate challenge to the institutional church's monopoly on the concept of "the church." Tyndale was asserting that the church is not a hierarchical institution with the pope at its head, but a congregation of believers gathered around the Word of God. Where the Vulgate used "sacerdos" (priest), Tyndale translated the Greek "presbuteros" as "elder" or "senior." Where the Vulgate used "paenitentiam agite" (do penance), Tyndale translated the Greek "metanoeite" as "repent." This last change was perhaps the most theologically explosive, for it struck at the entire sacramental system of the medieval church. If the Greek word means "repent" -- that is, to change one's mind and heart -- rather than "do penance" -- that is, to perform prescribed acts of satisfaction -- then the entire apparatus of confession, priestly absolution, indulgences, and purgatory is called into question. Tyndale was not imposing his theology on the text; he was letting the text speak in its own voice, and the text was saying something very different from what the medieval church had taught.

Tyndale also translated the Greek word "agape" as "love" rather than "charity," and "charis" as "favour" rather than "grace" in some contexts -- choices that reflected his conviction that the English Bible should use the plainest, most natural English words available, rather than Latinate ecclesiastical terms that obscured the meaning of the original. His goal was always clarity -- to let the ploughboy understand what the scholar understood, to make the Word of God accessible to every English reader.

The Puritan writer John Foxe, in his great "Acts and Monuments," gave Tyndale a place of honor among the martyrs of the English Reformation and preserved the most detailed account of his life and death that we possess. The great Puritan theologian John Owen, writing in the seventeenth century, regarded Tyndale's work as foundational to the English Reformation and to the Puritan tradition. And the impact of Tyndale's Bible on English literature, English thought, and English-speaking Christianity is beyond calculation. Every time you open your King James Bible and read the words of our Lord and Savior, you are hearing the voice of William Tyndale -- the man who gave his life so that the ploughboy could know the Scriptures.

Let us also consider what Tyndale's story teaches us about the cost of faithfulness and the sovereignty of God. Tyndale spent twelve years in exile, hunted like a criminal, separated from his homeland, his family, and everything familiar. He lived in poverty, in danger, and in loneliness. He watched his friends arrested and executed. He was betrayed by a man he trusted. He died in chains, far from home, his great work unfinished -- he never completed his translation of the Old Testament. From a human perspective, his life might seem a tragedy.

But from the perspective of eternity, Tyndale's life was a glorious triumph. The Word of God in English -- the book he lived and died for -- conquered England without a sword. Within three years of his death, an English Bible was in every parish church in the nation. Within a century, the King James Version -- Tyndale's Bible, refined and completed by generations of scholars who stood on his shoulders -- had become the most widely read and most deeply loved book in the English language. The ploughboy whom Tyndale had promised to teach could now read for himself the words of everlasting life. The Scriptures declare in Isaiah 55:11: "So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it." God's Word did not return void. Tyndale's sacrifice bore fruit a hundredfold.

And let us remember, students, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ in John 12:24: "Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone: but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit." William Tyndale was that grain of wheat. He fell into the ground and died. But the fruit of his labors -- the English Bible -- has fed the souls of hundreds of millions of people for nearly five centuries, and it will continue to feed them until the Lord returns.

Now let us consider more carefully the chain of English Bibles that followed in Tyndale's wake, for each link in that chain brought the English people closer to the Reformation he had envisioned. After Tyndale's death, his friend and associate Miles Coverdale produced the first complete printed English Bible in 1535. Coverdale was a gifted translator in his own right -- his rendering of the Psalms, which was incorporated into the Book of Common Prayer, remains one of the glories of English devotional literature. But Coverdale's Hebrew and Greek were not as strong as Tyndale's, and for the New Testament and the Pentateuch he relied heavily on Tyndale's translations. The Coverdale Bible was dedicated to Henry VIII, and it received a cautious, unofficial approval from the crown -- a remarkable change from the days when possessing an English Bible could lead to the stake.

In 1537, "Matthew's Bible" appeared, edited by John Rogers, a former associate of Tyndale who worked under the pseudonym Thomas Matthew. This Bible was in many ways the truest representation of Tyndale's legacy, because it incorporated not only his published New Testament and Pentateuch but also his unpublished translations of Joshua through 2 Chronicles, which had been preserved in manuscript after his death. Rogers had found these manuscripts among Tyndale's papers and recognized their extraordinary quality. Matthew's Bible received a royal license from Henry VIII -- secured through the efforts of Thomas Cromwell and Archbishop Cranmer -- and became the first officially authorized English Bible. Thomas Cranmer wrote to Cromwell upon receiving the volume: "This is the Bible appointed to the use of the churches... you shall show the King's Majesty thereof, to the intent his Grace may grant that the same may be sold and read of every person." The Word of God was breaking free.

The Great Bible of 1539 followed -- a revision of Matthew's Bible prepared by Coverdale at Cromwell's direction and printed in Paris (the English printing presses being too small for the job). The Great Bible was a large, impressive folio volume, designed to be chained in the parish churches and read aloud to the congregation. Its title page, designed by Hans Holbein, showed King Henry VIII at the top distributing the Word of God to his bishops and nobles, who in turn distributed it to the common people, who received it with shouts of "Vivat Rex!" ("Long live the King!") and "God save the King!" It was a propaganda masterpiece, but it was also the fulfillment of Tyndale's dream -- the Word of God in English, in every parish church in the land, available to every man, woman, and child who could read or who could find someone to read it to them.

During the reign of Mary Tudor (1553-1558), when Protestantism was again persecuted in England, a community of English Protestant exiles in Geneva produced the Geneva Bible (1560). This was the first English Bible with verse numbers, and it included extensive marginal notes that explained the text from a Calvinist perspective. The Geneva Bible was smaller and cheaper than the Great Bible -- a portable, personal Bible that could be carried in a pocket rather than chained to a lectern. It became the Bible of the Puritans, the Bible of Shakespeare, the Bible of the Pilgrim Fathers, and the most popular English Bible for nearly a century. Its text was deeply indebted to Tyndale -- the Geneva translators knew quality when they saw it and retained much of his language.

The Bishops' Bible of 1568, an attempt by the Church of England to produce an official Bible that would supplant the Geneva Bible (whose Calvinist notes were offensive to some Anglican bishops), was less successful as a translation but served as the base text for the King James translators. And finally, in 1611, the King James Version appeared -- the culmination of nearly a century of English Bible translation, and the most enduring monument to Tyndale's genius. The King James translators, working under instructions from King James I, produced a translation that was at once faithful to the original languages, beautiful in its English prose, and suitable for public reading in the churches. They achieved this in large measure by standing on Tyndale's shoulders, preserving his language wherever it was accurate and beautiful -- which was almost everywhere.

It is worth reflecting on the providence of God in this remarkable story. Tyndale worked alone, hunted and persecuted, translating by candlelight in foreign cities, far from home and far from help. He died believing that his work was unfinished and that his enemies had prevailed. Yet within a few years of his death, the English Bible was in every parish church in England. Within a century, the King James Version had made the English Bible the most widely read book on earth. And within four centuries, the English Bible -- Tyndale's Bible -- had been carried by missionaries, emigrants, and explorers to every continent and every nation on the globe. The words that Tyndale forged in his lonely exile have been read by billions of human beings and have transformed the spiritual landscape of the world. Truly, as the Scripture says: "Being dead, yet he speaketh" (Hebrews 11:4). Tyndale is dead, but his words live on in every English Bible ever printed. His voice speaks every time a child reads the Christmas story from Luke chapter 2, every time a mourner hears the words of comfort from John chapter 14, every time a preacher opens the book of Romans and proclaims the gospel of grace.

We should also note how Tyndale's work connects to the broader Reformation story we have been studying. Luther had given the German people their Bible in 1522. Lefevre d'Etaples had produced a French New Testament in 1523. The Zurich Bible, shaped by Zwingli and his colleagues, appeared in 1531. Across Europe, the Reformation was inseparable from the translation of the Bible into the languages of the common people. The principle of sola Scriptura -- Scripture alone as the supreme authority for faith and practice -- required that the Scriptures be accessible to all. Tyndale was the English champion of this great cause, and his work was the necessary precondition for everything that followed in the English Reformation -- for Cranmer's Prayer Book, for the Puritan movement, for the Westminster Confession, for the Great Awakening, and for the global missionary movement that carried the English Bible to every continent on earth.

The Puritan tradition, which we study and cherish in Puritan Gold, was in many ways the child of Tyndale's Bible. The Puritans were, above all, people of the Book. They read it, memorized it, preached it, sang it, debated it, and sought to live by it in every detail of their daily lives. They established family worship in their homes, catechized their children from the Scriptures, and regarded the Bible as the supreme rule of faith and life. All of this was possible because William Tyndale, a century before the Puritans, had given his life to put the Word of God into the hands of the English-speaking people. We are the heirs of his sacrifice, and we owe him a debt that can never be repaid -- except by reading, cherishing, and living by the Book that he died to give us.

Let us close with the words of the Psalmist, which Tyndale himself translated with such beauty and power: "Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path" (Psalm 119:105). And again: "The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple" (Psalm 119:130). William Tyndale lit that lamp for the English-speaking world, and its light has never gone out.

--- Review Questions ---

Review Question 1: Why was the translation of the Bible into English considered so dangerous by the medieval church? What laws were in place to prevent it, and what were the penalties for possessing an English Bible?

Review Question 2: Describe Tyndale's famous declaration at the dinner table at Little Sodbury Manor. What did he mean by it, and how did it define the mission of his life?

Review Question 3: What were the circumstances of Tyndale's arrest, imprisonment, and execution? What were the charges against him, and what was his final prayer?

Review Question 4: Explain Tyndale's significance for the King James Version. How much of the KJV is derived from Tyndale's translation, and what specific phrases that we use today originated with him?

Review Question 5: How did Tyndale's translation choices -- such as "congregation" instead of "church," "elder" instead of "priest," and "repent" instead of "do penance" -- reflect and advance the theology of the Reformation?

--- Activity ---

Select a passage of at least ten verses from the New Testament (suggestions: John 1:1-14, Romans 8:28-39, or 1 Corinthians 13:1-13). Read the passage aloud from the King James Version. Then, using an online source, find Tyndale's original translation of the same passage and read it aloud. Write a one-page comparison noting the similarities and differences between the two versions. How many of Tyndale's exact words survived into the King James Version? Where did the KJV translators change Tyndale's wording, and can you suggest why? Conclude with a paragraph reflecting on what this exercise reveals about Tyndale's contribution to the English Bible and to the English language.

Materials needed: King James Bible, access to Tyndale's New Testament online, paper, pen.

--- Closing ---

William Tyndale gave his life for a simple conviction: that the Word of God belongs to the people of God, in the language of the people of God. His dying prayer -- "Lord, open the King of England's eyes" -- was answered beyond anything he could have imagined. The Bible he translated at the cost of his blood became the most influential book in the English language and the foundation of the entire Puritan tradition. As we read our Bibles today, let us remember the price that was paid to put them in our hands, and let us resolve to read them with the reverence, the diligence, and the love that such a gift deserves. Until next time, students.

[END OF HOMESCHOOL, LESSON 7]